Proceedings of the 2012 ACM annual conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems: Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY.
This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Department of Nursing at Opus: Research & Creativity at IPFW.
It has been accepted for inclusion in Nursing Faculty Publications by an authorized administrator of Opus: Research & Creativity at IPFW.
For more information, please contact admin@lib.ipfw.edu.
In this paper we describe findings from two studies aimed at understanding how health monitoring technology affects the parent-child relationship, examining emotional response and barriers to using this type of technology.
We present suggestions for the design of health monitoring technology intended to enhance self-care in children without creating parent-child conflict.
Our recommendations integrate the study findings, developmental stage specific concerns, and prior HCI research aimed at children's health.
Blood glucose monitoring  is central to maintaining the health of people with diabetes.
Thus, parents of children with T1D are likely to want a technology that helps collect, track and relay blood glucose  values to them.
In this research we sought to expose what - if any - emotional response is provoked by the use of BGM technology, and in turn, if this response affects the parent-child relationship.
We conducted two different kinds of study to examine this central concern.
First, we conducted an interview study to uncover the differing needs of children with T1D and their parents across three phases of development - Older Elementary , Early Adolescence  and Late Adolescence .
This study was designed to gain a better understanding of stage-based concerns surrounding the use of technology for routine diabetes management.
Our aim was to identify ways in which BGM technology could be designed to lower barriers to use and curtail negative emotional response.
Second, we analyzed the findings from a 12 month controlled trial of a BGM technology that automatically collects, tracks, and then sends BG information to parents.
This study focused on the older elementary age group and was designed to determine if the technology impacts affective response to BGM, in addition to the health outcomes and self-care of children with T1D.
While the two studies were carried out separately, they complement each other by addressing the core research question from different perspectives - how does the emotional response to BGM technology impact disease management and the family dynamic?
The interview study examines parents' and children's emotional concerns surrounding BGM usage while the technology trial uses a validated instrument to measure changes in emotional response to BGM during 12 months of use.
Importantly, both sets of findings suggest how technology can be designed to increase reflection on BG trends without creating problems in the family dynamic.
Parents guide their children through various developmental milestones to help shape behavioral choices - social, fiscal, academic, health, and others.
Technology can be an aid to parents, providing a virtual window into their child's life.
For example, parents can remotely monitor their child's choice of food items purchased in the school cafeteria, homework assignment submissions, and grades through school websites.
Social activities can be tracked through Facebook accounts and text message activity on mobile phones.
Driving decisions can be tracked with pervasive technology embedded into motor vehicles.
Credit card transactions and bank activity can be monitored using webbased portals.
These technological developments create a situation where parents with the best intentions of remaining connected with their child, in order to provide effective direction, can cross a personal boundary and create conflict in the relationship .
The focus of our research is on how new technologies can impact the health behavior of children.
While intended to reassure, health monitoring technologies may actually exacerbate bad feelings and parent-child conflict in certain contexts.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Despite how it may help our health, few of us enjoy stepping on a scale to monitor weight because it can make us feel bad about ourselves, out of control, or discouraged.
Likewise, few people with diabetes enjoy using technology to monitor their BG control.
Designing health promoting technologies aimed at a single user is challenging but this becomes even more complex when the technology must simultaneously meet the needs of two individuals with differing emotions - namely, parent and child.
T1D is one of the most common chronic childhood diseases with more than 15,000 young people diagnosed every year in the United States .
The disease occurs when the body's immune system attacks and destroys the beta cells in the pancreas, halting the production of insulin.
The main function of insulin is to allow glucose to move from the blood into the cell for energy, growth and healing.
A lack of insulin, therefore, causes a rise in BG levels, or hyperglycemia.
Once diagnosed, individuals with T1D will have to replace natural levels of insulin for the rest of their lives.
Insulin can be delivered either by multiple injections throughout the day or continuously with an insulin pump.
T1D differs from Type 2 Diabetes , insofar as the latter can be treated with diet and exercise, and where the pancreas still produces insulin, but the body cannot effectively use it.
Dietary intake, physical activity, stress, and physiological processes, such as growth or illness affect BG levels.
Dietary intake of carbohydrates is the primary contributor to BG levels, and thus insulin must be delivered in direct relation to the amount of dietary carbohydrates consumed.
Children with T1D must, therefore, carefully determine the grams of carbohydrates of anything they eat including meals, snacks, beverage, and medications.
Physical activity contributes to an increased utilization of BG and can cause low BG, or hypoglycemia, if insulin delivery and carbohydrate intake are not properly adjusted.
Tight glycemic control - keeping glucose values within normal range of 70-120 mg/dl - greatly reduces the long-term complications caused by hyperglycemia, which can include cardiovascular disease, blindness, amputation, and kidney failure .
Tight control can be accomplished by frequently checking BG levels using a glucometer and correcting for abnormal levels.
The glucometer is a device that determines BG level from a small sample of blood obtained by the user when they prick their skin with a small needle .
Reflecting on BG patterns is necessary to properly adjust insulin therapy for tight glycemic control .
Pervasive technologies offer much potential to support children with TID and their families, in particular, providing real time data that can help them cope with the complex, daily routines of diabetes care.
Prior research has established the value of parental involvement in the care of children with T1D .
A technology that makes it easy to collect and reflect on BGM data also stands to improve diabetes selfmanagement in children, which has been correlated with better glycemic control .
However, there is also the danger that these types of monitoring technologies can create a negative attitude towards BGM due to an increased focus on BG values and constant surveillance .
Negative BGM affect has been linked to poor glycemic control , underlying the importance of understanding the emotional response of user in the design of this type of technology.
However, there is a paucity of research that demonstrates the range of changes in attitude and behavior among children and their parents when using such pervasive monitoring technologies.
There is a significant HCI literature dedicated to understanding how best to design health promoting technology.
What follows is an overview of some of the work that has inspired the research presented in this paper.
Many studies aimed at managing the health of children have emphasized the importance of understanding the influence of technology on family dynamics.
Themes that evolved from focus groups and interviews revealed that the choice to use the technology may be based on emotions.
For example, some parents were not interested in collecting milestone data because they felt it may trigger feelings of paranoia about their child's development.
This study of 15 families found that understanding the potential impact to the family dynamic is essential in the design of health related applications aimed at children.
From her extensive work designing technology for autistic children, Hayes  suggests that emotions such as perceptions of surveillance be attended to in design by balancing the control of data with social needs such as trust.
Some researchers have sought to address the data capture needs of people as they manage health.
The central arguments in this body of work is that simply providing data does not ensure the user will know how to use it for behavior change.
Thus, data capture technologies should encourage users to engage with the data collection to promote reflection and understanding.
One design suggestion from this body of work is that data capture technologies must reduce the burden of collecting and analyzing data to a point where it does not interfere with ordinary activities of daily living.
She suggests technology be designed with the goal of sustaining the user's interest in the device so there is motivation to resume use after breaks.
Our research builds on prior work on health monitoring technologies, focusing on the ways in which emotional response to it affects user engagement with BG data, family interactions, and health outcomes.
An interview study was conducted to better understand tensions that occur between children with T1D and parents as they use technology to cope with diabetes across the continuum of childhood development.
This study focused on children, aged between 8 and 18, which is the peak time of T1D diagnosis  and a stage of development when key interventions can make a life-long impact upon health behaviors.
The age range encompasses three specific stages of development for which unique diabetes management issues have been defined  - Older Elementary , Early Adolescence , and Late Adolescence .
While the interaction between parent and child evolves over time, research has shown that children with T1D who have parents who are engaged in diabetes management throughout these stages of development, ultimately have better health behaviors and outcomes .
Thus, it is important to design technology that supports parent engagement.
All of the parents interviewed had completed college.
There was one participant  whose parents were divorced; all other parents were married.
The mothers from all of the families were interviewed, as well as the fathers of P1 and P7.
Written informed consent was obtained from all parents and children before the interview.
Children 10 years of age and older were interviewed individually, without their parents being present.
Children under the age of 10 were not interviewed because the IRB did not grant permission to utilize the planned interview questions for this younger age group.
Instead, we relied on the older children interviewed, asking them to reflect on issues around diabetes management that might have occurred when they were younger.
In total, 12 one-hour semi-structured interviews were conducted.
The interview questions solicited the types of diabetes technology used, barriers to use, and perceptions about how BGM technologies affect the parent-child relationship.
Parents and children were asked the same questions but to answer from their own perspective.
At the end of each interview, participants were shown a video demonstrating a technology called the Automated Diabetes Management System , by Diabetech, in use.
The video served as a probe to stimulate the participant's thoughts about a general category of technologies that automatically track, trend and communicate BG readings.
After viewing the video, parents and children were presented with various scenarios of use to identify how this type of technology would or would not be useful for diabetes care at their  current phase of development, as well as when they were younger, and how it might impact their relationship with their parent .
Qualitative research has been found useful for understanding the nuances and complexities of a particular research question.
One approach is to use a small number of participants in order to reveal these with respect to technology adoption, appropriation and resistance .
Likewise, we reached data saturation by conducting interviews with seven families.
The goal of the interviews was to investigate the ways in which technology, designed to track and trend BG levels, may contribute to or detract from the goal of independent and effective disease management.
The study protocol was approved by the institutional review board  of Indiana University.
The interviews were audio recorded and later transcribed to text.
The transcripts were analyzed using an iterative approach.
Participant comments were pulled out from each interview and grouped together in categories.
These were refined after each review of the data until prominent themes emerged.
We are now at a point that we have built that independence in her that she knows she can be away from us ... but she still needs that connection through our cell phone."
None of the parents we interviewed felt that this type technology would provoke a negative sense of surveillance for their child.
Although we were unable to interview children in the older elementary age group, several of the adolescent participants shared experiences, which support the perspective of the parents we interviewed.
P7 mentioned a time when he was in elementary school and the school secretary had to track his mother down while she was shopping to address a BG that was too high.
He concluded that a technology like the ADMS "would have been cool and would have made things easier."
P5 concurred stating "When I was a little kid  would have helped so much.
If we had that technology when I was 8, I probably would have had a cell phone.
I think my parents would have probably got me one for that sole purpose."
P3 felt it would have been helpful during sleepovers with friends when she was younger.
Barriers identified in the interview study of older elementary age children include frustration from the difficulty collecting BG values and engaging the child with the data.
Both families interviewed in this study used multiple glucometers, keeping one in their child's bedroom, kitchen, in the family car, and in the nurse's office at school.
Multiple meters present a barrier to reflecting on BG trends because there is no device that can collect, consolidate, and display information gathered from glucometers in different locations or glucometers of differing types.
One mother described her experience using an online tool to track and trend her son's BG values.
I don't really know how to get around that.
I usually use pencil and paper to log BG values, because we use so many different meters."
Both of the families interviewed felt that existing technology was not an effective training tool for their child.
One participant described a creative way in which parents in his support group get their children with T1D engaged with BG monitoring, by making it fun.
Who is going to be highest and who is going to be lowest?
Just to make a game out of it.
It is no big deal, it is just a number, but let's have some fun with it."
Diabetes management is a 24-hour responsibility; parents or trained caregivers must be nearby to provide care and ensure safety of late elementary age children.
This can be challenging when allowing children to participate in `normal' activities such as slumber parties and school sports teams.
The impulse to keep a young child safe and close to oneself is a natural response in parents, particularly when there is fear about putting the responsibility for diabetes management in the hands of another caregiver.
Equally, children seek the security of having a parent nearby.
One parent described this type of transition that had recently taken place for his eightyear-old daughter.
Puberty strikes at an average age of 11 years for girls and 13 years for boys with an accompanying growth spurt that begins between 12 to 15 years and 14 to 17 years of age respectively .
Growth brings about increases in the amount of insulin required for glycemic control, not just by virtue of the increase in food consumption, but also due to hormonal changes.
Both of the mothers we interviewed felt software to track and trend BG was especially important now because their daughters' blood sugars had become abnormal due to the onset of puberty.
Parental concerns about unusually high BG dominated the conversation and the following quote is a representative example.
She started her period and she was just running high all the time and today it is nothing for her to be in the 200s."
Both mothers explained that collecting contextual data surrounding the BG reading, e.g.
Health monitoring technologies have the potential to produce shame in the people who use them, as they are often a direct reflection of success towards a personal health goal.
The adolescents and parents we interviewed discussed examples of `shameful feelings' produced by interacting with diabetes-related technology.
One mother described how her daughter went through a period of being dishonest when questioned about checking BG values; "There was a period where she was lying that she tested.
She has even been on the phone with me and said `Okay I will test.'
I waited on the phone and  `I am 122 Mom' and when I check later I found she didn't even test and later we found her blood sugar had been high, it was just one lie after another ."
It can be frustrating to children as they search for independence within established parentchild interactions.
Simply checking in with a child about a glucometer reading can create feelings of frustration, as was described in the following; "Sometimes we will forget and say `Did you test yourself?'
By the third time she is like `Yes...I told you!'
You hear it so often from them; it is in one ear and out the other sometimes."
The younger a child is diagnosed, the more transitions a parent must successfully endure.
Responsibilities must shift but it is often easy to slip back into old routines.
Both of the girls interviewed shared the same conflicting attitude toward parental assistance, for example one child said: "I usually know everything, but once in a while I will wonder how much something is  and I will call her."
Anxiety was a tension shared by all of the parents - particularly the need to know if their child routinely checked BG.
Each parent also described their struggle to release control of diabetes care to their teenagers and expressed a need for suggestions about how to successfully navigate this difficult stage of child development.
Anxiety related to BG checking can interfere with the trust as one parent describes: "Sometimes I feel like I have to nag, because sometimes I don't see her test  and she says `Yes I have already done it!'
Another parent describes suspicions that her son may only share BG information when it works in his favor: "He is supposed to test before he drives, I am sure he doesn't test every time.
In fact, I don't think he tests ever, but if he feels weird, he will call me and say I am going to be late, my sugar is low.
I have said well just wait, get your sugars up and then come home.
One time though I have to say that it was awfully convenient.
He was at his girlfriend's but supposed to be home, hmm."
Trust issues can interfere with a parent's best intentions to release control of disease management to their child.
All of the parents had conflicted feelings similar to the following: "I don't like not knowing what  are.
I probably could just go in at night and take his meter and write them down, but I am trying to give him control and let him deal with the doctors."
The teens shared feelings of frustration surrounding the interaction with BG monitoring technologies due to their desire to be independent.
Vigilant `checking in' with a child about BG level is an understandable, and to a certain extent desirable, parental behavior, but it can lead to unhealthy tension in the parent-child relationship.
One teen explained how the tension in this interaction led to a complete shutdown of communication of any BG results to his parents: "I basically want a complete removal from ...absolutely with no information at all going to them or from them.
I  `I know what I am doing, I can do this by myself' kind of thing and for Mom that is really, really difficult, because she wants to be there to protect me and keep everything good.
Feeling trusted in independent self-care was an important acknowledgement for teens to receive from their parents: "My Dad kind of leaves it up to me, he will remind me like make sure you do your blood test and give yourself insulin.
My Mom is the real stickler.
I think my dad trusts me and knows that I am growing up and can do whatever, but my mom still thinks I am a baby."
I guess nobody really understands that I honestly forget.
People are just like ... you didn't forget, you just didn't want to.
It's like no, I really forget."
The primary contributor to tensions across all of the age groups was checking BG with a glucometer.
Parents of older elementary children experience a sense of fear as they leave their child's diabetes management in the hands of another caregiver, who then takes over responsibility for checking BG.
The lack of access to this data creates a loss of control and associated discomfort.
Glucometer use can create shame in early adolescence because blood sugars are extraordinarily variable due to puberty and growth.
This can contribute to parent-child conflict as children may be dishonest about checking BG to avoid bad feelings associated with high values.
Non-compliance with BG monitoring is the principle source of parent-teen conflict.
Our study has revealed two core aspects of a technology that could address the emotions surrounding BGM:  Remote access to data when parent and child are not co-located; and  easy collection of meaningful data that enhances reflection and awareness.
Each of these general functionalities would be designed differently based on the development stage-based needs identified in this study.
Next we describe the findings of the second study that investigated the emotional responses to families using a specific health monitoring technology, the ADMS.
The focus of this study was to investigate whether actual use would affect the child's and/or parents' emotional response towards BG checking and health outcomes such as glycemic control and diabetes self-care skills.
BG trending information and the heightened attention to BGM has the potential to trigger bad feelings for both parent and child.
Parental monitoring may also contribute to negative feelings of surveillance for a child .
Thus, the technology trial addresses important questions about the potential of remote BGM, identified in the interview study.
The interview study used a qualitative approach to understand the variety of parent and child perspectives about the use of diabetes technology.
In this experimental study, quantitative measures of improved glycemic control, attitude toward BG testing, and attainment of diabetes selfmanagement skills were collected for a BGM technology - the Automated Diabetes Management System .
The needs of families with children in the older elementary stage of development, as identified in the interview study, were further explored through the analysis of data from a 12 month trial of a technology that automatically collects, tracks, and trends BG values.
Although this study was not designed by the authors , it was completed after the interview study, enabling the themes identified to be explored in more detail, in particular, the changes in emotional response to BGM by the participants.
The ADMS comprises two components: the GlucoMON and GlucoDYNAMIXTM; these are wireless technologies that work together to provide automated BGM data retrieval, analysis, and reporting.
The participants taking part in the experimental study had access to two features within GlucoDYNAMIX including:  `Real-time alerts' - notification to parents, by text message to cell phones and/or email, of the last BG result immediately following the docking of the glucometer to the GlucoMON device; and  `Trend analysis reports' - parents received a daily email including the system generated 21-day BG log attached as a PDF document .
The report is color coded and arranged by date  and time .
Elevated BG values are red; low blood sugar results in yellow; readings `within range' are white.
Sixty-four families were invited to participate in the study.
Fifty-four  volunteered and were randomly assigned to one of two groups: 27 families in a control condition ; and 27 families in an experimental condition .
Three families from each group dropped out of the study leaving a total of 48 families - 24 in the experimental and 24 in the control condition of the study.
Analysis revealed no statistically significant difference for demographic and clinical characteristics between the experimental and control groups .
Participants in both conditions were seen five times during the 12-month study period, beginning with an initial baseline screening appointment during which demographic, glycemic control, and psychosocial data were collected.
Families were seen quarterly for routine diabetes clinic visits during which relevant information was gathered.
Neither group was asked to monitor BG any more or less frequently than other patients with T1D in the practice.
Families in both groups received two registered BG meters and agreed to use only these devices during the study.
Both groups were seen by the same health care team and provided the same level of care without bias.
BGM information collected by the ADMS was not monitored by the diabetes team outside of routine clinic visits.
The health care team did not explicitly encourage use of the ADMS.
Participants enrolled in the experimental group were provided the ADMS equipment and service, free of charge for the study duration.
As an incentive, participants in the control condition were offered use of the ADMS for 6 months after the completion of the study.
No other incentives for participation were provided to either group.
Participants were free to utilize data from the ADMS as they saw fit for diabetes management purposes.
They were advised to dock their meter daily or more often if they wish but at a minimum, they should dock weekly.
One family had no Internet access so their trend analysis reports were mailed to their home each week.
Reports were not automatically sent to the diabetes care team and no specific health care provider initiated action was triggered by ADMS reports.
It was left to the family to decide what  action should be taken.
Participants from both study groups completed a Diabetes Self-Management Profile  at the baseline, 6-month, and 12-month visits.
The DSMP is a semi-structured interview that is a validated measure of diabetes self-management .
Parents were interviewed in this study as prior work has shown little difference between child and parent responses .
The questions are grouped into subscales related to each area of self-care and have a range of possible points as follows: exercise , management of hypoglycemia , diet , BG checking  and insulin administration and adjustment .
Higher scores indicate more rigorous diabetes self-management along the five subscales.
Both parent and child completed separate Blood Glucose Monitoring Communication  questionnaires at the baseline, 6month, and 12-month visits.
The BGMC questionnaire is a validated eight-question survey that gauges emotional response to BGM .
Children are asked to reflect on how it feels when their BG is out of range.
Similarly, questions aimed at parents ask them to report the level of concern they have for their child in such situations.
The total score of the survey is used to evaluate BGM affect, where a minimum score of 8 reflects a more positive emotional response and higher scores up to a maximum of 24 points are indicative of negative feelings towards BGM.
HbA1c was collected at enrollment and at 3-month intervals for every participant in for the duration of the study.
This blood value is a reflection of how well BG has been kept in normal range during the prior 3 months, and is the clinical standard for measuring glycemic control.
The risk of microvascular complications, - including eye, kidney and nerve disease - increase exponentially with higher HbA1c values .
ADMS usage was measured using system recorded docking events .
Participants in the experimental condition were free to use the ADMS however they wished and 2 distinct groups of usage emerged - those who docked < 1 times each week and those who docked 1-3 times each week throughout the study.
In addition to comparisons between the control and experimental, the ADMS usage groups  docking <1 time/week,  docking 1-3 times/week, and  the control group are used to categorize the study outcomes.
There were no statistically significant differences in baseline demographic or clinical characteristics among ADMS usage groups ,  and  - including characteristics listed in Table 2, baseline HbA1c , BGMC or DSMP scores.
The results of the 12 month trial of the ADMS showed that children in the experimental group had significantly  lower HbA1c at 12 months  when compared to the control group .
Improvement was more profound in families using the ADMS more frequently.
Table 3 shows the mean BGMC scores of parents in Group B dropped below scores of children in that group after using the ADMS for 12 months .
Mismatch for groups A and C became larger, more positive, by the end of the study.
This study showed that participants who docked 1-3 times/week had larger improvements DSMP scores than both the control group  and the group docking <1 time/week .
The largest gain for children in this group was in skills related to BG checking.
This result occurred in a context where participants were simply given the ADMS and allowed to use it as desired.
There was no additional prompting, educational messages, or connection with health care providers afforded by the technology.
This study has shown a positive relationship between the use of the ADMS and health outcomes.
Specifically, docking 1-3 times/week was associated with significant improvements in HbA1c, DSMP, and BGMC-parent scores.
Although the BGMC scores of children were not significantly different with the addition of the ADMS, it is a positive finding given that this technology has the potential to make bad feelings worse.
We also found that families that used the ADMS more often had more comparable parent-child BGM affect by the end of the study.
As shown in Table 3, children in both the experimental and control conditions experienced no significant change in BGMC scores from baseline to 12-months.
This indicates that the introduction of the ADMS had no impact on the BGM affect of children in the experimental group.
Table 3 also shows that parents in group B , had a significant  improvement in BGMC from baseline  to 12-months  when compared with the control group and those docking <1 time/week.
The mismatch in BGMC scores  may reveal potential tensions around BGM.
A positive mismatch indicates that the parent has more anxiety related to the results of their child's BGM.
The studies presented in this paper provide different perspectives to address the research question - how does the emotional response to BGM technology impact disease management and the family dynamic?
The interview study revealed specific ways in which the evolving emotional needs of children and parents influence adoption and use.
Our findings suggest that the two core functions of BGM technology must be addressed based on the differing needs of each age group.
For example, `Remote access to data when parent and child are not co-located' must be addressed in the older elementary stage because parents and children, alike, fear separation when they must rely on others to properly respond to diabetes management concerns.
Parents of children in early adolescence would benefit from remote monitoring in order to support their child as they navigate the complexities of managing diabetes during periods of rapid growth.
In the later phase of adolescence, remote access to information could be used to foster trust and mitigate anxieties of parents who must back away gradually from their child's diabetes management.
In turn, parents without the full picture of BG trend information may react more strongly than needed to a single reading that is out of normal range.
This type of negative, affective response can have emotional repercussions to both the parent and child.
Children in early adolescence who are challenged by the changes brought about by puberty may benefit from contextualized BG readings to make the data more meaningful.
Ease of data collection is essential to promote BGM reflection during late adolescence, but more important is identifying what aspect of collecting the data is most meaningful to teens in order to motivate routine BGM.
In answer to the research question, the technology trial has shown that a technology that pushes data to the parent can actually improve their emotional responses to health data without adversely affecting the feelings of the child.
The results of this study confirm findings from the interview study, namely that attending to emotional response in the design of pervasive health technology can contribute to positive outcomes.
The families who used the ADMS frequently enough to experience benefits had a reduction in parental anxiety around BGM.
Moreover, the affective response of parents became more similar to that of their child, possibly lessening tension in their relationship.
The ADMS also sustained the interest of roughly half of the experimental group who remain consistently engaged with the technology for 12 months - through the various life events that can cause a break in routine.
This could be due to the system's ability to effectively address the anxieties of parents with children in the late elementary phase of development.
The discussions we had with teens in early/late adolescence and their parents suggest that the ADMS  would not effectively meet the needs of families with older children.
Furthermore, if not properly designed it could exacerbate parent-child conflict.
However, given the significant positive impact to glycemic control and self-care skills it is important to consider how this technology can be modified to better meet the needs of teens and their parents.
The findings from this experimental trial suggest that, if properly designed, health monitoring technologies can support parents' best intentions without contributing to conflict.
By focusing on user experience  and the issues brought about by the stage of child development, we have identified following design implications for of health monitoring technologies like the ADMS: Older Elementary: Children in this age group can assume basic self-care tasks including insulin injections and BG testing but still require the supervision and support of knowledgeable adults .
Early Adolescence: Puberty can result in average growth rates of 3.4-4 inches/year and 18-19.8 pounds/year , hormonal change, as well as stress related to social issues, all of which can alter metabolic control .
Providing context to supplement raw data might help sort out the cause of shifts in BG, improving acceptance of unstable glycemic control and reducing feelings of shame.
Likewise, monitoring alternative aspects of diabetes management, aside from BG, may bolster self-efficacy during this time of variable control.
Late Adolescence: During this phase, children transition to independence and begin defining their ambitions for adult life.
Research has shown that teens with T1D have better health outcomes when parents remain involved with diabetes care, despite resistance from teens .
Thus, technology should be designed to engage parents yet allow the teen to feel trusted to be independent.
One limitation of this study was the lack of interviews with older elementary school age children.
However, we have captured the needs of this group through the perspective of parents and the reflections of the older children we interviewed.
We also leveraged the ADA's guidelines for diabetes care during this developmental stage and feel this has helped mitigate bias brought about by not interviewing younger children.
Furthermore, because young children still require adult supervision, attending to parents' emotional response may also help meet the need of children to have parents who are less anxious about isolated BG readings.
The studies presented here show the potential of pervasive technologies to ease the tension in the parent-child relationship as it evolves over time, building on prior HCI research.
Our work makes a new contribution by informing the design of remote monitoring technologies that take into account the diverse emotional needs of children and their parents.
The trial of the ADMS has shown the potential of this type of health monitoring technology to enable positive outcomes for children with T1D and their parents.
An important theme from the interview studies is the balance of control over data versus feelings of surveillance.
However, there is still much to understand about the impact of this kind of pervasive technology given the potential for adverse effects on the family dynamic.
In addition, there may be certain aspects of learning and communication that are lost when moving to a purely technology driven form of monitoring.
For example, teens might assume their parents are looking out for them when BG data is released and decide not to send an accompanying text message, explaining, for example, why they cannot drive home before their curfew.
Temporary care providers may be disempowered by a technology that automatically communicates BG readings to parents - effectively cutting them off from opportunities to learn about diabetes care.
Monitoring the health of children with technology is a complicated design problem that requires a focus on the evolving needs of both child and parent as the child transitions through various stages of development.
Rogers argued that in order to understand the more complex needs of users, researchers and practitioners must move beyond design efforts that focus on creating pleasurable experience and proactive computing to those that uncover human desires, morals, and values that inspire technology use and proactive people .
Our research has shown that focusing on what makes us human - in this case one's emotional response to health data - may help design technologies that inspire people to change health behavior.
The authors would like to thank all of the families and clinicians who participated in the studies; Kevin McMahon, Stephen Ponder, and Eric Link for inviting us to join their research team; Josh Tenenberg, Barbara Anderson, Erik Stolterman, Shaowen Bardzell and the CHI reviewers for helpful feedback; the Morris L. Lichtenstein, Jr. Medical Research Foundation for funding the technology trial.
Care of children and adolescents with T1D.
Family conflict, adherence, and glycemic Control in youth with short duration type 1 diabetes.
Consolvo, S. Designing and evaluating a persuasive technology to encourage lifestyle behavior change.
Gammon D., Arsand E., Walseth O.A., Andersson N, Jenssen M. and Taylor T. Parent-child interaction using a mobile and wireless system for BG monitoring.
Grimes, A., Tan, D. and Morris, D. Toward technologies that support family reflections on health.
