Jiang Hu1, Andi Winterboer2, Clifford I. Nass1, Johanna D. Moore2, and Rebecca Illowsky1 1 2 Department of Communication School of Informatics Stanford University University of Edinburgh Bldg.
A 2x2 enhanced Wizard-of-Oz experiment  was conducted to compare two different approaches to presenting information to drivers in easy and difficult driving conditions.
Data of driving safety, evaluation of the spoken dialogue system, and perception of self were analyzed.
Results show that the user-modeled summarizeand-refine  approach led to more efficient information retrieval than did the summarize-and-refine  approach.
However, depending on driving condition, higher efficiency did not always translate into pleasant subjective experience.
Implications for usability testing and interface design were presented, followed by discussions of future research directions.
In the SR approach, attributes that partition the data into the minimal number of clusters are chosen, so that a concise summary can be presented to the user to refine.
The drawbacks of this approach, however, include the large number of dialogue turns required for the refinement process and the possibility of irrelevant/uninformative clustering.
In the user-model  based approach, the system identifies and presents a small number of options that best match the user's preferences .
Although the UM approach may work well with a relatively small number of alternatives, it does not scale up to presenting tens or hundreds of options.
In addition, the system does not provide an overview of options, which may lead to the user's actual or perceived missing out on potentially better options.
Recently, an alternative approach that combines the benefits of the two previously introduced approaches was proposed and studied .
In this way, UMSR aims to keep the benefits of user tailoring, while extending the approach to handle presentation of large numbers of options in an order that reflects user preferences.
Dialogue samples based on the SR and UMSR approaches can be found under the Experiment section.
In a previous laboratory experiment that compared the relative effectiveness of UMSR and SR approaches, participants read and evaluated transcripts of six manuallygenerated dialogue pairs based on both SR and UMSR .
Four criteria were used for the evaluation: understandability, overview of options, relevance of options, and efficiency.
While the results clearly favor the UMSR approach, it is unclear whether such preferences would still be observed when the user is actually interacting with an SDS, and when the user is simultaneously conducting another task, such as driving a car.
A common task for spoken dialogue systems  is to help users select a suitable option  from the set of options available.
When the number of options is small, they can simply be presented sequentially.
However, as the number of options increases, the system must have strategies for helping users browse the space of available options.
In this paper, we compare two recently proposed approaches in terms of the cognitive resources they require.
In the conventional summarize and refine  approach , the system groups a large number of options into a small number of clusters that share attributes.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
An important venue to deploy SDS is in vehicles because using eyes and hands for a secondary task may hinder driving .
Not only do busy people have a growing need for information services while driving, but increasingly automakers also regard providing such services as a potential profit source.
However, concerns over safety dictate the careful development and deployment of in-car applications of SDS.
Presenting information to drivers requires the consideration of the distractive factor imposed by communicating with the SDS.
This is especially true when driving conditions are unfavorable and demand a large portion of cognitive resources.
In the meantime, cognitive load associated with driving may negatively impact the efficiency of interaction with the SDS.
To test these hypotheses, the following lab experiment was designed and conducted.
The database contained actual flight information as provided by airlines.
When the system adopted the SR approach to presenting information, the wizard used drop-down menus to perform stepwise queries upon request from participants until they found the satisfactory flight and made the booking decision.
With the UMSR approach, the Web interface returned search results based on a business traveler's persona, but allows for additional stepwise refinement as well.
The wizard copied and pasted textual output from the Web interface to SpeechifyTM, a text-to-speech application provided by Nuance Communications, Inc. All participants heard a synthetic voice of their own gender.
They were encouraged to make requests for refinement rather than merely responding to system prompts.
Consequently, the wizard used very few questions as prompts and would add additional questions only if the participant remained silent for more than five seconds after each round of information presentation by the system.
We use the STISIM DriveTM simulation system and projected visuals on a wall-sized back-projection screen.
A total of four courses with two levels of difficulty were used to vary driving-related cognitive load imposed on participants.
With speed limits ranging from 25 mph to 55 mph, each course contained four sequential sections: a residential area, a small city, a country highway, and a big city.
Compared to the easy courses, the difficult courses had three times as many vehicles, cyclists, and pedestrians, as well as sharp curves, two foggy sections, a construction site, slopes of various degrees, and a police chase.
Pre-tests proved that the difficult courses were harder to drive than the easy courses in terms of effects on actual and perceived driving performance.
No significant difference was found between the two easy courses or the two difficult courses.
The simulator kept track of each participant's driving performance in terms of numbers of collisions, speeding tickets, traffic light and stop sign violations, and minor driving errors including centerline crossing and road edge excursion.
To make reliable and rigorous comparisons, participants were asked to assume a business traveler's persona for the flight-booking task.
The following offers a side-by-side comparison of first-round presentations for this persona: SR: "I found 23 flights from New York to Frankfurt.
There are direct flights as well as flights that require a connection.
I also have information about fare classes."
UMSR: "I found 6 direct business class flights from New York to Frankfurt.
However, if you're willing to make a connection, there is a business class KLM flight arriving at 1:35 p.m., connecting in Amsterdam."
Each participant drove for two experimental rounds and booked four different one-way flights.
Prior to each round of driving, participants received detailed instructions on the two flights to be booked.
Participants were randomly assigned to the "easy-driving" or the "difficult-driving" condition.
The order of each participant's two courses was also randomized.
During the first round of experimental driving, half of the participants received flight information presented with the SR approach; the other half heard search results presented with the UMSR approach.
The opposite approach was used during the second round of experimental driving.
The order in which the four flights were booked was rotated to counterbalance possible order effects.
Participants first drove on the demo course to familiarize themselves with the simulator.
The experimental phase that followed consisted of three major steps.
In Step 1, the participant was told to use an "in-car information system" to book flights while driving.
She was instructed to assume the persona of the business traveler for the booking tasks.
At the same time, she received instructions on booking the first two flights.
In Step 2, the participant drove on the first experimental course alone in the lab.
About three minutes later, a short beep was played, followed by the first utterance from the system saying that "This is the in-car information system.
I'm now connected to the network.
Would you like to book a flight?"
A conversation began as soon as the participant responded to this prompt sent by the wizard sitting in a neighboring room.
Via a wireless connection, the wizard monitored all audio events around the driving simulator, performed database queries, and converted textual output into synthetic speech on a laptop computer.
The synthetic speech utterances were transmitted wirelessly to speakers put near the simulator.
After booking the first flight, the participant was prompted to book the second flight.
In Step 3, the experimenter returned to the lab and administered a questionnaire that asked the participant to evaluate the "in-car information system," herself during the interaction, and the driving condition.
Ten-point Likert scales were used except for the four seven-point Likert scales from the previous study .
The ten-point scales were meant to capture subtle variations and to avoid a middle point that often encourages "satisficing."
Once the participant indicated that she was ready for the second round of driving, Steps 1 through 3 were repeated, with different flights to book, and a different course  to drive.
Upon completing the last questionnaire, the participant was debriefed, paid, thanked, and discharged.
The manipulation of driving condition was successful.
Specifically, although the average number of collision accidents was quite low, difficult-driving participants had significantly more accidents than easy-driving participants, F = 26.69, p < .001, Measy = 0 , Mdifficult = .82 .
No difference was found in terms of stop sign and traffic light violations, and number of speeding tickets.
Participants had significantly more minor errors when the system adopted the UMSR approach than when it used SR, F = 6.08, p < .05, MSR = 1.09 , MUMSR = 1.69 , but this appears to be driven by the difference observed among easy-driving participants.
In fact, the reverse was true for easydriving participants.
However, their average number of minor errors was less than one, thus having little negative impact on driving safety.
Post hoc analyses suggest that easy-driving participants thought that the UMSR approach was more fun to use than was the SR, and difficult-driving participants were more likely than easydriving participants to think that the SR was fun to use.
Answers to the four questions/scales used in the previous study  were also analyzed.
The only significant result was that participants thought that UMSR was more likely than SR to overlook better options, F = 5.33, p < .05, MSR = 3.94 , MUMSR = 4.68 , but this difference was primarily observed among difficult-driving participants.
Self: Overall, the participants perceived themselves more positively1 when the system adopted the SR approach to present search results, F = 9.65, p < .01.
Once again, this main effect appeared to be driven by the difference observed among difficult-driving participants.
An interaction of the presentation style and driving condition was found on participants' self-reported friendliness,2 F = 7.44, p < .05.
Post hoc analyses indicate that easy-driving participants thought that they were friendlier when the system adopted the UMSR approach than when it adopted the SR approach, and they were more likely than difficult-driving participants to perceive themselves as friendly when the system presented information with the UMSR approach.
Finally, a comparison of participants' self-reported usual driving behavior and in-experiment driving behavior shows an interaction between driving condition and presentation style, F = 6.25, p < .05.
Specifically, easy-driving participants reported that they had reduced offensive driving  when the system had adopted the SR approach, and had increased offensive driving when it presented information in the UMSR style.
There was also an expected main effect of driving condition, such that difficult-driving participants drove more cautiously than did easy-driving participants.
However, improved dialogue efficiency with an SDS does not necessarily lead to positive subjective user experience.
In our study, only participants in easy driving conditions were able to appreciate UMSR's tailored presentations, despite the high efficiency of UMSR in all conditions.
Whereas participants in the previous study believed that UMSR provides better overview than does SR , our participants thought otherwise when driving conditions were unfavorable.
Findings like this unequivocally highlight the importance of context of use in usability testing, and prompt researchers to identify problems with interface design.
A further examination of transcribed dialogue files helped us uncover a critical flaw with our current UMSR simulation: for one of the four city pairs, the system generated an extremely long first-round presentation with a user-modeled summary followed by details of three flights.
Moreover, there were redundant and unnecessary pieces of information within that long presentation.
Even though the presentation was tailored for the persona, the large amount of information nonetheless placed a huge cognitive burden on our participants, especially when driving-related cognitive load was already heavy.
In theory, UMSR systems should be intrinsically superior to SR systems because they leverage knowledge of the user.
The key challenge, then, is to utilize the strength of UMSR systems without burdening the user with too much information.
If this goal can be achieved, using an in-car SDS can be made safer, more efficient, and more pleasant.
Chung, G. Developing a flexible spoken dialog system using simulation.
Information presentation in spoken dialogue systems.
Moore, J.D., Foster, M.E., Lemon, O., and White, M. Generating tailored, comparative descriptions in spoken dialogue.
Polifroni, J., Chung, G., and Seneff, S. Towards automatic generation of mixed-initiative dialogue systems from web content.
Predicting the effects of in-car interface use on driver performance: an integrated model approach.
Walker, M.A., Whittaker, S., Stent, A., Maloor, P., Moore, J.D., Johnston, M., and Vasireddy, G. Generation and evaluation of user tailored responses in dialogue.
Although there was a slight increase in minor driving errors when the system used the UMSR approach as opposed to the SR approach, the general finding is that voice-based browsing using UMSR is more efficient than one that adopts the SR approach.
This is consistent with the findings of , and provides behavioral evidence supporting the UMSR approach.
This index is composed of 10 items such as competent, powerful, skilled, successful, and intelligent.
This index is composed of three scales: cooperative, friendly, and polite.
