Do people from different cultures tag digital images differently?
The current study compared the content of tags for digital images created by two cultural groups: European Americans and Chinese.
In line with previous findings on cultural differences in attentional patterns, we found similar cultural differences in the order of the image parts  that people tag.
We found that for European Americans, the first tag was more likely assigned to the main objects than that by Chinese; but for Chinese, the first tag was more likely assigned to the overall description or relations between objects in the images.
The findings had significant implications for designing culturalsensitive tools to facilitate the tagging and search process of digital media, as well as for developing data-mining tools that identify user profiles based on their tagging patterns and cultural origins.
Studies have been conducted to better understand why and how people create tags to digital media such as images .
However, we think that the content of tags  created by users are also important for two reasons.
First, one way to make the tagging process easier is to provide algorithms for partially automated tagging such as suggesting tags for digital media .
The more the suggestions resemble the actual tags created by human users, the easier the tagging process will be.
Second, better tag-based search algorithms can provide a more visible and direct association between the effort of creating tags and the benefit of searching from tags, thereby better motivate users to create tags .
Another important aspect is the cultural origins of taggers.
Research in perception and cognition suggest that people in different cultures allocate attention differently when viewing images and animations.
Westerners tend to focus on main objects and pay less attention to background and contextual information, whereas Easterners have a holistic way of perceiving images, in the sense that they tend to equally spread attention more evenly over different parts of an image .
For example, Westerners mention the active focal object more often and describe the inert background objects and overall context less often than Easterners in their first sentence when describing an animation .
Westerners are also more likely to detect changes in main objects and less likely to detect contextual changes than Easterners .
Based on the assumption that users' tagging process is implicitly tied to their basic attentional processes, we hypothesize that culturally different attentional patterns may predict cultural differences in the order of tags people create for digital media.
In other words, we hypothesize that people from different cultures may exhibit different tagging patterns.
In the current study, we compared the content of tags created by European Americans and Chinese for a same set of digital images.
We examined the extent to which people in the two cultures assign tags to describe different parts  of an image.
We also examined the association between the sequential order and the content of tags.
Innovations in technology have fostered a rapid growth in both personal and public digital media collections by providing a large variety of easy-to-use capturing devices and low-cost storage devices.
A growing population begins to realize the benefits brought by semantic interpretations and annotations  on searching tasks from these enormous collections of digital media .
As a result, researchers in human-computer interaction  have been actively investigating human tagging behavior.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
There were three groups of digital images, each with 20 images portraying a main object in one of the 3 categories mentioned above.
A sample image in each category is provided in Figure 1.
Twenty-one European Americans  and 23 Chinese  were recruited from a university community to participate in the study.
All European Americans were born in the United States and English was their first language except for one, who was born in France with French as the first language.
None of the European Americans had stayed in an Eastern country for more than 9 months.
All Chinese participants had stayed in the US for less than 15 months, with the average time spent in the US being 3.17 months.
The two groups were similar in age , and education level .
For both cultural groups, participants were familiar with searching for images on the internet and had some experience in tagging images on websites such as Facebook and Flickr.
The procedure was the same for all participants, except that the experiment was conducted in English for European Americans and in Chinese for Chinese.
We made sure that all participants understood the process of creating tags to images and the purpose of creating the tags.
Participants were given the following instructions: "The purpose to create these tags is to make it easier to search for a particular image in the future.
Please imagine that weeks or months later, when you come back to look for a certain image, you can only use tags as your searching cues.
The tags you have created should be able to help you find the correct image faster."
Each participant saw one image at a time, at a random order.
For each image, participants were asked to create at least one, at most 10 tags to describe the image using a web browser.
Participants were also asked to create short, single word tags rather than long phrases or sentences.
European Americans created all tags in English, and Chinese participants created all tags in Chinese.
After tagging all images, participants were presented the same set of 60 images again, one at a time, in a random order, together with the tags they just created.
Participants were then asked to select the tags they believe describe the main object of the image.
For each image, participants were allowed to select at most 3 tags.
Sixty digital images were selected from search results using public search engines such as Google.
Four steps were taken to code tags into categories.
First, three researchers  went through all images and agreed on which part is the main object.
Second, a coding scheme  was developed and the coders were trained.
Third, a Chinese coder did the coding for all Chinese tags and 2 European American coders coded the English tags.
Due to technical difficulties, data from one Chinese participant was excluded from the analysis.
The average number of tags participants created and selected as describing the main object for each image category is presented in Table 2.
On average, European Americans created more tags and selected more tags as describing the main object than Chinese.
The two cultural groups selected a similar proportion of tags as describing the main object.
Although the proportion of tags selected as describing the main object decreased along tag positions in both cultures , consistent with our hypothesis that main objects were more salient to European Americans, they selected more tags as describing the main object than Chinese  in the most important position  than Chinese.
It is possible that the cultural difference in the selection of tags is caused by different definition of main objects by the two cultural groups.
Thus, an objective coding scheme was developed to code the tags into different categories to ensure an equal criterion for selecting the main object across both groups.
If a similar result pattern was found, this alternative explanation can be ruled out.
Based on the coding scheme, percentage of tags coded as describing the main objects was computed by summing up the three subcategories  describing the main object for each tag position across all 60 images for each participant.
The mean percentages of tags describing the main object are presented in Figure 2.
Further analysis suggested that European Americans selected more tags as describing the main object than Chinese for the first position  and less tags for the third position .
Moreover, the proportion of tags selected as describing the main object decreased along tag positions only for European Americans .
The results from the coding of tags yielded a similar and even stronger effect in the same direction in our hypothesis.
That is, the foreground main objects appeared to be more salient to European Americans as they described the main objects in earlier tags rather than later ones, whereas Chinese tended to describe the foreground and background objects equally likely for each tag position.
The major investigation of the current study is to look at whether participants from the two cultural groups tag the main versus background objects differently.
We took sequential position of tags into account based on the assumption that tags created earlier are usually associated with the salient parts of an image and/or considered more important in describing the image by participants .
Since not all participants created more than 3 tags for each image, the result from the 3rd to 10th tag was combined in the analysis.
All analysis in this section generated similar patterns of results in the three image categories.
Therefore, only the combined results across image categories are reported.
The percentage of tags participants selected as describing the main object was computed for each tag position for each participant across all 60 images.
The mean percentages of tags selected by participants as describing the main object are presented in Figure 2.
Pearson Chi-square  suggested betweenculture difference in some of the categories, as flagged out in bold .
European Americans tagged names of the main objects more often in their first tags whereas Chinese started with tagging overall properties of the images and relationships between objects in their first tags.
This pattern again provided support to the main hypothesis that European Americans tended to pay attention to and tag the main object in their first tag, while Chinese tended to pay attention to and tag the overall description and/or the relationship embedded in the image in their first tags.
We were also interested in whether image categories had an effect on how likely participants from the two groups tag the main object in their first tags.
The percentages of the first tags that described the main object for each image category are presented in Table 4 for both participants' selections and the codings.
Mixed-design ANOVA found no interactive effect.
That is, European Americans tagged the main objects in their first tags more often than Chinese in all three categories.
For participants' selections, main objects were tagged more often in the animal category than the other two .
For the coding results, the percentage of tags describing main objects was highest in animal category and lowest in the category of still objects.
This is also consistent with previous research results that suggested that active objects are usually more salient than inert objects across cultures .
Future research is needed to understand whether users from different cultures would also exhibit similar cultural differences in the keywords that they used when they search for images.
Results would be useful for design of intelligent image search tools that adjust for the cultural difference that we observed.
We believe that current results will also inform design of data-mining tools to identify different communities of users based on the similar patterns of image tagging behavior.
For example, for the same image, users who assign tags in a particular sequence may imply that they are more likely to belong to a particular culture.
Cultural-sensitive algorithms can then be designed to better assist their future tagging and search tasks.
Of course this will require further research to validate the extent to which this also applies to cultural groups other than European Americans and Chinese.
This study examined the cultural difference in image tagging behavior.
Participants' selections and researchers' coding provided convergent evidence in support of our hypothesis.
A greater proportion of the first tags created by European Americans described foreground main objects than those created by Chinese participants, who were more likely to tag the overall properties of the images.
The findings provided implications on culturally sensitive design of tools that utilize user-generated tags as indices for image searching.
Our findings would suggest that when using tags created by European Americans as search indices, one would more likely obtain images that were tagged based on the main objects; but for tags created by Chinese, the same search engine would return images that were tagged based on their overall descriptions.
