Interaction tasks on a computer screen can technically be scaled to a much larger or much smaller sized input control area by adjusting the input device's control gain or the control-display  ratio.
However, human performance as a function of movement scale is not a well concluded topic.
This study introduces a new task paradigm to study the scale effect in the framework of the steering law.
The results confirmed a U-shaped performance-scale function and rejected straight-line or no-effect hypotheses in the literature.
We found a significant scale effect in path steering performance, although its impact was less than that of the steering law's index of difficulty.
We analyzed the scale effects in two plausible causes: movement joints shift and motor precision limitation.
The theoretical implications of the scale effects to the validity of the steering law, and the practical implications of input device size and zooming functions are discussed in the paper.
Figure 1: The two circular tunnels are equivalent in steering law difficulty but they differ in movement scale.
Does it take the same amount of time to steer through the two tunnels?
It is not clear whether these reduced-size input devices still maintain the same level of performance as their predecessors.
If we push the question of scale to the extreme, the answer is obvious: of course size matters.
Humans can not do well in movement scales that are either greater than their arm's reach or smaller than their absolute motor precision tolerance.
Within these extremes, however, the question is much more difficult to answer.
This research addresses the following questions: Can we successfully accomplish the two steering tasks in Figure 1 in the same amount of time?
Can a large input device be substituted with a small one without significantly impacting user performance?
Does size matter to input control quality?
What are the scale effects in movement control, if any?
How sensitive are the scale effects?
There are many practical reasons to ask these questions.
One concerns the miniaturization of the computing devices.
We are indeed stepping into the long-awaited era of inexpensive, powerful and portable computers.
One might imagine that the scale effects in input control should be a well documented topic in the human-machine system literature.
In reality, however, the results were scattered and controversial.
The scale effects were often studied and reported under two related concepts: control gain and control-display  ratio.
When the display  size is fixed, these two concepts correspond to control movement scale.
Major handbooks  tend to suggest that human performance is an inverted U-shaped function of control gain or CD ratio: it reaches the highest point in a medium range of the control gain and deteriorates in both directions away from this range.
Hess  is a common source regarding the U-shaped function.
In his experiment, subjects performed tracking tasks by manipulating a near-isometric joystick in rate control.
Control movement scale, on the other hand, is absolute and can be compared to human body measurements.
Furthermore, between the display and the control movement scale, the former is more relevant to perception and the latter is more directly relevant to control performance.
One implication of movement scale is the limb segments  involved in executing a task.
They came to the conclusion that the smaller the scale, the greater the aiming performance, which in terms of primary limb segments means that: fingers wrist forearm 
Buck  called into question the views on the significance of CD gain.
Based on results from a target alignment experiment, he argued that target width on both the control device and the display were important, but their ratio was not.
Arnaut and Greenstein  conducted a rather convoluted study in which control input magnitude , display output magnitude, display target width, control target width and Fitts' index of difficult were varied in two experiments.
They found that a greater movement scale increased gross movement time but decreased fine adjustment time.
Gross and fine movements were defined by the initial entry point in the target.
The total completion time, in the case of a tablet, was a U-shaped function.
In the case of a trackball, however, the greater movement scale increased the total completion time monotonically.
They concluded that a combination of gain and Fitts' index of difficulty could be a more useful predictor than either of them alone.
Jellinek and Card studied users' performance as a function of the control gain in a computer mouse .
They found a U-shaped performance-gain function, but argued against its status as a basic human performance characteristic.
If there were not a resolution limit, and as long as the control gain was in a "moderate" range, a user's performance should have stayed constant, so they argued.
It is necessary to clarify that the most basic construct, in our view, should be the "control movement scale".
Other variables, such as control gain and CD ratio, are derivative or secondary.
We think the concept of C-D ratio  in itself is partially responsible for the contradictions in the literature.
By definition, C-D ratio is a compound variable between the display scale and the control movement scale.
1 Note that the notion of control gain is related but not always interchangeable with movement scale or C-D ratio.
Control gain, a term originated in feedback control theory, exists in both zero order  and higher order systems.
Control display ratio and movement scale only exist in position control systems.
For example, since a force joystick was used, there was no control movement scale per se in Hess' study .
This performance order was confirmed by Balakrishnan et al.
However they noted that "the finger do not necessarily perform better than the other segments of the upper limb" when a single finger was involved3.
In a six degrees of freedom docking task, Zhai et al.
More specifically, they demonstrated that the user performance was superior with the fingers involved  in operating the control device than without .
The is logarithmic transformation of the ratio between and called the index of difficulty of the task.
Some researchers argue that control scale should not matter in view of Fitts' law .
If a reaching task is scaled by a factor of two, both will be twice as large and the distance and the width hence cancel each other in the index of difficulty measure.
On the other hand, the impact of scale could be reflected in and , as shown in .
The validity of index of difficulty as the sole determinant of aimed movement has been recently called into question by Guiard .
He argued that the way Fitts' law was studied and applied in the past was problematic; both difficulty and scale should be viewed as the basic dimensions of aimed movement.
2 Some objections have been raised about this study, suggesting a faulty experimental design .
But the finding that the index of performance varies with movement scale is widely accepted.
We recently established a movement law that models human performance in a different class of tasks: trajectory-based tunnel steering .
It is both theoretically and practically necessary to study the scale effects in relation to the steering law.
Theoretically, it is important to investigate how the steering law prediction is affected by movement scale.
Practically, the steering law may serve as a platform based on a new class of tasks for studying the control movement scale effects, which may guide the design and selection of interaction devices and techniques.
Some input devices, such as tablet, are primarily designed for trajectory-based tasks.
In both cases stands for the path width.
They were found to be different for linear and circular tunnels, due to the very different nature of steering in the two cases.
To move a stylus tip or a cursor through a tunnel or path  without crossing the boundaries is a steering task.
One common steering task in HCI is traversing multi-layered menus.
In a recent study , we proposed and validated a theoretical model for the successful completion $ of steering tasks.
This model, called the steering law, comes in both an integral and a local form.
One will notice from Equation 7 that the argument against scale effects based on Fitts' law can also be found here: in both the linear circular path, the steering difficulty depends on the length/width ratio, such that dividing both the length and the width of the steering path by a factor % gives the same index of difficulty.
In other words, although the speed in a tunnel of width & ' will be % times slower than in a tunnel of width , this decrease in speed should be fully compensated by the shortened steering length by the same ratio, such that the movement time remains the same.
Equation 4 allows the calculation of steering difficulty for a wide range of tunnel shapes.
In , three shapes were tested: straight, narrowing and spiral tunnels.
The experimental task was steering through linear and circular tunnels at five different scales.
The scales were chosen to cover a broad range of movement amplitudes so as to guarantee that different combinations of motor joints were tested.
The input device used in the experiment was a graphics tablet, which, in comparison to other input devices, provided the most direct interaction, hence allowing us to focus on more fundamental human performance characteristics.
Depending on the movement scale the movement of a tablet stylus may be controlled by the fingers, the wrist, or the arm joints.
When operating the stylus, multiple fingers work in conjunction, which should be much better than a single finger working in isolation .
Ten volunteers participated in the experiment.
All were righthanded and had no or little experience using graphics tablets.
The experiment was conducted on a PC running Linux, with IF|  resolua 24-inch GW900 Sony monitor   tion, and equipped with tablet .
The computer system was sufficiently fast that the input or feedback lag was not perceptible.
The size of the active view of the monitor was set exactly equal to the size of active  the   F area of the tablet, which gives an approximate screen resolution.
Different portions of the tablet area were mapped onto the screen depending on the movement scale currently being tested .
All experiments were done in full-screen mode, with the background color set to black.
Subjects performed two types of steering tasks: linear tunnel and circular tunnel steering .
At the beginning of each trial, the path to be steered was presented on the screen, in green color.
After placing the stylus on the tablet  and applying pressure to the stylus tip, the subject began to draw a blue line on a screen, showing the stylus trajectory.
When the cursor crossed the start segment, left to right, the line turned red, as a signal that the task had begun and the time was being recorded.
When the cursor crossed the end segment, also left to right, all drawings turned yellow, signaling the end of the trial.
Crossing the borders of the path resulted in the cancellation of the trial and an error being recorded.
Releasing pressure on the stylus after crossing the start segment and before crossing the second, but without crossing the tunnel border, resulted in an invalid trial, but no error was recorded4.
Subjects were asked to minimize errors.
Finally, linear tunnels were all oriented horizontally and were to be steered left to right; as for circular steering, it had to be done clockwise.
This %$ scale involves movement amplitudes typically around , which require mainly forearm movements.
This was equivalent to a A5-sized tablet.
This scale was somewhat equivalent to a A6-format tablet.
Typical movement amplitudes in   $ H that condition are 4 , which require finger movements and to some extent wrist movements.
This was the size of a touchpad used in some notebook computers.
Note that this smallest scale tested was still orders of magnitude above the tablet resolution, hence preventing the possible machinery quantization effect in previous studies.
Figure 3 illustrates the relative size of active areas of the tablet for the different movement scales.
The outermost box, labeled  , corresponds to the whole tablet active area.
A fully-crossed, within-subject factorial design with repeated measures was used.
Within each  condition, subjects performed VXWY a practice session, consisting of 1 trial in each of the 6 F I conditions, in both linear and circular steering.
The practice Figure 3: Relative active tablet sizes at different scales session was followed by two identical sets of the 12 - conditions presented in random order, during which data Table 1 shows the movement amplitudes and path widths in was actually collected.
Subjects performed 3 trials in each input space for each scale condition: for instance, the tunnel condition.
The five scales were chosen considering the maximum movement amplitude for each arm segment and in order to cover Finally, in light of the movement scale vs. C-D ratio and disthe maximum number of motor "strategies".
The experimental soft4 Subjects sometimes  ware was identical for all scales; only the tablet scale settings released the pressure by mistake, but this could not be attributed to the constraints imposed on movement variability.
While the significant impact mance  I  5 F of test phase   between test phase F    , and movement scale  I 5 suggests that the influence of scale is likely not to vary much  with practice.
Figure 4: Steering time as a function of scale smaller .
This was especially true for the scale-16 conditions: very long amplitudes or very narrow tunnels in this case were very difficult to steer, such that often subjects could achieve the trial only after a couple of attempts .
Paired  -tests between scale levels classified the scales into three groups.
The ranking between move ment scales in terms of time performance is:
This grouping of scales and the ranking between groups held in both linear and circular steering.
Figure 4 summarizes the average steering time depending on the movement scale and steering task.
The intercept was not significantly    |  I 5 F affected by tunnel type ,   ment scales  I  5 , ; furthermore, all inter cepts were rather small comparing to the total times involved, which is consistent with previous results .
In terms of tablet size, this corresponds to A4/A5-sized tablets.
In terms of motor joints involved, it was when the wrist and the fingers were the primary movement carriers.
A3-sized tablets seemed to be too large and require too much movement efforts, while tablets smaller than A6 format were likely to amplify noise beyond reasonable rates.
A significant interaction between scale and tunnel type   I  5 , | shows that the number of errors increases much faster for circular steering than for linear steering when the movement scale decreases .
But even within the "moderate" range we tested, the U shape was still clearly demonstrated.
The cause for the U-shaped function in this range is likely to be twofold: motor joints shift and the human motor precision limitation.
The best performance appeared in the middle range , when the movements were carried out by all parts of the upper limb , although the arm's role might be lesser than the hand and finger.
On the larger scale side, when the movements were primarily carried out by the arm movement, steering performance dropped to   for circular steering.
On the smaller scale side , when the movements were carried out by fingers, the performance  mostly   also dropped .
However, we can not make a conclusion that the fingers are inferior, because the other factor, motor control precision limitation, was increasingly more limiting as the movement scale decreased.
This was clearly demonstrated by the number of errors  shown in Figure 6: participants increasingly "accidentally" moved out of the tunnel.
Note that because we maintained the same visual display size for all scale conditions, the error had to be on the motor precision side.
Figure 8: Average number of errors in each scale To conclude, the smaller the scale, the higher the error rates.
Considering that the optimal scales were and for time performance, it appeared that the scale-2 condition had the best overall performance while considering both time performance and error rate.
The more theoretical implication of the results pertains the validity of the steering law .
Similar to Fitts' law, the steering law states that the difficulty of movement lies in relative accuracy.
The two steering tasks in Figure 1 are exactly the same in steering law terms.
This study shows that while the fitness of the steering law held very well in all levels tested, the movement scale does have an impact on steering law's index of performance.
A steering law model with strictly the same index of performance is only valid if the scale does not vary so widely that the motor joint combination shift fundamentally or the control precision becomes the primary limiting factor.
It is interesting to realize that the impact of scale is much less significant than the steering law's index of difficulty.
For example, the range of scale we tested varied by a factor of 16, but the largest steering time difference was only 17% -- an impact equivalent to only 17% change of the steering F I .
There are also many practical implications in our results.
For example, the size of a computer input device  should be such that the fingers, wrists and to a lesser extent forearm are all allowed in the operation.
Another practical implication lies in the design and use of zooming interface.
In fact users often unconsciously make effort to stay at the bottom of the U-shaped scale function by zooming up when their motor precision limits their performance, and zooming down when too much of the movement had to be carried out by large arm movement.
How we can deliberately apply the findings in the present study to assist zooming is an interesting future research issue.
Movement scale, control gain, control-display ratio and motor joints performance differences, are a set of related concepts in input control literature without consistent conclusions.
In terms of movement scale or control gain effects, some researchers found a U-shaped function ; others straight linear function , and yet others did not believe gain or scale should matter much .
Traditionally these issues have been studied in the framework of target acquisition tasks.
We have conducted a systematic study on these issues in a new paradigm -- the steering law.
Furthermore, we focused on the most fundamental concept of them all -- control movement scale.
Our results supported the U-shaped performance-scale function: scale does matter.
Based on the results of this study, we can begin to answer some of the questions we raised at the beginning of this paper on a more scientific ground.
First, we found that device size and movement scale indeed affects input control quality: people do not accomplish the two steering tasks in Figure 1 in the same amount of time.
Furthermore, small scale tends to be limited by motor precision, large scale limited by the arm dexterity, but scale in the medium range does not significantly influence performance.
Consequently, substituting a large input device with a small one will not significantly impact user performance if there is no fundamental change in the muscle groups involved; but it will if the substituted input device is too small that human motor control precision becomes a limiting factor.
Finally, the question with regard to control gain or control-display ration is ill-posed, because what matters is the control movement scale: for the same movement scale, the appropriate control gain depends on the display size.
Motor performance in relation to controldisplay gain and target width.
The information capacity of the human motor system in controlling the amplitude of movement.
Controller design: Interactions of controlling limbs, time-lags, and gains in positional and velocity systems.
Difficulty and scale as the basic dimensions of aimed movement.
In Proceedings of the Tenth International Conference on Perception and Action, page 87, University of Edinburgh, Scotland, 1999.
Nonadjectival rating scales in human response experiments.
In Proceedings of ACM CHI'90 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pages 213- 220, 1990.
G. D. Langolf and D. B. Chaffin.
An investigation of Fitts' law using a wide range of movement amplitudes.
Fitts' law as a research and design tool in human-computer interaction.
W. E. Woodson, B. Tillman, and P. Tillman.
The influence of muscle groups on performance of multiple degree-offreedom input.
In Proceedings of ACM CHI'96 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pages 308-315, 1996.
J. Accot and S. Zhai.
Beyond Fitts' law: models for trajectory-based hci tasks.
In Proceedings of ACM CHI'97 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pages 295-302, 1997.
J. Accot and S. Zhai.
Performance evaluation of input devices in trajectory-based tasks: an application of the steering law.
In Proceedings of ACM CHI'99 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pages 466-472, 1999.
L. Y. Arnaut and J. S. Greenstein.
Is display/control gain a useful metric for optimizing an interface?
R. Balakrishnan and I. S. MacKenzie.
Performance differences in the fingers, wrist, and forearm in computer input control.
In Proceedings of ACM CHI'97 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pages 303-310, 1997.
Handbook of Perception and Human Performance.
Engineering data compendium: Human perception and performance, Harry G. Armstrong Aerospace Medical Research Laboratory, Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, Ohio, 1988.
