Despite the availability of other mobile messaging applications, SMS has kept its position as a heavily used communication technology.
However, there are many situations in which it is inconvenient or inappropriate to check a message's content immediately.
In this paper, we introduce the concept of audio previews of SMS.
Based on a real-time analysis of the content of a message, we provide auditory cues in addition to the notification tone upon receiving an SMS.
We report on a field trial with 20 participants and show that the use of audio-enhanced SMS affects the reading and writing behavior of users.
Our work is motivated by the results of an online survey among 347 SMS users of whose we analyzed 3400 text messages.
The main goal of this work was to find out how providing abstract audio previews of SMS messages can influence the SMS reading and writing behavior of users.
The first hypothesis is that users will adapt when to read/check the SMS content depending on the provided audio preview.
The second hypothesis is that users will increase the usage of emoticons and phrases that create meaningful audio previews after they have used the system for a while.
To investigate this a system was implemented which intercepts incoming SMS messages on the phone and creates for each message a preview tone, representing some simple and abstracted indication on the content of the SMS.
The contribution of this paper is twofold.
First, we present the results from an online survey among 347 participants, analyzing 3400 messages with regards to the usage of emoticons, keywords, and punctuations marks.
Based on the survey's result, we implemented a mobile application, which analyzes incoming SMS content in real-time and plays an audio preview of the content that represents the type of the message.
Second, we report on the results of a field trial with 20 users.
We show how the use of audio preview affects their behavior while writing and checking text messages, and present the results on learnability and usability of the abstracted audio preview.
The short message service , also referred to as text messaging, has become a form of mass communication since it provides a convenient way of exchanging textual information on-the-go.
However, there are many situations, e.g., when users are engaged in other activities, where it is difficult or inappropriate to check the content of an incoming message immediately, even if the user is made aware of a message arrival by the notification tone.
We believe that if a user is made aware of the type of received message by using an abstracted audio preview similar to a notification tone, this may lead to a change in the reading behavior.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Non-verbal clues are important aspects of interpersonal communication.
The absence of such clues, as well as contextual information, in SMS communication might often raise difficulties in understanding the received messages correctly.
In computer mediated text-based communication means for explicitly expressing emotions and feelings by abbreviations and symbols have been developed .
Emoticons widely add emotional expression to text-based communication.
Walther and D'Addario investigated the affect of emoticons on message interpretation and conclude that the emoticons have an impact but their contribution is outweighed by the textual content .
These findings motivated our research and led us to look at emoticons as well as the textual content.
SenseMS  is designed to augment text messaging with contextual information and human embodiment and aims by these means to provide richer messages.
Another similar type of application, Comeks, enables people to create comic strips as MMS, thus empowering a more expressive communication .
In that system, the interplay between text and animation allows users to create expressive messages.
In contrast to this research we focus on the use of text messages only and audio as output.
Our approach is inspired by the idea of sonification of contents and provision of audio cues.
Providing audio cues for blind visualizing of messages has been investigated in instant messaging communication.
QnA estimates the type of an instant message, e.g., whether it is a question or not, and changes the notification mechanism accordingly .
The results indicate that modifying the way of notification can create a benefit for the user.
In our work we were especially interested if the same is true in the context of mobile communication using SMS.
Hubbub  is a sound-enhanced mobile instant messenger aiming at increasing background awareness by providing audio clues.
The focus of our research is to enable an abstract preview of incoming messages' content in mobile phones and investigate how sonification can influence the user experience in the mobile context.
The survey was divided into three main parts: first, we assessed general data on the users' SMS behavior .
Second, we were interested in the users' behavior when receiving SMS .
Third, we asked them to analyze their last 10 received SMS and provide the following data: the first word of each SMS, the number and type of emoticons included in the messages, and the number of question marks.
We were especially interested in situations in which the users checked or did not check the message immediately after they were notified of an incoming message by the tone .
We discovered that 87.0% checked their SMS immediately if being at home, 79.9% in public transport, and still 65.3% in the office.
However, more than two thirds of the participants did not check on SMS immediately while driving or doing sports.
Several studies exist as to where, when, and for which reasons text messaging is used, e.g.,  and .
Users are facing several limitations when writing short messages.
Firstly, space is scarce, limiting the amount of information that could be transmitted.
Secondly, SMS lacks expressiveness and support for non-verbal communication.
Those issues led to the evolution of a distinct language for text messaging , characterized by the use of abbreviations, acronyms, and emoticons.
Such elements seem to be suitable for defining the type of a message.
To inform our work we conducted a survey to get quantitative information on emoticons used in SMS.
From analyzing the first word of each SMS the most frequently used ones were greeting phrases such as hi, hey, hei, or hello , further keywords included ok , and yes/no .
We conducted an online survey where we assessed the users' behavior with regards to writing and receiving SMS.
The web survey was an open call announced via mailing lists and social networks , not targeted any specific group, ran over three weeks in spring 2009 and was available in English, Finnish, German, and Spanish.
Participants came from 21 different countries, mainly Germany, Finland, and the United States.
They had various backgrounds, being, e.g., high school or college students, or employees with different academic and vocational backgrounds.
The completion of the survey took approximately 10 minutes for each participant.
The set of SMS that were assessed was fairly large - nevertheless the survey does not claim to be representative due to the fact that users were openly recruited online .
This may have drawn in people who are more au fait with digital technologies than the average user, and may not be a perfectly matching sample compared to the participants of the user study conducted later.
Our above-described survey revealed that there are situations in which users prefer not to check incoming messages immediately.
Further the survey showed that the scarce space and lack for expressiveness of short messages led to a widespread use of emoticons and abbreviations.
Since emoticons are universal in many languages, we decided to sonificate them in incoming messages.
So if a message in-
Our hypothesis is that this kind of content presentation may change the users' behavior in writing and checking SMS.
Our approach consists of the following steps:  The content of incoming messages is scanned for key strings, emoticons, and punctuations.
We discriminate between the following types of messages: * happy messages * sad messages * questions * answers and responses A similar concept is popular for incoming calls on mobile phones when it comes to identifying the caller.
Users may assign different ringtones to individual contacts.
Participants could either use their own mobile phone if it was compatible with the application or we provided a Nokia 6210 Navigator for the duration of the study.
During the four weeks' test period, the participants used their own SIM cards and received 20 Euros as compensation.
Since the application was running in the background users were not required to interact with the application during the trial.
During the study we provided a hotline and contacted the participants regularly asking if they faced any problems.
The study consisted of four parts:  in the preliminary interview, we gathered demographics, asked about the participants' current SMS behavior, gave a short briefing about the study and explained how the application worked.
In addition, the users were asked to complete a System Usability Scale  questionnaire.
Additionally, open-ended questions asked for cases where, when, and how the audio preview had changed their SMS behavior.
Besides, we did a recognition test, playing the tones to the users and asking them which character set they thought the sounds correspond to in order to evaluate the learnability.
We implemented a Python-based application capable of detecting certain sets of characters from incoming messages and playing a corresponding tone in case of finding a positive match.
The standalone application works on Symbian S60 mobile phones.
After the installation and launch, the program runs as a background process without having any impact on the other phone's functionalities.
The application has a callback feature, which is activated whenever a short message arrives.
The callback feature analyzes the content of the incoming message and plays a corresponding tone after the normal SMS tone.
The tones are played based on the current profile settings of the phone, e.g., if the silent mode is activated the audible notifications are not played.
It was a conscious design decision to limit the number of different preview sounds to a small set to avoid the complexity of learning them and minimize the effort for the user.
A professional composer created a tone for each message type representing the characteristics and emotions included.
If a message includes more than one key string the application detects just the first key string and plays the related tone.
In addition, the application includes a GUI, which shows the detected characters and creates a log file.
We did not implement a comprehensive content logging function since this would have had a major impact on the users' privacy.
We did not replace but append tones with the original SMS notification tone.
The created tones did not exceeding three seconds.
In the study we did not include a control group to collect comparative data as we assume that SMS behavior does not change significantly in short-term with experienced mobile phone users, and thus relied on the data collected in the preliminary interview.
The data collection time was limited to 4 weeks.
Although one can argue that this is not long enough to record the long-term influence of new technology, this time frame seemed appropriate as we could observe interesting changes in behavior.
The results of the study indicate that the abstracted audio preview had an impact on how the participants utilize SMS.
Already after a week of usage, 11 participants stated that they opened a received message faster if they heard the question-mark tone.
Secondly, 8 out of 20 said that they did not need to open a message immediately if they heard the ok tone.
In comparison with the results from the final interview there was not a statistically significant margin to these result after one-week usage.
Figure 1 shows the results from the interview.
During the interview some of the users mentioned that they usually did not check the incoming messages immediately if their phones were not nearby, unless they heard a tone indicating a question mark.
In this case they wanted to check the message directly.
Beside that, based on qualitative user feedback, we found out that couples tended to use more emoticons and ok instead of yes or similar agreement words in their SMS conversations after they started using our application as both sides were aware that their partners also use the application.
We discovered that there was a significant impact when it comes to checking messages in situations where users are engaged in other activities.
Question marks often led users to check messages immediately.
In contrast messages including ok were mainly checked after finishing current activities.
Additionally coupled participants used more emoticons and ok instead of yes or any similar agreement words after using the application and understanding the audio preview.
In these cases both partners were using the system and knew that their partners also used the system.
This supported our second hypothesis.
As future work, we plan to investigate how the personalization of the sounds and their mapping to emoticons can help to meet the users' personal preferences in audio previews.
Table 2 gives an overview of the results from the recognition test.
We discovered that the degree to which users could recognize the tones, related to the number of received emoticons, keywords, or punctuations during the study .
The correlation coefficient between the recognized and the number of received tones is 0.71.
This result indicates that the abstracted audio can be used to preview content, but the learning of the tones is dependent on how often they are heard.
The results from the SUS indicate that the users were more comfortable with the application after a longer period of usage.
The score from the initial survey was 77.12 and from the final interview 83.12.
One of the enhancements suggested in the second web survey was the opportunity to define character sets and notification tones by the end user.
In this paper we presented the concept of audio previews for text messages.
Based on an online survey we motivated not only the need for such a feature but also gathered knowledge about the usage of keywords, emoticons, punctuation marks, and SMS checking behavior.
We implemented a mobile application, which intercepts incoming messages and notifies the user about the type of the incoming message using preview tones.
In a field study we evaluated the impact of our application on the users' SMS read-
SenseMS: a UserCentred Approach to Enrich the Messaging Experience for Teens by Non-verbal Means.
Avrahami, D. and Hudson, S.E.
QnA: augmenting an instant messaging client to balance user responsiveness and performance.
Crystal, D. Language and the Internet.
Hoflich, J.R. and Gebhardt, J.
Changing Cultures of Written Communication: Letter - E-mail - SMS.
The Inside Text Springer, Dordrecht, The Netherlands, 9-31.
Hubbub: a sound-enhanced mobile instant messenger that supports awareness and opportunistic interactions.
Leung, L. Unwillingness-to-communicate and college students' motives in SMS mobile messaging.
Persson, P. Exms: An animated and avatar-based messaging system for expressive peer communication.
Salovaara A., Appropriation of a MMS-Based Comic Creator: From System Functionalities to Resources for Action.
The impacts of emoticons on message interpretation in computer-mediated communication.
Zerfos, P., Meng, X., Wong, S., Samanta, V., Lu, S. A study of the short message service of nationwide cellular network.
