One of the key technologies to provide reality is natural interaction between human and objects or living-things puter.
A neural indicated represented .
In general, the conversion function @ is a sigmoidal indicated multiple nonlinear function with the characteristics in the figure.
The weight on the links coming into the output units are then changed by an amount proportional are then propagated den units, computed tially, large amount error and error by adding to the error signal.
Error sigmls back down these links to the hidsignals for the hidden signals.
Values representing the posture are given to the input nodes.
At the same time, one of the output nodes corresponding to the presented character As will nition be descrikd rate.
In this way, we taught 42 characters showing posture to the system.
When the value of a node is the greatest in the output layer, the character corresponding to the node is selected to be recognized.
To solve the delimiter problem, a new method has been developed.
The method is to recognize and output the character corresponding to a node only when the value of the node is the greatest in the output layer and exceeds a predetermined threshold value.
As a result, the system does not respond to vague hand postures that have not been learned.
This enables continuous and natural finger alphabet recognition.
SIGN LANGUAGE WORD RECOGNITtON words shown in Figure 3 were to be recognized in the experi-
42 patterns corresponding to the set of 42 charfather mother brother acters were taught to the network, the recognition rate for the trainers was 71.4%.
When three patterns for each character were taught, improved.
To improve the general recognition rate, we made a dictionary in which data for six randomly selected people were used during the learning mode.
We assume that features dependent on each person are generalized by mixing the data.
By using a total of 252 learning patterns, six for each character, the general recognition rate increased to 92.9%.
The recognition rate of the trainer 94.3%.
Encoding of input data data to We improved the encoding scheme of input raise the gesture recognition rate.
Augmented positioml positional data for posture We use the recurrent neural network proposed by Elman  shown in Figure 4 to process time-series data.
By the nature of backpropagation, such representations correspond to the input pattern partially processed into features relevant to the task.
In this way, the context layer holds the history of the input data.
The recurrent network uses the history to enable recognition of the time-series data.
Our basic network scheme is shown below:
Neural network for sign language word O represents a node.
EXPERIMENTS Experiments on the recognition of ten sign language words were made using this recognition system.
The learning time for ten words took 4 days with a SUN/4 workstation.
The sampling rate of the Data glove is 30Hz.
Segmentation of a sign language word is useful in gesture recognition because there may be many meaningless movements between individual words.
Methods for cheeking the starting and ending points of a gesture are implemented in the processing.
This enables sign language words to be recognized continuously and automatically without specifying delimitem.
At first, there is little difference between the output value of the father node and mother node.
This indicates that the system confuses father with mother in the beginning.
As the is recognized, the output mother-specific movement value of the mother node increases quickly and the word mother is recognized.
A neural network has been successfully applied to gesture recognition.
We use a recurrent neural network for the gesture recognition system.
The proposed automatic sampling method is very useful for a sign language words recognition system.
Several improvements such as augmented and filtered data work effective y.
We are conducting further to develop a method for handling a large vocabulary,
