A gestural text entry method for mobile is presented.
Unlike most mobile phone text entry methods, which rely on repeatedly pressing buttons, our gestural method uses an isometric joystick and the EdgeWrite alphabet to allow users to write by making letter-like "pressure strokes."
In a 15-session study comparing character-level EdgeWrite to Multitap, subjects' speeds were statistically indistinguishable, reaching about 10 WPM.
In a second 15-session study comparing word-level EdgeWrite to T9, the same subjects were again statistically indistinguishable, reaching about 16 WPM.
Uncorrected errors were low, around 1% or less for each method.
In addition, subjective results favored EdgeWrite.
Overall, results indicate that our isometric joystickbased method is highly competitive with two commercial keypad-based methods, opening the way for keypad-less designs and text entry on tiny devices.
Additional results showed that a joystick on the back could be used at about 70% of the speed of the front, and the front joystick could be used eyes-free at about 80% of the speed of normal use.
Among computing platforms, mobile phones are easily the most widespread.
At the close of 2003, there were 400 million mobile phone users in Europe, 150 million in the United States, and 270 million in China with an additional 5 million new users each month.
Phones are becoming increasingly powerful, capable of displaying full-color graphics, animations, and quality sound.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
In addition, phones may become people's personal remote controls for accessing computers in the environment .
However, this vision is compromised by the poor input methods available on today's phones .
Phone keypads support only discrete keypresses and are incapable of expressing the kind of fluid control essential to many new phone-based applications.
For example, video games, music or video playback, scrolling long song lists, and panning maps or photos will all require fluid control.
Although joysticks traditionally can provide such control, the joysticks found on today's phones are really just four-way switches that cannot provide a range of inputs.
We therefore envision a future in which phones may be equipped with more expressive joysticks, such as isometric joysticks.
This research anticipates this future by studying how isometric joysticks can be used to address a particularly lacking aspect of mobile phone use--that of text entry .
Given that future phones may have isometric joysticks , it is worth investigating how these devices may be used for more natural or expressive input.
Specifically, this research investigates whether an isometric joystick can be competitive with predominant keypad-based methods for mobile phone text entry.
Using a physical phone prototype we created with an embedded isometric joystick , we compared a gestural text entry method that uses the EdgeWrite alphabet  to Multitap and T9  in a longitudinal study over 30 short sessions.
Both character-level and word-level  versions of EdgeWrite are involved in the study.
We also compare a back-mounted isometric joystick for use with the index finger  to the traditional frontmounted joystick for use with the thumb, finding the former to be about 70% as fast as the latter for text entry.
We also include results indicating that EdgeWrite is about 2.5 times faster than Multitap when the phone cannot be seen, which has positive implications for eyes-free mobile use.
Overall, our study results show that EdgeWrite text entry on an isometric joystick is highly competitive with both Multitap and T9, and that subjects generally preferred EdgeWrite.
Advantages of our design include the ability to write more "by feel" rather than by sight, and the ability to enter text in a very small space.
This work thus paves the way for keypadless designs and text entry on tiny devices.
An isometric joystick is a joystick that senses force but does not move.
Isometric joysticks were part of the early formal study of input devices by Card et al.
Thereafter, isometric joysticks became popular with the advent of the IBM TrackPoint, the small "eraser head" found on ThinkPad laptops that replaces the mouse .
However, Mithal and Douglas  found that cursor control with an isometric joystick involves many more fine sub-movement corrections than with a mouse, which is partly why isometric joysticks sometimes feel less accurate.
TrackPoint isometric joysticks have been embedded in research prototypes before, although none were mobile phones.
They found that this design was faster and better liked than the IntelliMouse scroll wheel.
They found that their two-handed prototype could achieve about 78% of a ThinkPad joystick's throughput--and their one-handed prototype  about 68%--when using the thumb for control and a separate button for selection.
Although isometric joysticks have not been previously used for text entry, other types of joysticks have.
For example, Wilson and Agrawala  used the two joysticks on a Microsoft Xbox game controller to select letters from two halves of a split on-screen keyboard.
We have also used a game controller joystick to perform EdgeWrite gestures within a plastic square .
Importantly, this game controller design differed substantially from the current isometric joystick method in that it relied on the absolute position of the joystick within a physical square.
The current method, in contrast, has no notion of absolute position and no physical square around its stick.
Instead, it uses force vectors to construct EdgeWrite gestures.
Other displacement joystickbased text entry methods include weegie , Quikwriting , and Xnav , all of which use some form of menus or regions from which letters are selected.
Our mobile phone hardware prototype  was built using a Red*E SC1100 Smartphone.
In augmenting this device with an IBM TrackPoint isometric joystick, we made it a priority to retain as much of the built-in functionality of the Smartphone as possible.
In particular, we made sure that the Smartphone's screen would still work.
Unfortunately, the circuit for the phone's keypad had to be removed to make room for the isometric joystick circuit, so the keys themselves were not functional.
Of course, the built-in four-way switch joystick that came with the Smartphone was also removed.
The back-mounted joystick required the removal of a speaker from the back of the device.
It also required that we drilled a hole in the device chassis.
Hot glue was used to mount both the front and back joysticks securely.
The outputs from the two joysticks were attached to a long PS/2 cable that emerged from the bottom of the phone and connected to a desktop PC.
The PC ran software that interpreted the user's actions with the joysticks and sent the results back to the phone.
The software involved in the isometric joystick text entry system.
In this image, the letter "t" is being made.
Along the way, an "i", "v", and "h" are made, and English frequency-based word completions are presented.
The first stroke for "i" requires two force vectors: one to indicate the initial corner, and then one to move downward.
Thus, although a PC was used in the loop for processing, subjects could attend to the phone screen as if no PC were used.
Our prototype's software had two main components.
One component ran on the Smartphone and was in charge of receiving data from the PC via TCP/IP over USB .
This data consisted of  EdgeWrite corner values, which fully define EdgeWrite strokes and were used in drawing traces;  any recognized characters or words, which were displayed in a text box; and  strings presented during user studies for subjects to transcribe.
The other main component was the software running on the PC.
This software consisted of  the EdgeWrite stroke recognizer that interpreted isometric joystick movements and turned them into characters or words ; and  the user test software TextTest  that generated the presented strings  to be transcribed by subjects and logged their subsequent text entry activity.
The design of the EdgeWrite stroke recognizer for isometric joysticks was based on the one used for Trackball EdgeWrite .
This design could easily be adapted to isometric joysticks because trackballs and isometric joysticks have similar properties--e.g., neither device has a notion of position, but only a change in either rotation or force, and neither device actually translates when used.
In effect, the underlying writing design interprets users' force vectors as indicating one of four corners of an imaginary EdgeWrite square in which letters are made .
EdgeWrite's straight line-based alphabet enables users to avoid having to make the kinds of smooth curvy gestures that would be required for Graffiti 2 or natural handwriting.
Importantly, our subjects indicated that using EdgeWrite still felt like writing hand-printed letters because of the Roman-like designs of the EdgeWrite characters .
Segmentation between letters is achieved when users briefly cease their force on the joystick.
Readers interested in further details of the writing mechanics are directed to the prior work on Trackball EdgeWrite .
Character-level and word-level entry coexist in EdgeWrite without interference.
For word-level stroking , wordcompletions are presented based on the current prefix and stroke underway .
The presence of words at the four corners of the EdgeWrite square does not mean that users must utilize them.
Instead, users are free to stroke character-by-character without ever selecting a word.
To select a word, users simply make a stroke into the corner of the desired word and then segment that stroke as usual by briefly ceasing their force on the isometric joystick.
All EdgeWrite letters require at least two corners to make, so there is no conflict between selecting a word and stroking a character.
Erroneous completions can be corrected with a single backspace from right-to-left along the bottom of the square.
This removes the completed suffix and restores the prior completions.
In contrast, a normal single-character backspace is made across the top of the square.
Thus, the "w" stroke in Figure 3b would produce only the letter "w" despite the presence of "w"-words.
However, after that "w" is entered, a stroke to the upper-right corner would enter "ith" to complete the word "with".
Importantly, words are always shown in the same corners, allowing for improvement through memorization and motor repetition.
Although our software for the isometric joystick was based on Trackball EdgeWrite, modifications were crucial in getting the writing to "feel right" on the phone.
For example, the sensitivity of the joystick, the size of the virtual EdgeWrite square, the segmentation timeout, and the angular regions in which users' force vectors are interpreted were all adjusted differently from Trackball EdgeWrite.
Most of these adjustments were made in ways that lessened the force required to write comfortably with the joystick.
Concerning the back-mounted joystick and its use with the index finger , we were at first unsure whether users would prefer to write in a visually-oriented manner, as if looking through the device, or in a motor-oriented manner, maintaining the same finger path they would use on the front of the device .
Six paid subjects ages 21-28 were recruited from the local university community.
Not all were students, and half were not technology majors.
Although all of the subjects owned mobile phones, their previous use of Multitap was very limited, involving only the entering of contact information.
None were active users of text messaging, none had used T9, and none had ever used EdgeWrite.
All six subjects participated in each part of the study.
1 In a pilot study, we found that subjects preferred to write in a visually-oriented manner as shown in Figure 4b.
This finding is consistent with prior work for letters made in different orientations on the human body .
Because of this, we had to add software to reflect the horizontal movement of the joystick.
We also found that users' index fingers operated the isometric joystick at an angle.
Thus, we implemented the ability to arbitrarily reflect and rotate the input space .
Through a brief period of experimentation, users could discover the proper settings that resulted in accurate and comfortable movements.
For EdgeWrite, subjects used our isometric joystick phone prototype as described in the previous section.
However, in pilot testing we found that latencies between the PC and phone were undesirable, making stroke feedback a little bit too slow.
Therefore, subjects held the phone in a natural position adjacent to the PC monitor and observed their strokes and text input there.
They were able to see their phone, hand, joystick, input, and output all at once, as the physical distance between these items was 3 inches.
As stated above, the joystick phone's keys were disabled since its keypad circuit had to be removed.
Therefore, a second Smartphone, an i-Mate Smartphone 2 that was similar in size and shape to the joystick phone, was used for Multitap and T9.
This phone ran the user test software and was connected to the desktop PC via TCP/IP over Bluetooth.
Latency was not an issue since no stroke drawing was necessary.
For both phones, the desktop PC logged text entry activity for later analysis.
The evaluation was within-subjects and consisted of five parts in order to assess different aspects of our isometric joystick phone prototype.
Part 1 consisted of 15 short sessions in which subjects entered phrases  of about 30 characters each using character-level EdgeWrite and Multitap.
In each session, subjects warmed up with 2 phrases before testing on a set of 8 to 12 phrases, depending on the session number.
In later sessions, subjects were faster so 12 phrases could be entered.
By the end of the study, sessions only took about 20 minutes.
Importantly, the number of phrases entered in a given session was always identical for EdgeWrite and Multitap, and measures were the average speeds and uncorrected error rates for the test phrases entered by subjects in that session.
Part 2 of the evaluation consisted of 15 additional sessions, this time comparing word-level EdgeWrite and T9.
The T9 method works by disambiguating the current word's keysequence to match the most likely word from a lexicon.
Thus, often only one keypress is necessary per letter, but sometimes the wrong word is proposed and the user must select the desired word from a list.
All sessions had subjects enter 12 test phrases.
In Parts 1 and 2, the order of methods was counterbalanced among subjects and across sessions.
Also, no session was separated by less than 4 hours or by more than 2 days.
Part 3 of the study was run concurrently with the last 5 sessions of Part 1 .
For this part, subjects entered 2 practice phrases followed by 8 test phrases using the back-mounted isometric joystick .
Similarly, Part 4 of the study was run concurrently with the last 5 sessions of Part 2 .
Using the same practice and test amounts as Part 3, subjects used the backmounted joystick with word-level stroking .
Finally, Part 5 of the study occurred at the very end, where subjects entered 5 test phrases with character-level EdgeWrite and Multitap while holding the phone beneath the edge of the table.
Using the desktop PC, they were able to see the character they produced, but at no time could they see their hand, the device, or its screen.
This simulated an eyes-free situation where feedback would be provided via some other means.
Thus, subjects were "input blind" but not "output blind."
In all five parts, subjects transcribed a presented phrase in an "unconstrained" fashion .
That is, they were free to enter the presented string using any combination of letters, spaces, and backspaces.
Subjects were encouraged to proceed "quickly and accurately"  and to correct errors as they went.
As with speed, this difference was not significant , although the trend was in favor of Multitap.
But again we see that much of the difference occurred in the first two sessions when subjects were learning EdgeWrite and errors were highest, about 2%.
Parts 1 and 2 of the study were analyzed separately as 2x15 within-subjects factorial designs with factors for method and session.
These data were analyzed using a repeated measures ANOVA.
Parts 3 and 4, which used the backmounted joystick, were compared to the front joystick over the same sessions.
Part 5 is analyzed using a single-factor within-subjects ANOVA.
Subjective measures in the form of 5-point Likert scale responses are compared with nonparametric Wilcoxon signed-rank tests, although such strict tests present a challenge for detecting significance.
The assignment of methods to subjects was fully counterbalanced across subjects and across sessions.
For each part of the study, we conducted tests for order effects, but none were significant, indicating adequate counterbalancing.
As measured by 5-point Likert scales filled out at the end of the study , subjects felt that compared to Multitap, EdgeWrite was significantly faster , marginally more enjoyable , and marginally better liked .
No differences were found for ease of use, perceived accuracy, or comfort.
Subjects indicated that they would unanimously select EdgeWrite over Multitap to enter "a few sentences," "a few paragraphs," and "a few pages of text."
Overall, 5 of 6 subjects indicated they liked EdgeWrite more than Multitap.
Some subjects also made written comments: "EdgeWrite is just like writing with a pen; very enjoyable," and "It is very intuitive since it very much corresponds to the way I write on paper."
Of Multitap, subjects wrote: "This is too slow and boring," and "For any word with an `s' we have to tap four times, which is very tiring."
Results are reported for test phrases only.
Dependent measures for a subject were mean session speeds  and uncorrected error rates  .
Corrected error rates were not analyzed because they are subsumed in speed, and because they are not appropriate for T9, where an entire word is first composed before it is "committed" all at once.
Thus, our analyses consider how accurate the final text is, and how much time it took to enter it.
For WPM plots, error bars represent 1 stdev.
Five of 6 subjects said they would select word-level EdgeWrite over T9 to enter "a few sentences" and "a few pages of text."
All six preferred EdgeWrite for entering "a few paragraphs."
Overall, 5 of 6 subjects indicated they liked word-level EdgeWrite more than T9.
Subjects comments about word-level EdgeWrite included: "Very convenient for long words, but it is sometimes easy to make an error," and "Slightly frustrating when we enter a word completion by mistake," and "At times, one has to erase a word completion and do it again, wasting time."
Of T9, subjects only wrote that it was "substantially better than  because we do not have to tap repeatedly."
No difference was found for ease of learning.
These results are not surprising given subjects' longer practice with the front joystick, its familiarity, and its more customary position on the front of the device.
The comments provided by subjects on the back joystick were: "frustrating" and "takes time to get used to."
Other responses--perceived speed, enjoyment, comfort, and likeability--were not different.
Interestingly, subjects felt that the back joystick entry speed was faster on average than Multitap's speed .
With word prediction enabled, subjects significantly preferred the front joystick to the back joystick for comfort  and likeability .
Only concerning perceived errors was there no detectable difference, which corresponds to the lack of a significant difference in actual error rates described above.
Some comments by subjects were: "Easier and faster than before, but uncomfortable position for holding the device," and "better than the earlier one without word prediction."
Subjects did not exhibit a significant preference concerning enjoyment.
Part 3 was a further exploration of the back-mounted joystick, this time with word-level stroking enabled .
Trials were held during the last 5 sessions of Part 2 .
As before, we can examine this design's performance to the front joystick for the same sessions .
This means that the back joystick achieved 73.3% of the front joystick's speed for these sessions.
In Part 5, subjects entered 5 phrases with character-level EdgeWrite using the front isometric joystick and Multitap.
Subjects did not use T9 simply because it would be impossible to do so without seeing the device.
For this part of the study, the device was held under the edge of the table and out of sight.
Under these circumstances, subjects might be called "input blind," but not "output blind," since they could see their results on a desktop PC screen.
The goal was to compare performance when visual attention on the device was compromised.
The Multitap phone had sufficient keypad tactility to support eyes-free use .
The eyes-free gestural version is 80.7% as fast as in normal use, while eyes-free Multitap is only 32.6% as fast as in normal use.
At the outset of this study, we were somewhat skeptical that "daily intermittent use" would result in sufficient practice for EdgeWrite to eventually be competitive with Multitap and T9.
Certainly, selection-based keypad methods were easier to use than gestural methods at the outset of the study.
But we were somewhat surprised to see how quickly subjects learned EdgeWrite, and how their EdgeWrite results remained competitive with the results for two commercialized techniques over the course of the study.
In light of these findings, subjective results take on greater importance, since no method is an obvious "win."
Here we see that subjects preferred EdgeWrite, particularly over Multitap, which they regarded as "tedious."
Extrapolated learning curves for all four techniques are shown in Figure 8.
These are fit according to a power law and allow us to speculate about performance in future sessions.
The curves suggest that the EdgeWrite methods have more long-term potential than the keypad-based ones, and that the speed advantage begun in the final sessions of Parts 1 and 2 would continue.
Of course, further experimentation would be required to verify these predictions.
Some of the results from this study are similar to those found in prior studies.
Butts and Cockburn  found that subjects reached 7.2 WPM with Multitap in a single session.
This is similar to our result for Multitap in the third session.
In work by Pavlovych and Stuerzlinger , subjects reached 7.15 WPM with Multitap after three 20-minute sessions.
James and Reischel  found that novices entered text with Multitap at 7.98 WPM while experts were about the same.
For T9, novice speeds were 9.09 WPM while expert speeds reached 20.4 WPM.
Our subjects did not reach this expert T9 speed by the end of their sessions, nor does their learning curve suggest they would anytime soon.
They found that over twenty 20-minute sessions, two-handed Multitap speeds ranged from 8.2 WPM in the first session to 19.8 WPM by session 20.
Our subjects could not reach these speeds because they did not use the methods for very long in each session, and they operated the phone with just one hand.
The major findings of this multifaceted study comparing our isometric joystick techniques to predominant keypadbased mobile phone text entry methods are: * Gestural text entry on an isometric joystick was, in fact, feasible.
Moreover, it seemed to be quickly learnable when using the EdgeWrite alphabet.
With six subjects and 15 sessions, there was ample power for one method to significantly outperform the other, but speed and accuracy statistical tests were not significant.
Thus, including stroke-based word prediction in EdgeWrite gave rise to a method that can be said to be "highly competitive" with T9.
This is notable since some previous word prediction systems have actually slowed users down .
Our isometric joystick design seemed to exhibit qualitative advantages such as the tiny physical footprint about the size of one button, the ability to perform fluid control tasks, its promise for gaming and multimedia, its ability to be more "felt" instead of "seen," and preference among subjects.
Also, unlike some mobile methods where input and output are collocated on a display , our method could function separately from where it is displayed, and the display can even be omitted.
Of course, there are disadvantages to our joystick design as well.
The main disadvantage is probably that regardless of how learnable a gestural method is, its gestures still must be learned.
Device manufacturers may be reluctant to include gestural alternatives in lieu of keypad-based methods that, although tedious, require very little learning prior to use.
Compared to other versions of EdgeWrite , the character-level isometric joystick version  seems slower than the stylus version , the touchpad version , the 4-key version , and the version for game controllers .
However, it seems comparable to a version for power wheelchair joysticks and for trackballs .
Note that these character-level speeds reflect expert use as reported in  and should only be used for ballpark comparisons.
Finally, given the small size of the isometric joystick, other devices might benefit from having one of them.
For example, a futuristic "pen" might have a joystick on its top used for pointing and text entry on remote displays, or a key-fob might use one to enter a few-letter password before unlocking a car to prevent signal spamming with a lost key.
In this paper, we investigated using an isometric joystick on both the front and back of a mobile phone for gestural text entry with the EdgeWrite alphabet.
We compared our phone prototype to Multitap and T9, finding that our gestural text entry techniques were highly competitive and realistic alternatives to keypad-based techniques.
Furthermore, subjects generally preferred our gestural designs to the tedious keypad-based systems, and our gestural system seems to have advantages for eyes-free use.
This work has anticipated the future of highly capable mobile phones in an attempt to broaden their interaction vocabularies by using isometric joysticks to improve text entry.
Acknowledgements The authors thank Brandon Rothrock, Joe Rutledge, and Ted Selker for their help.
This work was supported in part by IBM, Microsoft, General Motors, and the National Science Foundation under grant UA-0308065.
Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the National Science Foundation or any other supporter.
Although our isometric joystick prototype fared competitively in the current study, there are still many ways in which it could be improved.
Some of the subjects' comments indicated that word-level EdgeWrite had accuracy troubles when selecting words.
Although erroneously completed words can be undone in EdgeWrite with a single backspace stroke, the design for word selection could be revisited in an effort to improve selection accuracy.
Numerous further studies would also be useful.
Clearly, more sessions would help us assess what happens beyond sessions 15 and 30.
We could evaluate our prototype against keypad-based techniques with subjects who are actually walking.
