Global warming, and the climate change it induces, is an urgent global issue.
One remedy to this problem, and the focus of this paper, is to motivate sustainable energy usage behaviors by people.
One approach is the development of technologies that provide real-time, continuous feedback of energy usage.
However, there is one problem - most technologies use a "one-size-fits-all" solution, providing the same feedback to differently motivated individuals at different stages of readiness, willingness and ableness to change.
In this paper, we synthesize a wide range of motivational psychology literature to develop a motivational framework based on the Transtheoretical  Model.
For each stage, we state the motivational goal, and recommendation for how technologies can reach these goals.
Each goal and recommendation is supported by a rationale based on motivational literature.
Each recommendation is supported by a simple textual example illustrating one way to apply the recommendation.
Feedback is often presented as raw energy use , personal cost , or environmental impact .
While feedback can be effective , most technologies are limited as they use a "one-size-fits-all" solution - that is, they provide the same feedback to differently motivated individuals, at different stages of readiness, willingness and ableness to change.
Unless the energy consumer already holds a strong goal to use energy sustainably , feedback only informs, but does not necessarily motivate sustainable energy action.
Motivating sustainable energy behavior change is a psychologically, socially, and culturally complex problem .
While all perspectives offer important insights, we approach this problem from the psychological perspective.
From this perspective, we explore the following question: How can energy feedback technologies leverage existing techniques and theories within motivational psychology to more effectively motivate sustainable energy usage behaviors?
In approaching this question, we argue that designers of such technology need to consider two points: 1.
Different people hold different attitudes, beliefs and values , and are motivated by different things.
Intentional behavior change does not occur as an event, but rather, as a process in a series of stages as defined by the Transtheoretical Model .
Individuals move from being unaware or unwilling to acknowledge the problem, to considering the possibility of change, to preparing to make the change, to taking action, and finally, to maintaining the desired behavior over time .
Global warming, and the climate change it induces, is an urgent global issue.
Moving towards an environmentally sustainable lifestyle is recognized as a partial solution to this problem.
While important, this is only a partial solution as people do not always use this technology in energy-efficient ways .
We must also focus on a people solution: understanding how and why people use energy , so we can develop technologies that can motivate sustainable energy behavior.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Motivation is "an inquiry into the why of behavior" .
It is "an internal state or condition  that serves to activate or energize behavior .
Motivation is closely tied to emotional processes .
Attitudes, beliefs and values are "learned psychological constructs that motivate and influence behavior" .
Within these constructs, attitudes are the least enduring , and values are the most enduring  .
We discuss these constructs within the context of sustainable energy behavior.
Attitudes are "learned predispositions to respond to a person, object, or idea in a favorable or unfavorable way" - reflecting what one likes or dislikes .
For example, John holds a favorable attitude towards water conservation: in particular, taking short showers.
Beliefs are "the ways in which people structure their understanding of reality" - in other words, "what is true and what is false" .
Most beliefs are based on previous experience , e.g.
Values are "central to our concept of self" , and can be conceptualized as "behavioral ideals" or "preferences for experiences" .
As behavioral ideals, values function as "enduring concepts of good and bad, right and wrong" , e.g.
As preferences for experiences, "values guide individuals to seek situations in which they may experience certain emotions" , e.g.
I bike to work because it makes me feel good.
Throughout this paper, we draw upon a subset of values defined by Rokeach and Maslow .
Both proposed that people hold value systems - "a value hierarchy or priority structure based on the relative importance of the individual values" .
Kim, an energy auditor, values being "logical" more than she values being "imaginative" during an audit.
The Transtheoretical Model , also known as the "Stages of Change" Model, is an established theory of behavioral change processes .
It states that intentional behavior change is a process occurring in a series of stages, rather than a single event .
Motivation is required for the focus, effort and energy needed to move through the stages .
The stages progress as follows.
The individual is unaware, uninformed, unwilling or discouraged to change the problem behavior .
They are not intending to take action in the foreseeable future, usually measured as the next 6 months .
Individuals acknowledge their behavior is a problem , and intend to change in the next 6 months .
Contemplators are open to information about the problem behavior, though may be far from making an actual commitment due to feelings of ambivalence .
The individual is ready to take action in the immediate future , and aims to develop and commit to a plan .
At least one 24hour change attempt was made in the past year .
Action: The individual takes action by overtly modifying their behavior, usually within the past 6 months .
Maintenance, Relapse, Recycling: The individual works to sustain the behavior change, and struggles to prevent relapse .
If relapse occurs, individuals regress to an earlier stage and begin to progress through the stages again .
Motivational Interviewing  is a client-centered counseling style often used in conjunction with the TTM that aims to facilitate behavior change .
In MI, motivation to change is elicited from the client .
We now show the value of the above constructs and theories by assessing selected persuasive energy feedback technologies from this motivational perspective.
First, however, we discuss the goal of motivating durable sustainable energy behavior change, and define the concepts of extrinsic and intrinsic motivation.
We then introduce commonlyused techniques that aim to motivate sustainable energy behavior.
Attitude Model: Almost all current feedback technologies employ the Attitude Model.
We illustrate using two examples.
The `Power-Aware Cord'   is an electrical cord that visualizes electricity consumption by varying the pulse, flow, and intensities of light using electroluminescent wires.
It assumes that visualizing electricity alone suffices in motivating individuals to reduce their consumption.
The lower the energy usage, the more trees shown.
The higher the energy usage, the more buildings and appliances shown.
This work assumes that showing energy usage in relation to carbon offsets suffices to motivate action.
There are two limitations to this model.
First, it does not consider the stages of behavioral change.
Specifically, the assumption of a pro-environmental attitude does not hold for precontemplators who have not yet acknowledged their behavior is problematic.
For contemplators, feelings of ambivalence may indicate that a pro-environmental attitude does not lead to commitment or action.
While the Attitude Model may be effective in the preparation stage, it does not provide individuals with specific energy actions they can take.
In the action and maintenance stages, individuals have already acted, and thus motivations based on attitude alone may have no further effect.
REM and Attitude Models: The Attitude Model is often used in conjunction with the REM.
Early works employing these models include textual LCD displays that present energy usage in relation to cost.
Examples include the `Energy Detective', `Power-Cost Monitor', and `Kill-AWatt' .
Other systems add persuasive prompts  to encourage less usage during peak hours when energy costs are high.
Examples include the `Wattson', `Energy Orb', and `Energy Joule' .
When motivating sustainable energy behavior, one important goal is durability of behavior change .
Durability is behavior that is "self-sustaining without the need for repeated interventions" .
To achieve this goal, intrinsically motivated behavior is ideal .
Intrinsic motivation is "the doing of an activity for its inherent satisfactions rather than for some separable consequence" .
Extrinsic motivation is "the doing of an activity in order to attain some separable outcome" .
Examples include material incentives or social reinforcement.
The Attitude Model assumes that "pro-environmental behavior will automatically follow from favorable attitudes towards the environment" .
This model appeals to Rokeach's value of "a world of beauty", assuming if one values nature, then they will act to protect it.
The Rational-Economic Model  assumes "people will make pro-environmental decisions based on economicallyrational decisions"  - that is, monetary cost is the primary motivator.
This model appeals to Maslow's value of "safety" - specifically, "security of resources", and Rokeach's values of being "logical" and "responsible".
The Information Model provides information to a problem, why it is a problem, and action steps to solve the problem .
It appeals to Rokeach's value of being "obedient", assuming once you know what to do, you will do it.
The Elaboration Likelihood Model   proposes two routes of cognitive processing.
The central route processes arguments according to logic, rationale, and quality of the argument.
The peripheral route uses emotional persuasion, where one is influenced by factors unrelated to the argument's validity, such as emotional responses.
Caveat: Assessing existing feedback technologies from the author's descriptions of them solely from a motivational perspective is not really `fair'.
Our intent, rather, is to reflect on these designs, where we reconstruct, how well a particular design is justified  as a motivational device.
First, the motivating effect of material incentives  is nondurable; just as the behavior is quickly started using material incentives, their removal likewise terminates behavior change .
Second, when the cost of energy is low in proportion to one's income, feedback is not as effective .
Third, similar to the Attitude Model, the REM does not consider situational circumstances that may override the logistics of cost, or the positive influences of proenvironmental attitude .
Information, Rational-Economic and Attitude Models: Some systems supplement these earlier models with an Information Model.
They provide complex feedback visualizations for energy used, cost and CO2 emissions, summarize trends over days to months, and provide action steps for more efficient usage.
These help to explain why current energy use is problematic and how more efficient usage can be achieved.
While the combination of these models improves upon the previous categories, limitations remain from a motivational perspective.
First, information alone rarely motivates action  as information is only effective if the user already holds a strong goal to act based on that information .
Second, humans have a psychological tendency to avoid non-supportive and seek out supportive information .
Specifically, individuals in the contemplation stage may hold ambivalent feelings , and thus may psychologically discount information that contradicts with their current energy behaviors.
In contrast, the Information Model can be very effective in the preparation and action stages, improving upon the Attitude Model by providing specific actions one can take.
In maintenance, Information Models can be effective if the information provided changes over time to match with the individual's deepening knowledge.
Positive Reinforcement, Emotional Persuasion  & Values: `Ubigreen'  employs these techniques.
It is a mobile phone visualization that uses semi-automatic sensing technologies to provide feedback of transportation behaviors.
Icons also represent "auxiliary benefits", including a piggy bank to represent money savings, a person meditating to represent relaxation, a book representing the opportunity to read and a weightlifter to represent exercise .
We classify these respective icons as appealing to the following values: Maslow's "safety", Rokeach's "inner harmony", "intellectual", and "health".
An improvement would be to consider the specific values and value systems of each individual.
For example, Person A holds a high value on exercise and fitness, and a lower value on money savings.
In contrast, the visualization could highlight different benefits for Person B who  highly values money savings.
One limitation of `Ubigreen' from a motivational perspective is the possible extrinsic nature of the positive iconic reinforcement .
Specifically, some participants viewed the visualization to be a "game", where making it to the last screen was the "final level" .
When people are only in it to win, it negatively impacts their intrinsic motivation , and may lead to less durable behavior change .
As this work aimed to target "already very green individuals", participants were most likely in the action or maintenance stages, where intrinsic motivation is required for long-term success .
Our assessment argued that most feedback technologies tend to design for "one-size-fits-all".
To address this shortcoming, we offer a motivational framework based on the TTM's stages of change and MI's counseling principles, to propose strategies that aim to target individual motivations at each stage of behavioral change.
To do this, we synthesize the TTM and MI with various motivational literature, including foundational motivation theories, learning theories, social psychology, applied psychology, and environmental psychology.
For each stage, we present the motivational goal, and recommendation for how technologies may reach these goals.
Each goal and recommendation is supported by a rationale .
To make the recommendations more vivid, we use a scenario of a particular energy user named Mary, who holds specific attitudes, beliefs and values.
We simplify this example to focus on one appliance - the desktop computer.
We draw upon the details presented in this scenario to provide a simple textual example for each recommendation.
We do not claim the examples we provide are ideally presented; rather, they illustrate one way to achieve a recommendation.
Table 2 summarizes the goals of each stage, and can be used as a reference for the following text.
Once planted, precontemplators often need time to let them germinate .
Information should be provided in moderation as more intensity will often produce fewer results with this group .
Recommendation #1: Provide personalized feedback that acknowledges both the benefits and consequences of the individual's non-sustainable energy behavior.
Present these benefits and consequences in relation to what the individual values, in a neutral, non-biased way.
Rationale: Technologies must acknowledge both the pros and cons of the individual's current non-sustainable energy behaviors before they can expect precontemplators to "decrease resistance"  and become open to considering the "not so good" things" .
This is especially important when motivating energy action as non-sustainable energy behaviors offer many benefits, such as comfort, luxury, convenience, social status, and sometimes cost.
These benefits appeal to Rokeach's values of "a comfortable life" and "social recognition".
About Mary: Mary is 36 years old, married, the mother of two school-age children , and lives in Edsen Community.
She is a novelist and works on a home desktop computer with two 19" monitors.
Mary values work and productivity, family, and physical health.
Though money is not a problem, Mary is a frugal spender.
Computer usage: Mary uses MS Word, Internet and email.
She browses the web for ideas and usually keeps her computer and monitors on so she can readily access her open Internet tabs and work when desired.
Mary knows about but does not make use of her computer's automatic power management features.
Last month, Mary's computer got a virus, though she is not sure how it was contracted.
Motivational stage: We begin this scenario with Mary as a precontemplator.
While Mary is somewhat aware of general environmental problems, she does not believe her personal energy use  has much negative effect.
In general, Mary does not believe she has the time or energy to make big energy changes.
Goal #1: Present information in moderation to "plant the seed" for individuals to acknowledge their current  behaviors are problematic.
Rationale: Precontemplators can be reluctant, resistant, resigned, or rationalizing .
Through inertia or lack of knowledge of the effect of the problem behavior, precontemplators do not want to consider change .
Recommendation #2: Refer to social norms regarding sustainable energy behaviors by aligning the use of descriptive and injunctive normative messages.
Rationale: Social norms are "the `rules' or expectations for appropriate behavior in a particular social situation" .
The idea is motivate the individual to think: "if many people value it, maybe I should as well".
These appeal to Maslow's value of "love/belongingness".
These appeal to Rokeach's value of being "obedient".
Recommendation #3: Provide personalized feedback of a variety of small energy actions that, if performed, would have positive impacts on the environment.
Rationale: Two barriers to motivation include: "not feeling competent"  and "not believing it will yield a desired outcome" .
Providing information of energy actions that can make a positive impact addresses the barrier of "not feeling competent" and appeals to Rokeach's value of being "capable".
Presenting a variety of action choices appeals to Rokeach's value of "freedom", and increases one's sense of personal control  and intrinsic motivation .
Providing projections of the positive impacts of potential energy actions addresses the barrier of "not believing it will yield a desired outcome".
Example: To provide information in moderation, one energy tip could be provided each day.
Goal #1: "Tip the balance" in favor of change  Rationale: Contemplators have acknowledged the problem, are open to information, but are not yet ready to take action .
Ambivalence is the key issue that must be resolved, as evaluations of the pros and cons of the current behavior are more or less equal .
Recommendation #1: Provide personalized feedback on the pros of sustainable energy behavior, and the cons of nonsustainable energy behavior.
The pros should emphasize an improvement to the individual's quality of life .
The cons should be presented in terms of loss  rather than gain.
Rationale: This recommendation aims to reduce feelings of ambivalence by providing a more one-sided perspective.
The individual should perceive the `pros' of sustainable behavior as enhancing their quality of life.
This is important as people resist making changes that they perceive as reducing their quality of life, in particular, those that stress selfsacrifice for the welfare of the common good .
The `cons' should focus on the costs of non-sustainable behaviors, from a perspective of loss rather than gain .
This maximizes the impact of information as people are more willing to take actions to avoid or minimize a loss, than do the same action for gain .
The focus on values emphasizes personally relevant information or feedback, which can be extremely persuasive at this stage .
Recommendation #2: Remind individuals of their proenvironmental attitude, inform them of the discrepancy between their attitude and the corresponding behavior, and encourage a change towards more sustainable behavior.
Rationale: Contemplators hold pro-environmental attitudes but do not behave according to those attitudes.
This recommendation uses this discrepancy through cognitive dissonance - "an uncomfortable state" that occurs when a person holds an attitude and a behavior that are "psychologically inconsistent" .
When this happens, people try to reduce this uncomfortable feeling, either by changing their attitude or their behavior .
Cognitive dissonance appeals to Rokeach's values of "inner harmony" and being "honest", and often leads to enduring changes in attitude or behavior .
As people change attitude more easily than behavior , an emphasis on encouraging sustainable behavior change is important.
Recommendation #3: Provide encouragement for small energy actions  to encourage larger energy actions in the future.
Rationale: This recommendation uses cognitive dissonance through "Foot-in-the-Door" processes .
The idea is, if people can be encouraged to perform a small energy action on their own accord, they can be encouraged to perform larger energy actions in the future .
This occurs because of cognitive dissonance - individuals will change their internal attitudes to justify or rationalize their already performed external actions .
Example: Yesterday, Mary was working on Sarah's surprise birthday invitations when Sarah came home.
Mary turned off her monitors to keep the invitation a secret in case she glanced over.
While Mary's original intention was not energy savings, a message the next day could say:
Recommendation #4: Link the feedback technology to a sustainable energy usage community website, and encourage the individual to browse and read information of the experiences of sustainable energy users in the community.
Rationale: Contemplators are open to information, but are not ready to commit to action .
Providing an opportunity to read about the experiences of sustainable individuals in their community is a vivid and personalized way to appeal to social norms regarding energy usage, without pushing any type of commitment.
When this happens, people perceive a role for themselves, and may feel an obligation or responsibility to help the change succeed .
First, it may increase the individual's level of goal commitment, targeting Rokeach's values of being "responsible", "helpful" or having "wisdom".
Second, adaptive muddling may encourage selfreflection of one's energy behaviors, which may invoke the intrinsic emotions of curiosity and interest.
Example: Technologies can automatically generate potential implementation intentions while also encouraging adaptive muddling:
Goal #1: Support individuals in developing a plan that is acceptable, accessible and effective .
Rationale: A goal is defined as "an internal representation of a desired outcome" .
Individuals in the preparation stage may have abstract goals but do not necessarily know the best way to achieve them.
Rationale: Goal-setting and goal commitment influences the success of goal achievement.
Specific, difficult and selfset goals lead to higher performance and commitment than do-best, easy or assigned goals .
Specific goals make clear when the goal has been achieved .
Difficult goals provide a greater sense of achievement, though there is a lower probability of success .
Achieving difficult goals appeals to Rokeach's value of being "capable", and Maslow's value of "esteem".
Goal difficulty can start at the easy level, as success builds on success, and with each small change the individual builds self-efficacy about making bigger changes .
Recommendation #3: Within the sustainable energy usage community website, provide individuals with the option to be connected to energy "mentors" - people in the action or maintenance stages of sustainable energy behavior change.
Rationale: This recommendation employs social diffusion the observation that people are more likely to follow the modeled behavior or example of others who have successfully adopted energy actions .
Being connected to an energy mentor also implies a level of commitment, which may be acceptable for individuals who are preparing to act in the near future.
Example: Feedback technologies could provide Mary with brief descriptions and profiles of energy mentors, highlighting those with similar energy needs or interests.
Technologies could also provide text chat, photo exchange or other ways in which Mary and her "mentor" could communicate and share their experiences.
Recommendation #2: Support individuals to develop multiple methods to achieve these goals, and encourage them to apply their personal expertise and knowledge to these plans.
Rationale: Implementation intentions are the "plans that specify the when, where and how to lead to goal attainment" .
Goal intentions that are furnished with implementation intentions are more easily attained than mere goal intentions .
Flexibility in goal attainment is good, providing the option to switch to other routes .
Implementation intentions appeal to Rokeach's values of being "logical" or "imaginative".
Goal #1: Positively reinforce sustainable energy actions Rationale: Positive reinforcement  is the most effective technique for motivating the increased occurrence of a desired behavior .
Techniques such as punishment or negative reinforcement stop the undesired behavior, but do not replace anything in its place .
Recommendation #1: Provide positive performance feedback in relation to progress made towards energy goals set in the preparation stage.
Deliver PR immediately after the preferred behavior occurs, and in multiple ways.
Rationale: Positive performance feedback tends to increase intrinsic motivation, whereas negative performance feedback tends to decrease intrinsic motivation .
Providing positive feedback on goal progress may lead to the intrinsic satisfaction of competence, which appeals to Rokeach's value of being "capable".
Delivering PR immediately and in multiple ways enhances the effectiveness of PR .
Goal #2: Develop intrinsic motivations for sustainable energy behavior.
Rationale: Constructive behavior change arises when the person connects it something of intrinsic value .
Recommendation #1: Allow for interactive exploration, customization and annotation within the feedback interface.
Rationale: Interactive exploration and annotation may invoke self-reflection of one's energy behaviors, and in turn, the intrinsic satisfactions of curiosity and interest.
Customization provides choice, appeals to Rokeach's value of "freedom", and increases intrinsic motivation .
Example: Technologies could allow Mary to explore with "what if" questions of her energy usage, for instance, by interactively manipulating existing energy information to see the potential positive or negative effects.
Interface customization and annotation allows Mary to personalize the interface, which is a more effective motivator than general and non-personalized information .
Recommendation #2: Provide the choice for individuals in the maintenance stage to become "energy mentors" to individuals in the preparation stage.
Rationale: This recommendation employs cognitive dissonance - "individuals who have attempted to persuade someone else will internally rationalize their behavior, and therefore are particularly prone to increase their commitment" .
The social component also adds a dynamic factor to the technology, and may inspire new and unpredictable ways in which the individual's motivation may be sustained.
This method appeals to Rokeach's values of "social recognition" and "wisdom", and in turn, may invoke the intrinsic satisfactions of competence and enjoyment.
Example: A post on the "Edsen Community Sustainable Lifestyles Website" could say:
If Mary showed interest, she could be asked to submit a profile of herself, her interests and experiences, and would be contacted when someone has chosen her for a mentor.
Recommendation #3: Encourage individuals to selfreinforce and self-reflect on their energy experiences through daily journal-keeping.
The aim is to invoke deeper thought regarding their energy behaviors and encourage more advanced energy actions.
Rationale: Journal-keeping is a form of expressive practice and promotes reflection on one's experience .
Reflection of one's energy behaviors and viewing one's progress over time may invoke the intrinsic satisfactions of interest, competence and enjoyment.
Self-reinforcement  may invoke the intrinsic emotion of competence, and lead to higher perceptions of self- efficacy.
This is important as "in order for individuals to experience long-term success, they require adequate self-efficacy and intrinsic attributions of the behavior" .
Example: Feedback interfaces could provide flexible ways in which Mary could journal-keep within the interface.
For example, Mary could take snapshots of notable milestones in her goal progress, and annotate visualizations by circling or highlighting areas of interest and writing her thoughts.
If desired, the technology could also automatically record energy summaries for each day or week in the journal.
Recommendation #4: Maintain the cyclical loop of intrinsic motivation: interest, curiosity, optimal challenge, competence feedback and enjoyment.
Rationale: Intrinsic motivation is a cyclical, two-step process .
First, stimuli such as novelty, complexity and change  attract attention, curiosity and interest .
This invites exploration, investigation, and manipulation of the stimulus .
Second, competence performances on challenging tasks are enjoyed, where increased enjoyment increases one's willingness to continue the activity and to confront similar challenges in the future .
Goal #1: Maintain durable sustainable energy behavior Rationale: In maintenance, the individual works to consolidate the gains attained during the action stage and struggles to prevent relapse .
Often change is not established even after 6 months or so of action .
At some point, behaviors will become sustained over time and integrated into their lifestyle so that the individual can exit the cycle of change .
While it is not possible for every decision to be "maximally green", the goal in this stage may be to be "just a little more conscious and aware" .
Recommendation #1: Support energy actions to become energy habits using opportune prompts reminding individuals to take specific energy actions.
As the habit becomes well-instantiated, these prompts can gradually disappear.
Rationale: Habits are "associations between goals and actions that allow the instigation of automatic behavior on activation of these goals by the environment" .
In other words, when a behavior has been performed many times in the past, future behavior becomes increasingly under control of an automaticized process .
The instantiation of habits may be especially important in this stage, as it may help to reduce the occurrences of relapse and recycling.
Example: Feedback technologies could make use of automatic sensing technologies and computer usage rhythms to provide reminder prompts  based on the individual's proposed goal implementations.
An example using text could be:
The importance of intrinsic motivation is supported by the work of Woodruff et al.
First, participants pursued their "environmental goals", "creatively solved problems" and "modest mental challenges", where they derived satisfaction from the "cleverness and resourcefulness" of their solutions and gained a strong sense of "empowerment and confidence" .
From these findings, we argue that participants maintained their behavior due to intrinsic satisfactions of performing energy behaviors.
Specifically, pursuing "goals", "problems" and "challenges" indicate the intrinsic satisfactions of curiosity and interest leading to exploration, taking on challenges and competence performances.
Participants also gained "empowerment and confidence", indicating the intrinsic emotion of enjoyment.
These reflect Rokeach's values of being "intellectual", "imaginative" and "capable".
Example: Technologies could continually provide Mary with novel, complex and changing information to maintain her curiosity and interest.
Technologies could also provide and encourage Mary to take on new challenges and responsibilities in regards to sustainable behavior.
This puts forth difficult challenges in terms of the validity of stage assessment and staging algorithms.
Fourth, our framework aims to motivate sustainable energy behavior primarily from the psychological perspective.
Consequently, it is also important to consider how social, cultural, contextual, and situational factors can be incorporated into the proposed framework.
If technologies act as training devices, designers should consider sustainable interaction design principles proposed in .
Finally, as in most persuasive energy feedback systems, our framework assumes that it is necessary to motivate sustainable energy behavior change in the individual.
We recognize this is only a partial solution - holistic approaches are also required, such as energy-efficient technology, government policies and so on.
However, we believe the issue of motivation is still crucial in these domains, and future work should also look at applying motivational theory to motivate government or business policy makers to affect higherlevel changes that can potentially make a bigger impact.
We now discuss our framework  to energy feedback technology design.
First, the TTM assumes behavior change occurs in discrete states .
However, studies show that "rather than simply being in one stage or another, clients show patterns of differential involvement in each of the stages" .
In this case, "the concept of stages loses its meaning" .
For example, in our scenario, Mary could be in the action stage of sustainable computer usage, and in the contemplation stage of composting.
In addition, rather than a progression through stages, change can come about swiftly, often as a result of life events or external pressures .
While we recognize the value of these critiques, we make use of the TTM 's stages of change for its heuristic value, recognizing it is as a simplified model of "ideal change" , rather than how behavior processes necessarily occur in real life.
We hope the value of our framework lies in its contribution of a new and potentially useful way of thinking about motivating sustainable energy behaviors, while inspiring new ideas and approaches to this problem.
Second, the TTM is a general model of behavior change  with applications in a variety of addictive and healthrisk behaviors .
To our knowledge, no other work has applied TTM to energy behaviors.
While we believe we have shown that TTM provides a useful starting point, further exploration is needed as to whether the TTM is a suitable model to apply to this problem.
Third, we argued that the success of feedback technologies employing this framework lies in its effectiveness in moti-
