Despite the growing research on usability in the predevelopment phase, we know little about post-deployment usability activities.
To characterize these activities, we surveyed 333 full-time usability professionals and consultants working in large and small corporations from a wide range of industries.
Our results show that, as a whole, usability professionals are currently not playing a substantial role in the post-deployment phase compared to other phases of usercentered design, but when they do, practitioners find their interactions quite valuable.
We highlight opportunities in HCI research and practice to bridge this gap by working more closely with software support and maintenance teams.
We also raise the need to understand what might be called 'usability maintenance,' that is, the process and procedures, by which usability is maintained after deployment.
A key component of user-centered design  and usability engineering is the commitment to usability principles throughout the analysis, design, implementation, and deployment phases .
While upfront user research and prototyping are crucial to designing user-centered products, learning from users in the deployment phase about their actual use of the product is also valuable .
However, prior works  have suggested that this "ideal" UCD process across all four phases rarely happens in practice: most companies invest heavily only in upfront UCD methods.
Our literature review indicated that research on usability practices has largely centered on upfront UCD methods,
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Given that most software companies invest a major portion of their budgets on maintaining software  and providing technical support 1 after a software has been released, understanding the UCD practices in the post-deployment phase is critical for identifying opportunities and challenges in supporting a product's overall usability.
To better understand the state of post-deployment usability activities in industry, we surveyed usability professionals in North America and abroad.
We received 333 responses from Usability professionals working in large and small corporations representing a variety of industries.
Our key findings suggest that the role of usability appears to diminish in the post-deployment phase and usability professionals are rarely involved in postulated post-deployment activities  such as usage logs analysis, customer support logs analysis, benchmarking, and in situ usability testing.
However, respondents also indicated that when they were involved, they found significant value in interactions with support.
This paper is the first to provide empirical evidence through a large-scale survey about the current state of postdeployment usability.
In this regard, it complements prior surveys of usability practitioners  that have focused on upfront usability activities.
Our results further provide an impetus for the HCI community to better align UCD with software support and software maintenance activities that play a critical role in supporting the overall user experience.
Our survey consisted of 16 multiple choice and open-ended questions.
We began by asking respondents about their demographics, such as job title, experience, company size, industry, and location.
Next, we asked questions about direct involvement in the 4 different phases of UCD and asked respondents to specify their particular pre-deployment and post-deployment activities.
We devised categories of activities based on previous surveys  and recommendations in UCD/usability lifecycle guidelines .
We also asked respondents about their interactions with software support and software development teams in the post-deployment phase.
Lastly, we gave respondents a chance to share their stories about post-deployment usability activities.
We distributed the survey online during the summer of 2010.
We also made use of social networking sites such as LinkedIn and Facebook to advertise our survey in professional discussion groups.
In some cases, we personally contacted team leads in large corporations and consulting groups and asked them to encourage their employees to participate in our survey.
The respondents were offered a chance to participate in a $50 gift card drawing.
The majority of respondents  said that they were regularly involved in the design phase.
The involvement appeared to decrease in the implementation phase, but 69.2% of the respondents reported being regularly involved.
Only 50.9% of respondents reported involvement in the post-deployment phase.
Our next question was, Please describe your main role after a product that you helped design has been deployed.
Responses are shown in Figure 3.
We asked respondents to select all options that best described their role after a product had been deployed.
It appears that most of the respondents  started working on another product and/or the next version of the current product .
Only 23.1% of respondents said that they were involved in conducting benchmark tests while 33.0% said that they monitored feature data for the deployed product.
Next, we asked respondents about the usability-specific activities that they engaged in both before and after a product was deployed.
The activities and the comparison of responses are shown in Figure 4.
Almost all usability activities appeared to drop after a product had been deployed.
Also, note that 12.0% of the respondents selected not applicable  for the post-deployment phase.
Our next question was, How often do you interact with support specialists  after a product has been deployed?
Responses are shown in Figure 5.
The survey was targeted at anyone who identified as a usability or a User Experience  professional.
Our respondents listed a variety of job titles and represented various design and usability roles.
Table 1 shows the top 12 job titles of our respondents.
Most of the respondents  were full-time employees, 17.1% were contractors and the remaining were part-time or temporary employees or self-employed.
Figure 1 shows the range in years of experience our respondents had in the usability field.
They represented organizations of all sizes, with the majority being from large corporations .
These organizations specialized in a variety of software, hardware, and web applications, including e-commerce sites, operating systems, online search, computer-aided design tools, social networking sites, government sites, among others.
Another 10.6% of the respondents said that they were not sure about their level of interaction.
Among the 6.3% of respondents who talked to support specialists every day, about a third  were from small corporations.
We also asked respondents to list where the support specialists were located in their organizations .
About half of the respondents  said that support specialists were located on the same floor as the usability professionals or within the same building.
A quarter of the respondents  were not sure where support specialists were located.
The next question we asked was, How often do you interact with software developers after a product has been deployed?
These results appear in Figure 5.
Compared to support specialists, usability professionals appeared to have a more regular interaction with software developers after a product had been deployed =71.7, p<.0001.
Among our respondents, 24.9% said that they interacted with developers every day and another 18.0% said they interacted a few times a week.
Still, about 30.0% of respondents did not appear to have much interaction with developers .
In terms of location, 56.5% of the usability professionals said that developers were located on the same floor as them and 39.0% said that developers were in the same building .
This difference was significant compared to the relative location of usability professionals and support specialists =67.8, p<.0001.
It appears that software developers in general were more collocated than support specialists and this could be one reason why usability professionals had more of an interaction with developers overall.
This finding suggests that there are factors other than location that could underlie the difference in interaction among usability professionals and software developers versus support specialists.
We also asked respondents to reflect on their role in postdeployment usability in free response questions; there was a 51.8% average response rate for the two questions.
We used respondents' comments to begin to understand some of the trends that we observed in the quantitative findings.
First, we filtered responses based on comments from respondents who said they were always involved in the postdeployment phase to see what type of activities they engaged in.
Respondents described activities such as monitoring current usage, benchmark studies, satisfaction surveys, user testing, and having informal contact with users, consistent with Figures 3 and 4.
However, some respondents were still not satisfied with their level and type of involvement in the post-deployment phase:
We get good feedback, but we don't work directly with customers, so it's hard to understand their specific pain points.
I have a suspicion that there are minor irritations that don't ever get reported because people just don't think it's worth the effort to write to customer service.
Without direct customer usability research, I don't exactly know what those are.
Even when there was interest in sustaining usability throughout the lifecycle, it appears that product delivery schedules and resource constraints made it difficult to practice usability after deployment.
Another challenge stemmed from organizational structures because in some cases customer support and software maintenance groups operated in silos, unaware of each other's activities.
However, despite sincere intentions in tackling potential usability problems upfront, we know from current industry practices that a number of issues emerge in the postdeployment phase .
Thus, post-deployment usability may be the next frontier in translating research into practice.
We propose that within the field of usability, there needs to be focus on "usability maintenance," paralleling software maintenance.
The goal of usability maintenance should be to enhance post-deployment user experience based on the actual use of a product and provide ongoing support for usability principles of learnability, efficiency, memorability, recovery from errors, and satisfaction.
As discussed above, we can start further studying and inventing opportunities for support and maintenance teams to interact with usability practitioners.
The before/after findings of usability activities showed that only 34.8% of respondents appeared to leverage customer support data in the post-deployment phase, even less than the pre-deployment phase .
Furthermore, over 50% of respondents never or rarely talked to support specialists.
Since support specialists are at the front lines of directly interacting with end-users and helping them troubleshoot or learn about product features, it is possible that usability practitioners are missing several opportunities for learning about user experience from the field.
As today's systems are becoming more complex and enabling idiosyncratic customizations, it is likely that the role of support will continue to be integral in supporting and evolving user experience.
Thus, our survey findings highlight the need for the usability community to consider ways in which customer support data can be leveraged more effectively to guide iterative design tasks.
The software engineering community has long recognized that software maintenance and evolution are an inevitable part of the software development life cycle .
Software developers spend most of their time triaging and fixing bugs.
Only 18.9% of usability professionals said that they are directly involved in helping triage bugs, and about 30.0% of respondents never or rarely talked to software developers after a product had been deployed.
Since a number of bugs that arise in the postdeployment phase are potential design and usability bugs , there is opportunity for exploring how usability professionals can play a more influential role in the bug triaging process.
This survey provides the basis upon which future work can investigate industry practices in the post-deployment phase in more depth and devise new methods or guidelines.
We generalize the survey findings with some caution since the survey was only distributed in English and respondents were largely from North America.
However, since our respondents represented a variety of usability-related positions and a range of organizations of different sizes and specializations, it is possible that these results would hold globally.
Our study currently provides an aggregate, quantitative view of usability practices, but in future work, we hope to tease out the effect of organizational cultures, usability positions, and differences between large and small corporations.
It would also be interesting to complement these survey findings with observations of interactions among usability professionals and support specialists and software developers.
Lastly, it is likely that in some cases pre-deployment activities on one version of a product can be considered post-deployment activities on the previous one and in future work we hope to shed light on such nuances.
Together, we hope these perspectives will reveal new opportunities for usability maintenance.
Our results show that, as a whole, the role of usability in current practice appears to diminish after a product has been deployed.
This finding is somewhat troubling given that iteration and user feedback have been advocated as core components of all phases in UCD and the usability engineering lifecycle .
Given the increased uptake of usability in industry, it is not a surprise that the value of getting upfront design into organizations has paid off.
