We present Surfpad, a pointing facilitation technique that does not decrease target distance or increase target width in either control or display space.
This new technique operates instead in the tactile domain by taking advantage of the ability to alter a touchpad's coefficient of friction by means of a squeeze film effect.
We report on three experiments comparing Surfpad to the Semantic Pointing technique and constant control-display gain with and without distractor targets.
Our results clearly show the limits of traditional targetaware control-display gain adaptation in the latter case, and the benefits of our tactile approach in both cases.
Surfpad leads to a performance improvement close to 9% compared to unassisted pointing at small targets with no distractor.
It is also robust to high distractor densities, keeping an average performance improvement of nearly 10% while Semantic Pointing can degrade up to 100%.
Our results also suggest the performance improvement is caused by tactile information feedback rather than mechanical causes, and that the feedback is more effective when friction is increased on targets using a simple step function.
Numerous techniques have been proposed that attempt to beat Fitts' law, i.e.
Most of these techniques attempt to decrease D, to increase W , or both.
Most of them are also inherently target-aware : they take advantage of some knowledge about the size and position of the targets and sometimes modify them.
In cases where pointing involves the indirect control of a visual cursor, some techniques operate by dynamically adapting the control-display gain CDgain = Vcursor /Vdevice .
Other techniques supplement the visual display with auditory or haptic feedback.
Yet despite their demonstrated efficiency in simple configurations, most target-aware pointing techniques are difficult to use in practice.
One of the key problems that affects them in real-life situations is the potential interferences caused by intervening targets on the way to the primary one , a problem that is still largely understudied.
In this paper, we present Surfpad, a pointing facilitation technique that does not decrease D or increase W in either control or display space.
This new technique operates instead in the tactile domain by taking advantage of the ability to alter the coefficient of friction of a particular touchpad, the STIMTAC , by means of a squeeze film effect .
We report on three experiments comparing Surfpad to the Semantic Pointing technique  and constant control-display gain with and without distractor targets.
Our results clearly show the limits of traditional target-aware CD gain adaptation in the latter case, and the benefits of our tactile approach in both cases.
Our results also suggest the performance improvement is caused by tactile information feedback rather than mechanical causes, and that the feedback is more effective when friction is increased on targets using a simple step function.
Pointing is a fundamental task of modern human computer interfaces and has been extensively studied by the HCI research community.
Fitts' law has proven to be one of the most robust and widely adopted models in this area .
It expresses the movement time to acquire a target of width W at a distance D as a linear function of the index of difficulty D ID = log2 .
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
But researchers have also investigated its potential for facilitating routine target acquisition in graphical interfaces.
The device used for these studies is typically a hapticenabled mouse.
In , the haptic mechanism was used to confirm the selection of the target.
In all the other studies, it was used to provide feedback about the cursor's relative position to the target, or tunnel, during the selection movement.
Haptic feedback has mostly been evaluated against "normal" pointing, i.e.
All the above studies showed it can improve users' targeting performance in this context by reducing the overall movement time , the time to stop after entering the target , or the error rate .
Some studies suggest that tactile feedback might be particularly effective at reducing selection times for small targets at the cost of higher error rates, although the reasons for the additional errors remain unclear .
It has also been suggested that tactile feedback does not aid in direct input configurations .
Moving and vibrating parts of haptic devices usually generate audible sounds that one might want to filter out during experiments .
Comparisons of tactile and auditory feedback indeed showed similar positive effects on target acquisition .
Tactile feedback has also been compared to visual feedback  and CD gain adaptation , and researchers have investigated whether these different modalities can combine in a positive way .
As Cockburn and Brewster put it, "some do while others do not" and the actual result depends a lot on the nature of the task: a promising technique poorly applied to a simple ecological task can damage interaction by distracting users from it .
The problem with these technologies is that the haptic sensations they support are rather coarse.
Yet recent advances in haptic technologies offer significant promise for extending their use in HCI in general, and pointing facilitation in particular, by supporting more subtle sensations.
Recent works on friction reduction are particularly interesting in this context.
A detailed review of pointing facilitation techniques can be found in .
As explained, most of these techniques are target-aware and involve the reduction of target distance, the increase of target width, or both.
In what follows, we briefly discuss the most relevant examples, focusing on the use of a haptic modality and the impact of distractors.
Different methods have been proposed to reduce target distance.
Drag-and-pop , for example, temporarily brings potential targets closer to the pointer.
Other techniques use endpoint prediction to make the cursor automatically jump over empty spaces and potential distractors .
The ninja cursors  reduce D in yet another way by attaching multiple cursors to the same device and using knowledge about the targets to resolve pointing ambiguities.
Different methods have also been proposed to increase target width.
Expanding targets , for example, dynamically grow to provide a larger area to interact with at the focus of attention.
Expansion usually occurs in visual space, but sometimes also in control space .
Research has also shown that the W term of Fitts' law can apply to the width of the cursor, rather than that of the target, which led to the design of different area cursors .
A problem with the above techniques is that they are often visually distracting because of the displacement, growing or shrinking of objects.
Other techniques have been proposed that preserve the display by operating only in control space.
Described as semantic pointing  or using a stickiness or force field metaphor, these control space techniques operate by adapting the CD gain  or warping the cursor .
The CD gain is typically reduced when the cursor is over targets or approaching them, thereby expanding them in control space.
Warping the cursor additionally supports trajectory adjustments in any direction.
A particular case of CD gain adaptation is described in , where it is not used to reduce D or increase W but to create a "cursor-catching effect".
By requiring more movement effort to leave than to enter the target centre without increasing the total amount of effort to enter and leave the target area, the proposed dynamic cursor gain preserves the pointing task's index of difficulty.
CD gain adaptation can be seen as a feedback mechanism in this context, rather than a Fitts' law optimization enabler, an approach that was also used to successfully simulate haptic percepts .
The perceived feeling, caused by a squeeze film effect , has been used recently to simulate bumps and holes .
Electrovibration has also been shown to support similar sensations .
In contrast to traditional vibrotactile approaches, devices based on these technologies provide information passively, acting as texture displays : they do not transfer energy to the user but modify how energy is dissipated within the contact area by a user-initiated friction process.
Target-aware pointing techniques tend to work best on sparse layouts.
For intrinsic reasons, many of them do not scale well to situations where multiple potential targets are closely packed together .
In real-world applications however, locally dense clusters of potential targets emerge for various reasons .
Surprisingly, although the problem is clearly identified in the literature, little research has been done to systematically evaluate the impact of distractors on existing techniques or design new ones that take them into account.
Among the studies of control space techniques and haptic feedback we discussed, a few took distractors explicitly into account - although in limited ways.
One variable of the experiments described in  and  was the presence or absence of a single distractor along the target path .
The second experiment described in  displayed 13 targets arranged in a cross shape and required the user to randomly move from one to another, all the others acting as potentially avoidable distractors.
The second experiment described in  is one of the very few that evaluated the impact of multiple distractors on a control space technique  and tactile feedback in a simple ecological task .
Results from all these studies suggest a negative impact of distractors on movement time, error rate, or user satisfaction.
All the authors recommend further investigation.
The plate is coated with a thin plastic layer to make finger contact more comfortable.
It vibrates at the ultrasonic frequency of 28.55 kHz and thus emits no perceptible noise during operation.
Since the frequency is outside skin mechanoreceptors' bandwidth, users do not feel the vibration.
Instead, they feel its effect on tribological contact mechanisms: the touchpad feels more slippery as one raises the vibration amplitude.
Traditional touchpad sensors are incompatible with the squeeze film effect due to the relatively high voltage and frequencies .
A custom-made optical sensor is thus used to locate the user's finger.
The sensor was built from two white LEDs, three mirrors and a linear 200 dpi CCD array.
The final resolution of the sensor is 170 dpi due to optical constraints and post-treatments.
The serial line allows to specify the desired coefficient of friction by controling the amplitude at a rate up to 120 Hz using a 7-bit encoded integer between 0  and 127 .
Previous research has clearly demonstrated the potential of control space techniques and haptic feedback for pointing facilitation.
Yet, the impact of distractors on these techniques remains largely unknown.
At the same time, recent advances in haptic technologies offer significant promise for supporting a wider range of sensations and thus more subtle barehand interactions.
All these elements contributed to our initial motivation for the Surfpad technique, which relies on a particular device, the STIMTAC .
The STIMTAC is a touchpad-like device based on the squeeze film effect described above.
The tactile plate is made of 36 piezoelectric cells bonded on a 79 mm x 49 mm copper-beryllium plate.
This monomorph structure constitutes a mechanical resonator excited by a 40 V sinusoidal voltage provided by a 0.5 W power supply .
Tactile feedback through the STIMTAC builds on the relative displacement that exists between a fingertip and a surface when a user is probing for friction.
A user moving a finger on the switched-off plate will find it hard, smooth, and not sticky.
But, because of its high level of friction, the skin will be stretched laterally, which will become obvious at any direction change.
Once the squeeze film effect is activated, the surface retains its original properties but with the reduced friction, the skin becomes less stretched.
The sensation can approach the feeling of touching a silk scarf.
Considering these new possibilities, we were excited to investigate ways in which they could be used for pointing facilitation.
Influenced by the related work, we started with the idea of designing a target-aware technique.
As we saw, many of these techniques operate by modifying the mechanics of motion around targets in the virtual world  or in the physical one .
The purpose of the modifications is to facilitate pointing and the desired result is to slow down the cursor or guide its movements.
In fact, existing techniques can be thought of as increasing the friction of specific objects.
The STIMTAC can only reduce friction.
In order to increase it on specific objects, one needs to decrease it everywhere else.
The technique we propose originates from this figureground reversal in pointing facilitation: instead of slowing down the cursor around targets, why not facilitate its movement on the background?
While most target-aware techniques tend to ignore the background, ours is backgroundaware.
A surfing metaphor seemed appropriate, the low friction background corresponding to the ocean, the objects to the shore, and the finger-controlled cursor to the board.
The Surfpad technique uses the programmable squeeze film effect of the STIMTAC to reduce the touchpad's coefficient of friction at all times except when the cursor is over a target.
We have implemented it in two ways.
Targets were rendered as solid vertical bars equidistant from the center of the display in opposite directions along the horizontal axis.
The target to be selected was colored green , and the previous one gray .
The cursor was represented by a one-pixel-thick vertical black line .
If a participant missed a target, a sound was heard and an error was logged.
Participants had to successfully select the current target before moving to the next one, even if it required multiple clicks.
The pointer was not constrained to screen bounds to avoid using the edges to facilitate target acquisition.
Participants used the left Ctrl key on a keyboard with their non-dominant hand to select targets.
After each block of trials, a cumulative error rate was displayed and a message encouraged participants to conform to an approximately 4% error rate by speeding up or slowing down.
The goal of this first experiment is to investigate the effect of Surfpad on performance in a pointing task and compare it to target-aware CD gain adaptation and constant CD gain in the absence of distractors.
We used the Semantic Pointing technique  for target-aware CD gain adaptation as it is well documented and considered as a reference in this domain.
A repeated measures within-subjects design was used.
The independent variables were the technique used  and the target distance  and width .
The index of difficulty thus ranged from 2.8 to 6.6.
The techniques were constant CD gain with no actuation of the STIMTAC , constant CD gain with full actuation of the STIMTAC , Semantic Pointing using the  step function , Semantic Pointing using the  mixing function , Surfpad and Surfpad.
For Semantic Pointing, we chose to quadruple the size of targets in motor space as this was reported by Blanch et al.
But while they had set their baseline CD gain to 1, we instead used one of 2 for all techniques to reduce clutching2 with the largest distance considering the dimensions of our input surface.
The STIMTAC device described in the previous section was used as the input device for all the techniques to eliminate extraneous intra-devices differences such as ergonomics, size and sensitivity.
The experiment was coded in C++ and OpenGL.
The frequency of the visual and haptic renderings were 60 Hz and 120 Hz respectively.
Participants had a few minutes to get used to the device in the Control condition before starting the experiment.
Each B LOCK consisted of 27 trials: 3 repetitions of the 9 D ISTANCExW IDTH combinations.
The D ISTANCE and W IDTH were presented in descending order.
The presentation order of T ECHNIQUE was counterbalanced across participants using a Latin Square design.
Participants were encouraged to take a break every 9 trials.
The experiment lasted approximately 50 minutes.
In summary, the experimental design was: 12 participants x 6 T ECHNIQUE x 4 B LOCKS x 3 D ISTANCE x 3 W IDTH x 3 trials = 7, 776 total trials.
Targets that were not selected on the first attempt were marked as errors.
Participants emphasized speed over accuracy with an overall error rate of 6.5%.
Movement time is the main dependent measure and is defined as the time taken to move from a target to the next one and click on it.
Targets marked as errors were removed from the timing analysis.
We also considered trials at least three standard deviations away from the mean for each T ECHNIQUExD ISTANCExW IDTH condition as outliers and removed them from the data analysis .
A repeated measures ANOVA showed that the presentation order of T ECHNIQUE had no significant effect or interaction on movement time, indicating that a within-participants design was appropriate.
We also found no significant effect or interaction for B LOCK indicating there was no presence of a learning effect.
Pairwise comparisons showed no significant difference between Surfpad and Surfpad , but while Surfpad was significantly different from all the other techniques , Surfpad was only significantly different from SemPoint and SemPoint .
No significant difference was found between SemPoint and SemPoint, but significant differences were found between these variants and the others techniques .
No significant difference was found between Control and Control-, but significant differences were found between these two techniques and the others 
Subsequent pairwise comparisons showed significant differences between the techniques as W IDTH gets smaller.
For WL , there was no significant difference between techniques except between Surfpad and Surfpad .
For WM and WS , we observed similar patterns.
There was no significant difference between the two control conditions and no significant difference between SemPoint and SemPoint.
For WM and WS , Surfpad, SemPoint and SemPoint significantly improved movement time compared to the two control conditions .
On these target sizes, SemPoint and SemPoint were significantly better than Surfpad .
To better understand the effects observed on movement time, we split it in three parts: approaching time, stopping time and click time.
As we noticed participants clutching during the experiment, we also analyzed the corresponding time.
Approaching time is the time between the beginning of the movement and the instant the target border is crossed.
Pairwise comparisons showed significant differences between the techniques in a trend similar to the one observed for movement time.
In particular, SemPoint, SemPoint and Surfpad showed a significantly lower approaching time compared to the two control conditions .
Pairwise comparisons showed that approaching time increased with larger target distances and smaller target widths.
More surprisingly the T ECHNIQUExW IDTH interaction exhibited a different behavior for SemPoint and SemPoint for WL with a significantly higher approaching time compared to Control, Control- and Surfpad .
This result might explain why no significant difference was found for the movement time on WL between the Semantic Pointing variants and the two control conditions.
We also observed significant differences between Surfpad and the two control conditions .
These results might partially explain the significant differences observed for the movement time.
Click time is the time during which the pointer remains still before the button is pressed.
This result might explain the significant difference observed between the Semantic Pointing variants and Surfpad for the movement time.
The experiment compared six techniques with the same baseline CD gain.
No significant difference was found between the two control conditions.
Our results show that Surfpad and the two Semantic Pointing variants significantly improve performance by 8.8% and 17.7% respectively, compared to the control conditions.
Surfpad did not result in any significant performance improvement compared to the control conditions.
Results also show that these differences can be explained by a significant decrease in approaching time and stopping time for Surfpad, SemPoint and SemPoint compared to the control conditions, and a significant decrease in click time for SemPoint and SemPoint compared to the other techniques.
This inclines us to conclude that the friction reduction provided by the full actuation of the STIMTAC does not help to achieve faster movements.
The approaching time is significantly lower for SemPoint and SemPoint than for the control conditions.
As the step function and the bell-shaped mixing function operate only in the close vicinity of the targets, we assume this is the consequence of an anticipation phenomenon already observed in the use of expanding targets .
The approaching time is also significantly lower for Surfpad than for the control conditions.
As friction reduction does not help to achieve faster movements, we assume this is also caused by anticipation of some later perceivable effect.
Since the approaching time for Surfpad is not significantly different from the control conditions, the perceived effect must be inherent to the  function and incompatible with the  one.
Our results show a significantly lower stopping time for Surfpad compared to the control conditions.
We hypothesize two reasons for this:  a mechanical braking effect related to the friction increase, or  tactile information feedback, i.e.
From a mechanical perspective, the braking effect of H1 should also be observed with Surfpad, which was not the case.
H1 is also contradicted by the fact that Surfpad is more efficient on small target sizes where it should be more difficult to take advantage of a mechanical effect.
We thus favor the second hypothesis, H2, which is also supported by previous evidence that the addition of tactile information can reduce response times by providing a confirmation without the need for visual attention .
We wanted to investigate if it can also be provided by a sudden decrease of friction.
We call this condition AntiSurfpad: the friction is minimal if the cursor is over a target, and maximal otherwise.
The apparatus and task for this experiment were the same as in the first one.
The techniques were Control, Surfpad and Anti-Surfpad.
Nine participants with a mean age of 27.3  took part in the experiment .
The significant interaction showed that Anti-Surfpad increased the movement time for all target widths .
Surfpad significantly improved performance compared to Control and Anti-Surfpad for WS and WM .
We again hypothesize two reasons for this:  a negative mechanical effect stronger than the information feedback, or  counter-effective information feedback.
Further experimentation is needed to validate these compatible hypotheses.
We observed a significant interaction between target sizes and techniques on movement time.
Compared to the two control conditions, the mean movement time for target sizes WM and WS is reduced by 8.8% for Surfpad and 17.7% for the Semantic Pointing variants.
Yet the three techniques fall short for WL although according to Blanch et al., Semantic Pointing reduces the index of difficulty in motor space independently of target width .
Although clutching remained limited, we hypothesize that the slightly higher amount of it observed for WL may have disrupted finger movements.
Further experiments are required to validate this hypothesis.
Still, the more pronounced effect of Surfpad as target width decreases agrees with results from previous work on tactile feedback .
In Experiment 1, we showed that Surfpad and the Semantic Pointing variants significantly improve the movement time compared to the two control conditions, especially for small target sizes.
The goal of this third experiment was to investigate the impact of distractors on the Surfpad and Semantic Pointing techniques.
As we found no significant difference between SemPoint and SemPoint in Experiment 1, we decided to focus on SemPoint which is the implementation described in .
We also decided to focus on Surfpad since it showed significant differences with the control conditions in Experiment 1 while Surfpad did not show any.
Surfpad and Semantic Pointing will thus refer to Surfpad and SemPoint in this section.
Lastly, as we found no significant difference between Control and Control-, we decided to focus on Control which corresponds to the default state of the STIMTAC.
Results from Experiment 1 suggest that the performance improvement observed with Surfpad is the result of information feedback provided by the sudden increase of friction when the cursor crosses the target border.
This second exFriction depends on control input nonlinearly for variable friction devices.
In the case of the STIMTAC however, the non-linearity is negligible.
The difference between the integrals of Surfpad and Surfpad is below 1%.
Targets marked as errors were removed from the timing analysis.
Trials at least three standard deviations away from the mean for each condition were considered as outliers and also removed from the data analysis .
A repeated measures ANOVA showed that the order of presentation of T ECHNIQUE had no significant effect or interaction on movement time, indicating that a within-participants design was appropriate.
We also found no significant effect or interaction for B LOCK indicating there was no presence of a learning effect.
As predicted by Fitts' law, a repeated measures ANOVA found a significant effect of W IDTH  on movement time with the smaller width increasing the movement time.
Pairwise comparison showed significant differences  between all techniques: 2.1s for Control, 2.9s for Semantic Pointing, and 1.9s for Surfpad.
It shows that Surfpad improves performance by 9.5% compared to Control and 52.6% compared to Semantic Pointing.
Semantic Pointing deteriorates performance by 38.1% compared to Control.
Subsequent pairwise comparison for the significant T ECH NIQUE x D ENSITY interaction showed that the degradation of performance for Semantic Pointing increased with D ENSITY.
No significant difference between techniques was found for density 0, but we found significant differences  between Control and Surfpad for densities greater than 1.
No significant difference was found between D ENSITY levels for Control and Surfpad.
Targets were rendered as solid vertical bars equidistant from the center of the display in opposite directions along the horizontal axis.
The target to be selected was colored green  and the last target gray .
The cursor was represented by a onepixel-thick vertical black line .
Distractors  were evenly spaced between the targets  and  and were also colored gray.
A repeated measures within-subjects design was used.
The independent variables were T ECHNIQUE, target width  and distractor density .
The distractors were evenly spaced between the extremum targets with a size equal to WL across all conditions.
We used this width and these densities for distractors as they are representative of buttons size and densities in toolbars or menus.
The target distance was kept constant to 100 mm to allow evaluating the different distractor densities while keeping a reasonably small amount of clutching.
Participants had a few minutes to get used to the device in the Control condition before starting the experiment.
Each B LOCK consisted of 36 trials: 3 repetitions of the 6 D ENSITY x 2 W IDTH combinations.
The W IDTH was presented in descending order and the D ENSITY in ascending order.
The presentation order of T ECHNIQUE was counterbalanced across participants using a Latin Square design.
Participants were encouraged to take a break after every 6 trials.
The experiment lasted approximately 35 minutes.
We define overshooting as the distance traveled past the extend of the target.
A repeated measures ANOVA showed no significant main effect or interaction on the overshooting distance.
The mean overshooting distance was equal to 1.7 mm  and the 90th percentile was equal to 4.8 mm.
The 90th percentile for overshooting was equal to 3.7 mm in Experiment 1 and 3.4 mm in Experiment 2.
Considering this relatively small overshooting distance, users' strategy to acquire the target was probably not to overshoot the target and then correct to select it.
Such a situation typically occurs in hierarchical menus .
If the device operating range is set to cover the entire display surface without clutching, multiplying the distance by the scale factor in motor space will inevitably lead to clutching and a deterioration of performance.
There was no negative effect of distractors on Surfpad which still showed a significant improvement of 9.5% on movement time compared to Control in their presence.
This reinforces our belief that the Surfpad implementation mainly provides information feedback and little or no mechanical effect.
Participants did not make any negative comment on the tactile feedback associated to distractors.
This makes Surfpad a good alternative to Semantic Pointing and probably target-aware CD gain adaptation in general, especially for limited workspaces where clutching is likely to occur in presence of distractors.
Most of participants comments on Semantic Pointing concerned the clutching required to move the pointer, especially when the number of distractors becomes important.
Participants did not spontaneously comment on distractors for Surfpad.
After debriefing, they explained they did not feel disrupted in their movement by the tactile feedback on distractors.
Participants were also asked which technique they would use.
Eleven chose Surfpad and one chose Control.
We compared Surfpad to Control and Semantic Pointing in the same conditions as in the first experiment with additional control on the density of distractors.
Our results show that Surfpad significantly improves the movement time by 9.5% compared to Control, independently of the density of distractors.
In contrast, we showed that Semantic Pointing significantly degrades the movement time compared to Control with a rate related to the density of distractors .
Results show that the significant increase in clutching for Semantic Pointing compared to Surfpad and Control can be held responsible to its significant increase of movement time.
We presented Surfpad, a new pointing facilitation technique based on STIMTAC, a tactile touchpad that supports friction reduction.
Surfpad preserves the nominal coefficient of friction of the touchpad when the cursor is on targets but reduces it in all other places.
We reported on three experiments comparing it to Semantic Pointing and constant CD gain.
Our results show that Surfpad leads to a performance improvement close to 9% compared to unassisted pointing on small targets without distractors.
It is also robust to high distractor densities, keeping an average performance improvement of nearly 10% whereas the performance of Semantic Pointing can degrade up to 100% due to increased clutching caused by distractor expansion in motor space.
Our results also show that Surfpad needs to be implemented using a step function  to improve performance.This implementation provides a sudden reduction in the amount of friction when the pointer crosses the target border which, we hypothesize, results in an information feedback that helps users reduce the approaching and stopping times.
Surfpad's robustness to distractors is particularly novel.
This characteristic has exciting implications since it no longer requires the careful determination of targets to enable a pointing facilitation technique.
Our prototype STIMTAC device can be easily carried for demonstrations, but it is still too large to incorporate in a mobile computing device such as a laptop.
New prototypes are being developed which use more compact sensing techniques.
Once the size is reduced, its low power consumption  makes it feasible to use in place of a conventional laptop touchpad.
However, the tactile feedback it provides is intrinsically mono-touch.
The extension to multi-touch will be addressed as future work.
