Counting using one's fingers is a potentially intuitive way to enumerate a list of items and lends itself naturally to gesturebased menu systems.
In this paper, we present the results of the first comprehensive study on Finger-Count menus to investigate its usefulness as a viable option for 3D menu selection tasks.
Our study compares 3D gesture-based finger counting  with two gesture-based menu selection techniques , derived from existing motion-controlled video game menu selection strategies, as well as 3D Marking menus.
We examined selection time, selection accuracy and user preference for all techniques.
We also examined the impact of different spatial layouts for menu items and different menu depths.
Our results indicate that Finger-Count menus are significantly faster than the other menu techniques we tested and are the most liked by participants.
Additionally, we found that while Finger-Count menus and 3D Marking menus have similar selection accuracy, Finger-Count menus are almost twice as fast compared to 3D Marking menus.
Menu systems are an integral component of any video game and can significantly impact user experience.
Due to the availability of various unobtrusive motion sensing devices , many gesture based menu systems  have been explored both in academia and commercially in recent years.
However, these menu selection methods are often slow  to perform and can suffer from accuracy problems making them less desirable compared to traditional keyboard-mouse or button based menu systems.
Since response time and ease of use of a menu system can significantly affect user experience in applications , it is essential that they be fast, efficient, and not be a burden on the user while setting up and during play.
People often use fingers to count or enumerate a list of items.
In the past, such finger-counting strategies have been investigated for interaction with multi-touch surfaces  and distant displays .
However, a gestural input system based on finger count gestures  also holds the potential to be a natural and intuitive approach for menu selection in gesture- and motion-based games .
We posit that using one's fingers for menu selection offers several distinct advantages.
First, finger count gestures are easily understood  and are fast to perform.
Second, users do not need to move the cursor to different locations on the screen since finger count gestures are not dependent on the layout of menu items.
Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Based on these suppositions, we explored the utility of finger count gestures in two user evaluations.
First, we compared a finger count based menu selection approach  against two other gestural menu selection techniques  adapted from existing motion controlled video games.
We examined both menu depth and different menu layouts.
In this evaluation, both menu selection strategies also had an expert selection mode .
In both experiments, we examined selection time, accuracy, and user preference.
We based our implementation of 3D Marking menus on multi-stroke Marking menus  because of its higher selection accuracy.
Researchers have also explored selection performance of several layouts for menu items on screen.
A similar result was obtained by Komerska and Ware  for their haptic menu system designed for Fishtank VR.
The results of all these studies are in line with Fitts's law , as pie layouts provide a smaller average distance to menu items.
Several menu techniques have been proposed for virtual environments.
TULIP  menus assign a menu item to each finger of a pinch glove and selection is made by pinching a finger with the thumb.
To select an item using the rapMenu, the user rotates his wrist to highlight a group of four menu items and then a finger is pinched with the thumb.
Spin menus  arrange items on a portion of a circle and enabled selection by rotating the wrist in a horizontal plane.
Their system used a workbench from BARCO and an Intersense IS900 Tracker with a wand as an interaction device.
Ring menus  also arrange items in a circle and attached a tracking device to the user's hand.
To select an item, users would rotate their hand and move the desired item into a selection bucket.
Body centered menus  assign menu items to parts of a user's body .
These menus do not support hierarchical menu items and due to limited mapping locations on body, the number of menu items is also limited.
All these techniques use expensive hardware and are not feasible options for consumer oriented products.
For our experiments, we used the Creative Interactive Gesture Camera  for gesture input.
However, it should be noted that the techniques examined in this paper can be implemented using any input device that can recognize hands and fingers.
To best of our knowledge, this work is the first to systematically explore the usefulness of finger-based menu selection, especially with relevance to menu item layout and hierarchy, given prior Finger-Count menu selection approaches were not fast enough for thorough user testing.
As mentioned in the introduction, menu systems based on finger counting are not a new technique.
Finger-Count menus were first proposed for multi-touch surfaces .
They were later adapted for distant displays , using the Kinect as the gestural input device.
However, the algorithm presented by  is too slow  to be used in realistic scenarios.
Additionally, the technique was limited to a circular layout and required both hands & multiple gestures to select an item.
We have improved the selection time of this technique by simplifying it to use a single gesture for selection and by using a faster finger recognition algorithm , resulting in an average selection time that is more suitable for our user evaluations and practical use.
Vision-based hand and finger recognition algorithms have been explored by many researchers.
The Kinect is a popular choice as input device for some of these algorithms .
All these techniques are mostly focused on algorithm design and not on investigating interesting interaction mechanisms based on finger gestures.
Marking menus proposed by Kurtenbach  are gesture based menus where the menu items are arranged in a circle and selection is performed by drawing a mark from the center of the menu towards the desired item.
Marking menus support two modes: novice and expert.
In novice mode, the user selects a menu item from a circular menu displayed on a screen.
In expert mode, the menu is not displayed, forcing a user to trace a continuous sequence of marks from memory, which is then recognized by the system.
FlowMenus by Guimbretiere and Winograd  are also based on the Marking menu.
FlowMenus let users make a sequence of selections without moving the pen away from the touch surface but no user evaluations were done as part of this work.
This section describes the Hand-n-Hold menu, Thumbs-Up menu, Finger-Count menu, and 3D Marking menu.
All these techniques were implemented using a finger/hand recognition algorithm adapted from the fingertip/hand detection algorithm included in the Intel's Perceptual Computing SDK .
The main properties of these menu techniques are summarized in Table 1.
The Creative Interactive Gesture Camera operates at an input frequency of 30 frames per second.
We delineate the beginning and end of a selection event by utilizing a frame window of 15 frames to help with segmentation.
Thus, each technique requires the user to maintain the selection pose for 0.5 seconds.
We chose to use the fist for pointing at menu items because it is extremely easy to transition into the Thumbs-Up gesture from the pointing stance.
This technique is similar to Hand-nHold in that both require the user to point to an item and then confirm the selection.
Hand-n-Hold implements an implicit confirmation mechanism based on a timeout while ThumbsUp requires explicit confirmation from a user.
Like Hand-nHold, this technique is layout dependent, and consequently, its efficiency also depends in part on the spatial arrangement of menu items.
It is important to note that while we chose to use a fist for pointing at menu items, theoretically, any hand posture can be used for this purpose, followed by any other gesture for confirmation.
In this technique, users control a cursor by moving their hand in the air .
The position of the cursor on screen is directly related to the 2D position of their hand in a virtual plane.
A menu item is selected by holding the cursor over the desired item for a short duration .
If the menu item has a sub-menu then the sub-menu appears in place .
The sub-menu items are selected in the same manner as the main menu.
This technique requires visual feedback and supports any layout  of items.
As a pointer based technique, the efficiency of this menu technique is dependent in part on how the items are arranged on screen.
A user holds her fist in front of the input device .
The user then has to move her fist either horizontally, vertically or radially in a virtual plane, depending on the layout, to highlight an item corresponding to their fist position and then give a thumbs up gesture to confirm the selection.
Sub-menus appear in place and the selection strategy is the same for submenus.
Visual feedback is also required for this technique.
All the menu items are numbered and the user has to extend a corresponding number of fingers to select a given item .
Items can be arranged in any layout and sub-menus appear in place.
We tested three different layouts: horizontal, vertical and circular for this technique.
Eyes-free selection is supported since visual feedback is not needed as long as the user knows the corresponding number of the desired item.
In novice mode, the menu appears on screen with a number displayed next to each item and the user has to extend a corresponding number of fingers to select an item.
In expert mode, the menu does not appear but the selection strategy is the same as novice mode.
Expert mode supports a series of finger gestures  to get to an item under a sub-menu.
This techniques supports using both hands simultaneously, so we can have up to 10 items on screen at a time.
In case there are more items, we can label the last item as "Next" indicating that there are more items.
If the user selects "Next" then more items appear on screen in place of the original menu.
We can extend this idea to include any number of items.
Our 3D Marking menu design is based on the multistroke Marking menu  because of its higher selection accuracy.
The 3D Marking menu gestures are easy to learn and menu item locations can be remembered easily due to spatial memory .
In this technique, the user performs a series of simple gestures instead of a compound stroke.
Menu items are always presented to the user in a circular layout.
To select an item, the user positions her fist in the center of the menu and moves it towards the desired item, followed by a thumbs up gesture to finalize the selection.
Sub-menus appear in place and the selection strategy is the same as the main menu.
In novice mode, the menu appears on screen and a single selection is made at a time.
In expert mode, the menu is not shown and the user has to perform the required gestures to select an item from memory.
We conducted two experiments to evaluate the usefulness of Finger-Count menus.
Our first experiment focused on comparing Finger-Count menus with Hand-n-Hold and ThumbsUp menu selection techniques.
We also conducted a second experiment to compare Finger-Count menus with 3D Marking menus.
We chose to conduct two experiments because 3D Marking menus support only circular layouts and were very different from Hand-n-Hold and Thumbs-Up.
In our pilot tests with two participants, we found the Finger-Count menu to be the fastest technique, therefore we chose to compare only Finger-Count menus with 3D Marking menus.
We chose a within-subjects design for our experiments in order to be able to measure and compare user perceptions of the menu selection techniques on a variety of quantitative and qualitative metrics.
All menu items were labeled with numbers in our experiments.
The setup and participants were the same for both experiments.
Participants completed both experiments in order  in a single session.
We had the following hypotheses about the chosen menu selection techniques: Hypothesis 1  : Finger-Count menus are faster than the other menu techniques.
Hypothesis 2  : Finger-Count menus have higher selection accuracy than the other menu techniques.
Hypothesis 3  : People will prefer to use Finger-Count Menus than the other techniques.
We used the Unity3D game engine  and Intel Perceptual Computing Software Development Kit   for implementing all four menu techniques.
Participants were seated about 3 feet away from the display and the camera was placed about 1.5 feet away from the participant, in order to ensure that the participant's hand was completely visible to the camera.
The position of the camera was changed either to the left or right of the participant, while maintaining the distance from the participant, based on dexterity  in order to enable optimal viewing of the menu items on screen.
The experiment began with the participant seated in front of the TV and the moderator seated to the side.
Participants were given a consent form that explained the experiment procedure.
They were then given a pre-questionnaire which collected general information about the participant .
Participants then completed both experiments in order.
At the beginning of each experiment, the moderator explained the selection techniques and allowed the user to practice each technique for as long as necessary.
Details of experiment tasks are provided in the respective sub-sections of the experiments.
We recorded selection time and accuracy of all the techniques presented in both experiments.
For both experiments, selection time was measured as the time from when a random number appeared on screen to the time the corresponding item was selected.
Selection accuracy of a technique was measured as the percentage of correct selections out of total selections made for that technique.
After each experiment, the participant filled out a post-questionnaire  with questions about their experiences with the techniques they tried.
We recruited 36 participants  from the University of Central Florida, of which two were left handed.
The experiment duration ranged from 50 to 70 minutes and all participants were paid $10 for their time.
The experiment setup, shown in Figure 5, consisted of a 55" Sony HDTV and the Creative Interactive Gesture Camera 
The first experiment compared Hand-n-Hold, Thumbs-Up, and Finger-Count menus.
All these techniques support horizontal, vertical and circular layouts.
Hand-n-Hold and Thumbs-Up only support single handed interactions.
As a result, we chose to use a one handed variation of the FingerCount menu in order to remove a potential confounding variable.
Participants responded to question 1-8 on a 7 point Likert scale.
Question 9 was a multiple choice question.
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q5 Q6 Q7 Q8 Q9 Post Experiment Questions To what extent did you like this menu selection technique?
How mentally demanding was this technique?
To what extent your arm was tired when using this technique?
Did you feel hurried or rushed when using this technique?
How successfully you were able to choose the items you were asked to select?
Did you feel that you were trying your best?
To what extent you felt frustrated using this technique?
To what extent did you feel that this technique was hard to use?
Which layout of menu items would you prefer for this technique?
Horizontal, vertical, circular or all equally?
This within-subjects experiment had 3 independent variables: technique , layout  and menu depth .
In total we had 3 x 3 x 2 = 18 conditions and for each condition the user conducted 10 trials which makes a total of 180 selections per participant as part of this experiment.
Our dependent variables were average menu selection time and selection accuracy, where the average is taken over the 10 trials for that condition.
Each condition was presented to the user in random order based on a Latin square design .
For each condition, users were asked to select 10 randomly generated items displayed on screen one item at a time.
After completing the experiment, users filled a post-questionnaire  with the same set of questions for each technique and then ranked the techniques based on ease of use, arm fatigue, efficiency, and overall best.
To analyze the Likert scale data, we used Friedman's test and then a post-hoc analysis was done using Wilcoxon signed rank tests.
These results are displayed in Table 3.
Median rating for post-questionnaire questions 1 to 8 is summarized in Figure 12.
From the results we an see that: * People liked Hand-n-Hold and Finger-Count more compared to Thumbs-Up.
Based on the post-questionnaire data, 22 people preferred the circular layout for the Hand-n-Hold menu, 21 preferred the horizontal layout for the Thumbs-Up menu, and 32 people thought that all layouts were equivalent for the Finger-Count menu .
The Finger-Count menu was ranked as the overall best technique and the Thumbs-Up menu as the worst technique.
The Finger-Count menu was also ranked as best  in terms of ease of use, efficiency and arm fatigue .
This experiment focused on comparing the Finger-Count menu with a 3D Marking menu.
3D Marking menus support only a circular layout, so we restricted the Finger-Count menu to a circular layout for a fair comparison.
Menu depth for this experiment was set to one in order to the keep the same environment for both novice and expert mode.
Our second within-subjects experiment had two independent variables: technique  and user mode .
There were a total of 2 x 2 = 4 conditions with 10 trials for each making it a total of 40 selections per participant.
Our dependent variables were average menu selection time and average selection accuracy, where the average is taken over 10 trials for that condition.
Each condition was presented to the user in a random order based on a Latin square design .
In novice mode, users were asked to select 10 randomly generated items.
In expert mode, a sequence of two numbers were generated for each trial and users were asked to pick the corresponding items in order.
After completing the experiment, users filled out a post-questionnaire  with the same set of questions for each technique.
A repeated-measures 2-factor ANOVA was used per dependent variable.
We did a post-hoc analysis using pairwise sample t-tests.
We used Holm's sequential Bonferroni adjustment to correct for type I errors  and the Shapiro-Wilk test to make sure the data was parametric.
Table 4 shows the results of repeated measures two-factor ANOVA analysis.
Overall, there was no significant difference in selection accuracy between the menu techniques .
The 3D Marking menu also lead to significantly more arm fatigue than the FingerCount menu .
People thought that using the Finger-Count menu let them select items with significantly higher accuracy than the 3D Marking menu .
People also felt significantly less frustrated with the Finger-Count menu than the 3D Marking menu .
Statistics for expert mode were similar to novice mode .
3D Marking menu usage also lead to significantly more arm fatigue than the FingerCount menu .
People thought that when using Finger-Count menus they were able to select items with significantly higher accuracy than with the 3D Marking menu .
Hold, Thumbs-Up or 3D Marking menus.
This is primarily because Finger-Count menus do not require the user to move their hand in accordance with the position of items on screen, resulting in a constant selection time for all items.
For Handn-Hold menus, the second-fastest technique, the user has to continuously move his hand to select an item, increasing the selection time.
Thumbs-Up not only requires a user to move his hand for selecting a menu item, but to also give a thumb's up gesture to finalize the selection.
3D Marking menus have similar hand motion characteristics as Thumbs-Up, as both techniques require hand motion and then an explicit thumbsup gesture to finalize item selection.
This additional motion and a gesture takes significantly more time than simply extending one's fingers.
We found that Hand-n-Hold was the most accurate out of all selection techniques tested because it involves controlling a pointer with one's hand with implicit finalization, making it less error prone than recognizing extended fingers or the thumb's up gesture.
Even though Hand-n-Hold is the most accurate technique, we found that users preferred Finger-Count menus more because of its faster selection time and its natural interaction metaphor.
In the future, we foresee better selection accuracy for Finger-Count menus due to the availability of better gestural input devices and recognition algorithms.
Our analysis of menu item layout presents an interesting picture.
Finger-Count menus have a constant selection time and are not at all affected by the layout of menu items.
When using Hand-n-Hold with horizontal and vertical layouts, participants occasionally tended to accidentally bump into wrong items while moving the pointer to a desired item, resulting in a wrong selection.
But with circular layouts, they could keep the pointer inside the circle and reach all menu items at the periphery without accidentally selecting other items.
For Thumbs-Up, we found that horizontal layouts resulted in faster selection and increased selection accuracy.
We believe this is primarily because a person's arm has a more natural and relaxed posture when moved horizontally.
In the case of vertical and circular layouts, participants often oriented their hand in such a way that their thumb was not pointing upwards making it difficult for the gesture recognizer to identify it as a thumb's up gesture.
This orientation decreased the mean selection accuracy in these layouts for Thumbs-Up.
For Finger-Count menus, three fingers can present a possibly difficult combination for detection because users in our experiments tended to keep the middle finger and ring finger close enough to be detected as a single finger.
However, detecting the number four proved easier because participants automatically provided sufficient spacing to alleviate confusion in the recognizer.
This issue can also be remedied by using both hands simultaneously .
Our implementation of Finger-Count menus support using both hands simultaneously.
But since the other techniques in our study were single handed only, we restricted Finger-Count menus to use single hand interaction for a fair comparison.
Our subjective responses indicate that Finger-Count menus were the most preferred and most efficient, had the least arm fatigue, and was the least frustrating technique.
This seems promising for future games and applications with short range gestural input.
Participants were impressed by the selection time of the Finger-Count menus.
The second most preferred technique was Hand-n-Hold because of its ease of use and high accuracy.
People are used to controlling a pointer using a mouse and this technique seems familiar to them.
People did not like Thumbs-Up because of high error rate.
Participants thought that 3D Marking menus are more mentally demanding than the Finger-Count menu.
This is because for Finger-Count menus, the user does not have to worry about the location of items on screen.
This fact is much more noticeable in expert mode where the menu does not appear on screen.
For 3D Marking menus, people need to memorize the location of items with respect to the center to be able to perform a radial mark to select the desired item.
Finger-Count menus were rated as less frustrating and most liked technique than the 3D Marking menu.
Based on the results of our experiments, we were able to accept H1, H3 and were unable to accept H2.
Consequently, we believe that Finger-Count menus have the potential to be used as a menu system in future 3D gesture controlled applications and video games.
Finger-Count menus have a very low response time making users spend a minimal amount of time interacting with menus.
All the Finger-Count gestures are intuitive and easy to remember.
Both casual and expert gamers could use this technique with a limited learning curve.
Once players get used to the menu system, they can transition to expert mode and can change game setting 
It could also be a good idea to mix traditional mouse based menus with Finger-Count menus.
Mouse pointer menus could be used to select game settings at the beginning of a game and FingerCount menus for changing in-game settings while playing.
For example, in a gesture controlled car racing game, a user can set display resolution, select a track and car using traditional menus.
While racing, he can switch between first person view to third person view using Finger-Count menus.
Similarly, a user could select weapons from an inventory for a First Person Shooter  games using Finger-Count menus.
Finger-count menus could be combined with other hand gestures to increase the number of possible gestures thereby increasing the number of possible motion controlled tasks in video games.
There are a few factors that could have affected our results.
When comparing layouts for a given technique, items were equally spaced for a given layout but the item spacing was not the same across the three layouts.
It could have a minor effect on our results but we still believe that horizontal layout would be slightly faster than vertical layout for hand based interaction because a person's arm has more natural and relaxed posture when moved horizontally.
The shape of the menu items could also have had some influence on how well users perform in an horizontal or vertical layout.
Hence, circular menu items were not considered to simulate real world menu items.
Our study design could also have had an influence on our results.
The two experiments were performed in order, experiment 1 and then experiment 2 but conditions in each experiment were randomized.
This could have some effect on our results but we believe that people would have still preferred Finger-count menus over 3D Marking menus  due to its ease of use and fast response time.
Moreover, we did not consider studying learning effects because all the gestures performed were easy to learn requiring very little time to train the users.
Finger-Count menus do have some limitations.
Hand physiology also plays an important role.
Some people found it difficult to keep their fingers separated.
One of the participants had arthritis in one hand.
It was difficult for him to keep enough separation between the fingers to be counted as separate fingers by the recognizer.
But the Finger-Count menu worked fine for him when he used his other hand.
We think that it could also be a problematic for some old age people because of the weakening of intrinsic hand muscles with age .
Thus, such an interface could be a challenge for people with arthritis or any form of ailment preventing them from keeping their fingers separated for the gesture recognizer.
We presented an in-depth exploration comparing FingerCount menus with Hand-n-Hold, Thumbs-Up, and 3D Marking menus using different layouts and modes .
Our results show that Finger-Count menus are a viable option for 3D menu selection tasks with fast response times and high accuracy and could be well suited for gesture controlled applications such as games.
In terms of horizontal, vertical and circular layouts, selection time and selection accuracy of Finger-Count menus did not change with layout.
However, the circular layout had higher selection accuracy for Hand-n-Hold menus while the horizontal layout was faster and more accurate for Thumbs-Up menus.
A significantly higher number of participants ranked Finger-Count menus as their favorite technique and the second best technique was the Hand-n-Hold menu.
In the future, it will be interesting to see how well Finger-Count menus perform in real application environments.
We would also like to see the performance of Finger-Count menus in the context of 3D environments where menu item selection is in 3D space.
Bailly, G., Lecolinet, E., and Guiard, Y. Finger-count & radial-stroke shortcuts: 2 techniques for augmenting linear menus on multi-touch surfaces.
In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, ACM , 591-594.
Bailly, G., Walter, R., Muller, J., Ning, T., and Lecolinet, E. Comparing free hand menu techniques for distant displays using linear, marking and finger-count menus.
In Human-Computer Interaction INTERACT 2011, vol.
Bowman, D., and Wingrave, C. Design and evaluation of menu systems for immersive virtual environments.
An empirical comparison of pie vs. linear menus.
An exploration of menu techniques using a 3D game input device.
Fitts, P. The information capacity of the human motor system in controlling the amplitude of movement.
Gerber, D., and Bechmann, D. The spin menu: A menu system for virtual environments.
Guimbretiere, F., and Winograd, T. Flowmenu: combining command, text, and data entry.
Holm, S. A simple sequentially rejective multiple test procedure.
Jennings, C. Robust finger tracking with multiple cameras.
In Recognition, Analysis, and Tracking of Faces and Gestures in Real-Time Systems, 1999.
Kolsch, M., and Turk, M. Robust hand detection.
In Proceedings of the Sixth IEEE international conference on Automatic face and gesture recognition, IEEE Computer Society , 614-619.
Komerska, R., and Ware, C. A study of haptic linear and pie menus in a 3d fish tank vr environment.
In Haptic Interfaces for Virtual Environment and Teleoperator Systems, 2004.
Kulshreshth, A., Zorn, C., and LaViola, J. Real-time markerless kinect based finger tracking and hand gesture recognition for HCI.
Kurtenbach, G. The design and evaluation of marking menus.
PhD thesis, University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 1993.
Liang, J., and Green, M. JDCAD: A highly interactive 3D modeling system.
Mine, M. R., Brooks Jr, F. P., and Sequin, C. H. Moving objects in space: exploiting proprioception in virtual-environment interaction.
Ren, G., and O'Neill, E. 3D marking menu selection with freehand gestures.
Robust hand gesture recognition based on finger-earth mover's distance with a commodity depth camera.
Ryan, D. J. Finger and gesture recognition with microsoft kinect.
Master's thesis, University of Stavanger, Norway, 2012.
Tao, N., McMahan, R., and Bowman, D. Tech-note: rapmenu: Remote menu selection using freehand gestural input.
Trigo, T., and Pellegrino, S. An analysis of features for hand-gesture classification.
Zhao, S., and Balakrishnan, R. Simple vs. compound mark hierarchical marking menus.
In Proceedings of the 17th annual ACM symposium on User interface software and technology, ACM , 33-42.
