The role of computers in the modern office has tended to split our activities between virtual interactions in the realm of the computer and physical interactions with real objects that have been part of the traditional office infrastructure.
This paper discusses a variety of scenarios we have implemented in which the physical world can be invisibly and seamlessly augmented with electronic tags in order to connect physical objects with virtual representations or computational functionality.
We demonstrate the utility of linking physical objects to electronic services and actions that are naturally associated with their form .
Unlike previous work in this area, we have focused on uniquely combining four inexpensive technologies with off-the-shelf applications, everyday objects, and computational devices.
A goal of these emerging projects is to seamlessly blend the affordances and strengths of physically manipulatable objects with virtual environments or artifacts, thereby leveraging the particular strengths of each.
Typically, this integration exists in the form of physical input "devices"  virtually linked to electronic graphical objects.
Manipulation of the physical objects signals a related operation on the associated electronic objects.
Typically these electronic objects reside within a proximate computer and associated display.
With each new prototype comes a wealth of subtle information about the underlying design  and the advances in technology that can better support these new "invisible interfaces".
The goal of this paper is to share our experiences in designing and building a number of new physical prototypes which incorporate key technologies to address issues which limited the use of earlier experimental systems.
In particular, we have combined four technologies  in a seamless and tightly integrated way.
This combination has not been discussed in the literature and is only now being experimented with in research labs working on user interface design.
We further provide several new examples of augmented reality "devices" that we have used and we describe the underlying hardware and software systems to support this emerging genre for user interaction.
Similar to Wellner , Fitzmaurice , and Ishii , a primary goal of our work is to support everyday tools and objects, the affordances of these objects, and computationally augment them to support casual interaction using natural manipulations and associations.
However, unlike this previous work, we have tried to build invisible interfaces that have little reliance on specialized single-user environments and/or display projection, or custom-designed objects.
To this end, we start with everyday objects and embed computation in them in the ubiquitous computing tradition founded at PARC .
Six years ago a compelling and provocative vision of the future was presented in Pierre Wellner's video and article on the Digital Desk .
Physical office tools such as pens, erasers, books, and paper were seamlessly integrated 
His works, and now our most recent efforts , are directed at more seamlessly bridging the gulf between physical and virtual worlds; an area which we believe represents a key future path for the design of user interfaces.
Surface projection  is expensive - typically $35K for the former and $10K for the latter, per prototype.
These systems were built around a model of "time traveling" into the future to better understand these physical/tangible user interfaces by building custom "user workstations".
As a result it is usually difficult to establish a wide-scale deployment and to measure their impact in different environments across many users.
Finally, virtually all of these systems assume that the augmented objects must reside upon the display surface area to have interaction meaning.
Notable exceptions are work where tethered objects such as Hinckley's doll's head  are used .
Clearly the tether and the location sensor limit the range of object movement or distribution of objects throughout an environment.
We have instead taken an approach to augment everyday objects that already have some useful purpose independent of any electronic system.
The augmentation technology  is sufficiently inexpensive that it can be considered disposable .
It is sufficiently small that it does not destroy the integrity or aesthetics of the original object.
Although we can certainly build, and have built, custom objects, we mainly use everyday items - which have proved to be the most powerful examples.
The process of embedding tags and associating virtual functionality is very straightforward .
Any user can do it.
This provides us with a much broader range of artifacts to experiment with and an easy deployment scheme.
Objects tagged in this way generate new and interesting capabilities whenever an "augmentation-sensitive" device approaches the augmented object.
One type of reader we have used costs, at present, about $300 US while the tags cost about 50 cents in quantity.
We have adapted the reader to plug into a portable computer serial port.
Its range is up to about 10 cm, which for many applications works extremely well and affords many possible interaction scenarios.
Again, this means that we can instrument a number of tablet computers  1200 & 510, laptops, or even Palm Pilots thereby deploying the system for many users in many contexts.
The technology and interactions are not tied to a particular location or workstation .
We can choose to have the system operate locally with no network dependencies.
However, in practice we have found that far more interesting scenarios are possible when wireless network connections are incorporated.
Again, the wireless networking provides far more flexibility and seamless integration than previous systems were able to take advantage of.
This too is a relatively low cost item and easy to deploy across many devices , with device PC cards costing $475 US each.
Lastly, in some scenarios we have used the IrDA ports on the mobile computers to receive a room ID from strategically placed IR beacons.
This allows us to further interpret the context of tagged objects as the system is now aware of the room in which they reside.
We believe that recent technological advances have made possible some interesting and untried combinations that make physical-virtual user interfaces possible for large numbers of objects and scenarios.
This differs in significant ways from earlier systems.
In the remainder of the paper, we describe implementation details, scenarios, and applications that we hope will inspire and teach others about this provocative UI domain.
The essence of the system is one or more electronic identification tags affixed to each physical item that we wish to augment.
These RFID tags are small transponders comprised of an integrated circuit, storing a unique 39-bit ID, and a small coil.
There is no on-board power, thereby reducing the size and weight of the individual tags and eliminating maintenance requirements .
A tag reader, comprising a transmitter and receiver component is affixed to a computational device.
This portion of the system, the reader electronics and larger antenna, energizes the tag by inductive coupling between its coil and a tiny coil in the tag.
The "tag reader" draws power either from the associated computational device or from an externally connected power supply.
The communication between tag and reader only occurs when both are proximate.
The actual distance varies based on the size of the antenna attached to the tag and to the transmitter, from a distance of a few inches to a couple of feet.
Once the ID sequence  is received, the tag reader passes this on to the computer system as an ASCII string via an RS-232 connection.
From this point, our application program interprets the ID input string, determines the current application context, and provides appropriate feedback.
In particular, we maintain an ASCII file that maps ID numbers to one or more actions.
For example, one common action is a {program, filename} pair that invokes the identified program on the associated filename.
We provide auditory feedback to confirm that an RFID tag was within range and was read by the hardware.
If the ID number has not been previously registered, i.e., associated with an action in our tag file, we prompt the user to enter an action and any associated parameters via a dialog box.
Network and server connectivity is provided by a separate wireless RF networking system.
If the program or the file to be retrieved reside on the network, we can have filenames that are independent of the particular sensing computer.
RFID tags don't degrade over the course of normal usage.
They are impervious to dust, dirt, and smearing, and are quite physically robust.
They are routinely used over long periods of time in very harsh environments, such as in tracking livestock .
RFID tags are easily added as a post-process to many physical objects, a task that can be more difficult with bar codes or especially glyphs.
Because the tag and the reader have been designed to be loosely coupled during interrogation, the tags do not have to physically contact the sensing device, let alone "dock" in a specific location with a specific orientation.
This flexibility not only makes the tags easier to use, but also adds to the ubiquity mentioned above.
They are read in tens of milliseconds; we are not restricted by image processing software quality and related processing time, camera hardware or image resolution, camera placement, angular skew, or visual obstruction of objects.
Bar codes, and in some cases glyphs, are used to label many commercial products.
However, we are often less inclined to have a bar code stamped upon certain items because appearance is important.
While UPC  barcodes appear on any number of products, it is frequently on the packaging that is subsequently discarded.
The look of a product in these cases limits the widespread use of visual labels.
Furthermore, the size of these labels is often constrained by the scanning technology, print quality and cost, i.e., small labels are, at present, infeasible.
There are two principle disadvantages of the tagging technology we have described: * Associating Functionality.
At present we maintain a database in the form of a network-accessible editable ASCII file that associates particular tags with sequences of actions to be taken upon detection of that tag.
The administrator of the tag system or the user must register actions and maintain this file.
Barcode labels and glyph labels, which are produced and subsequently affixed to objects, rely on the same post-hoc process.
While printed material can be readily associated with particular barcodes or glyphs at the system level automatically, to execute a particular action, additional instructions must be explicitly provided.
In both scenarios, the challenge is to provide easy mechanisms for performing the association of a physically tagged object to a particular set of actions.
Since barcodes and glyphs both rely on being visible and visually processed, it is clear which objects have these tagging mechanisms.
We believe the tag system we present here has some interesting advantages over other methods of tagging documents, such as bar codes  or glyphs .
Specifically: * Ubiquity and Flexibility.
These tags are sufficiently small that, with some care, they can be added to most physical objects such that they are invisible at best, unobtrusive at worst.
This extends beyond tagging paper or printed material.
Although we are currently using 3 specific commercially available tags, we are investigating tags with other form factors to further support subtle integration.
This could potentially be confused with a system that is simply broken.
However, overall the technologies and research area seem both promising and useful.
We have explored a variety of applications and prototypes.
We briefly outline some of these in the next section.
By augmenting a physical document or book with an RFID tag, we introduce a virtual linkage between that physical document and an equivalent or related electronic document.
For example, consider a book consisting of a collection of printed pages, such as a technical manual, a patent application, or a conference submission such as this paper.
Tags can be associated with any physical documents, even those which are much smaller than a book or other types of thick document.
For example, Figure 5 shows a tag placed on the back of a regular business card.
The virtual association for this physical document is the home page of the person so represented - when the business card is brought close to the computer, their home page is displayed.
Alternatively, the business card tag could also automatically generate a blank email message with the addressing information already filled in.
Although the RFID tags we are currently using are still are too large and thick to invisibly embed within a page, they can however, be easily accommodated in most forms of document bindings.
For example, tags can be located upon or within a document binder as shown in Figure 3, or can be embedded within other marks such as an embossing seal, as shown in Figure 4, or can even be located in or on the document staple.
When a computational device such as a tablet computer detects the tag, an associated virtual document is displayed.
This is particularly useful in the case of collaborative and/or iterated documents, which go through versioning - no matter which version the user is physically holding, when they bring the document near to their computer, they can see the latest electronic version.
While in the simplest case, we link virtual books or documents to their latest on-line version , a variety of other functional associations are possible.
For example, in Figure 6 below, we show an augmented book that is linked to the corresponding Amazon.com web page to order a copy of the book.
We could additionally link in the author's home page, the New York Times reviews of the book, or other correspondence related to the book.
In fact, we could link all of these sources to a single book by displaying a page of hyperlinks, one for each option.
A tagged item can also be linked to a service that is to be performed on a document already being displayed, i.e., context-aware.
For example, a French dictionary was augmented with a tag .
User ID Tags can be imperceptibly added to existing physical artifacts used for user identification, such as ID cards, signet rings, watches, jewelry, or even keys.
When such an artifact moves close to the computer, the user specified by the tag has their profile and preferences applied to the current context.
Location Locations such as tables, chairs, and doorways can be augmented, either by the addition of tags, or additional coil sensors.
In the first configuration, the computer senses the location - in the second, the location senses the computer.
In either case, the semantics can be similar.
By automatically detecting device context in this way, the device can perform various actions, such as only displaying documents in certain locations, automatically displaying the last document displayed in this location, and so forth.
IR beacons have also been used to provide room ID information.
Some of the beacons emit a signal automatically once every 10 seconds, others can be activated by shining a laser spot on a target point.
A hand laser-pointer is ideal for this purpose and can be integrated with the case of the mobile device.
When sensed, the dictionary can invoke a language translation program that picks up the currently selected document, executes the language translation, and displays the newly translated document.
The language of translation can be based upon the physical affordances of the dictionary, in particular the title and content, e.g., a French dictionary will perform translation to French.
In this way, we can use everyday objects and tools in the office place to invoke electronic services upon documents, services analogous to and synergistic with the real-world services they already perform.
While tags can be used to permanently associate a physical document with a virtual document or with a particular service, they can also be used to create ephemeral or transitory associations.
For example, we created user defined "bookmarks" , which were physical bookmarks augmented with one  virtual reference pointers.
In the simplest case, bookmarks are associated with particular locations or pages in particular documents, just as one would anticipate.
Bringing the physical bookmark next to the computer loads the associated document at the marked page.
Users can write the book name and page or other notes on the physical bookmark as a reminder.
As shown by the French dictionary example, tag semantics can be a function of the existing context on the sensing computer.
Tags can, therefore, have an associated action that sets that context, either instead of, or in addition to, launching applications and services.
Two particularly useful examples of this are using tags to establish user ID, and to establish location.
When the user taps the top of the bookmark on the computer , the system retrieves this association, and displays the linked document at the designated location, i.e., essentially a "go to bookmark" operation.
Any number of user interface mechanisms could be used to signal the "put association" action as opposed to the "go to association" action - tapping on different parts of the computer, reserving one side of the bookmark for each action, having a "write-only" enabler on the bookmark, and so forth.
Virtual links may be associated with any physical container or object and may reference various media, not just textual information.
For example, consider a "photo cube" .
In this document container, a set of 6 related documents  are bound together within the same physical object.
Each face or side of the cube has its own associated information set, augmented by a unique ID tag.
This is one example of a 3D augmented object.
To implement this prototype, we took a small balsa wood cubeoid , and drilled holes in each face such that each face could accommodate a disk-sized tag .
Each face was then covered with a photograph - one photo of each author of this paper.
Each of these graphics had a corresponding Web site link.
The virtual association for each face, then, was to the Web home page for the person or organization shown on that face.
For example, in Figure 10, a photo of a team member is being touched to the computer.
In Figure 11, as a result of this action, the computer is displaying that person's home page.
The photo-cube illustrates one mechanism associating particular affordances of a specific physical object with a set of virtual documents.
When the computer is held and used normally, the watch is not located near the sensor zone and therefore it has no effect.
If the watch is deliberately moved over the top of the tablet computer and hence into range, the calendar program is loaded.
In this way, we keep all prior uses of the watch, while leveraging its affordances: they are already worn, are already associated with scheduling, and are already easily  available for moving into a target area of a computer.
Basically, our software layer reads the incoming tag ID values, examines the associated tag file, which contains the mapping of IDs to actions, and then executes the desired command sequences.
Sometimes the same tag will be rapidly detected twice: to filter this out, a hysteresis is imposed on each tag.
If a tag ID is detected which is not associated with any semantics, the program can either ignore the tag, or launch a dialog box querying the user for the semantics of the tag.
The latter mechanism is used to update our system whenever a tag is attached to a new document.
We created a shared network database, mapping each tag ID number to its virtual association.
By placing this database on the network, and making the association descriptions generic, we were able to support augmented documents in a portable way and ensure consistent object responses across multiple computers/users.
Our system was designed around a pen-based computer, the Fujitsu 1200, - a tablet computer with a 20cm diagonal and VGA resolution and suitable for reading electronic documents.
We integrated the RFID reader electronics onto the back of the housing.
To provide wireless network connectivity for these mobile devices, we chose a Proxim Rangelan2 frequency-hop spread-spectrum radio in a Type II PC card format.
This type of radio system operates at 2.4GHz.
The particular units we acquired are designed to provide up to 500 feet of coverage centered on each network access point.
The raw bandwidth of the radio is 1.6Mbps with a data rate of 500kbps available to applications, taking into account the protocol overhead.
The Trovan 656 OEM reader turned out to be ideal for our task .
It was easily concealed on the back of the tablet and power was delivered to it by tapping into the internal power supply of the machine, with only minor modifications to the computer's housing.
All of the interpretation and storage of the tag-IDs is carried out by our software system and we only rely on the Trovan reader to deliver valid digital representations of the tags across the RS-232 serial interface.
The Trovan RFID tags use 39 bits for each ID .
Physically larger tags  have a greater read range.
The tradeoff between tag size, reader coil size, and read range is governed by the application.
For the applications described in this paper, we were always able to find some combination of the many readers, coils and tags to achieve the desired property.
The reader and the RFID tags communicate by inductive coupling between two coils.
The reader coil is large relative to the tag and is responsible for providing energy to it and for reading the small radio-signal that is returned.
Placement of the reading coil on the housing of a tablet computer has to be done bearing two issues in mind.
First, the reading coil must be in a position that is both convenient and natural for a user interacting with tagged objects.
Second, the mounting location must be chosen to minimize interference from the host computer.
We found that the pen sensing electronics on a Fujitsu 1200 generates signals that are directly in competition with the reader system and coil placement is critical.
If care is not given to this part of the design, the apparent tag reading range of the system can be reduced to a centimeter or less.
In our prototype we could generally rely on a reading range of approximately 5-10 cm.
The Trovan system can only read one tag at a time and some care needs to be taken beyond a tag separation of 1cm because the tags will interference with each other.
However for objects that are large enough to support multiple tagged regions, it is usually possible to final suitable locations for their placement.
Because the positioning of the read coil is critical to the ease of use of the system, we have examined this problem in some detail.
The exact dimensions of the read coil affects the overall inductance and the Q value.
Dimensions that are optimal for one application are not for another.
For example, placing a reading coil on the underside of a tablet computer, where there is lots of space to embed it, gives a designer more flexibility with the coil geometry than if it were on the front, where space is limited.
To solve this problem we expanded the original system so that a variety of coils could be positioned around the computer housing.
The modifications allowed a user to chose between sensing locales with a manual switch.
For some applications it might be desirable to use the physical world to automatically choose the active coil.
The software infrastructure to support this functionality is relatively straightforward.
A single thread of a multithreaded Windows program, written in C++, monitors the serial port for incoming tag IDs.
A second thread is notified of each incoming tag and displays the appropriate application and document.
There has long been a discontinuity between the rich interactions with objects in our physical world and impoverished interactions with electronic material.
Furthermore, linking these two worlds has been difficult and expensive.
Yet "invisible interfaces" still hold promise to leverage the natural, intuitive manipulations based on a wealth of affordances and everyday skills married with powerful computational and network information and functionality.
In this paper, we have described our efforts at bridging this physical-virtual gap by subtly augmenting physical objects thereby making them computationally sense-able through combining several technologies in a widely deployable manner.
We have illustrated a number of hopefully thought provoking examples of how this augmented environment might support coupling physical objects to a virtual form or to representative services .
These concepts can clearly be extended further.
We have described a software and hardware implementation that readily supports this system and can be extended and enhanced in a variety of ways to encompass more complex scenarios.
The research described in this paper reflects our approach and philosophy of creating what we hope will be "invisible interfaces" for the workscape of the future, leveraging the strengths and intuitiveness of the physical world with the advantages and strengths of computation.
The physical/virtual concept has been a hot topic at Xerox PARC during the last two years and we wish to acknowledge the many people and conversations that have influenced our thinking: Rob Burtzlaff, Helen Davis, Keith Edwards, David Goldberg, Dan Greene, Anthony Lamarca, Tom Moran, Beth Mynatt, Bryan Preas, Mark Weiser, Polle Zellweger, and the Portable Document Reader  group.
Collins D. J, Whipple N. N. Using Bar Code - why its taking over.
Hewkin, P. Smart Tags - The Distributed Memory Revolution, IEEE Review , June 1989.
Fishkin, K. P., Moran, T., and Harrison, B. L. Embodied User Interfaces: Towards Invisible User Interfaces.
To appear in Proceedings of Engineering for Human-Computer Interaction, Heraklion, Crete, September 1998.
Fitzmaurice, G., Ishii, H., and Buxton, W. A. S. Laying the Foundations for Graspable User Interfaces.
Gorbet, M. G., Orth, M., and Ishii, H. Triangles: Tangible Interface for Manipulation and Exploration of Digital Information Topography.
An Exploration of Manipulative User Interfaces.
Hecht D. L., Embedded Data Glyph Technology for Hardcopy Digital Documents.
SPIE -Color Hard Copy and Graphics Arts III, Vol.
Hinckley, K., Pausch, R., Goble, J. and Kassel, N. Passive Real-World Interface Props for Neurosurgical Visualization, Proceedings of CHI'94, pp.
Ishii, H. and Ullmer, B. Tangible Bits: Towards Seamless Interfaces between People, Bits, and Atoms.
Schilit B. N., Golovchinsky, G and Price M. Beyond Paper: Supporting Active Reading with free-form digital ink annotations.
Small, D., and Ishii, H. Design of Spatially Aware Graspable Displays.
Extended Abstracts of CHI'97, pp.
Spencer, H. Non-Contact Imaging Tracks Incoming Cartons, Crowds - and Cattle!
Integrated Design of Real Architectural Spaces and Virtual Information Spaces.
Cooperative Buildings: Integrating Information, Organization, and Structure.
Proceedings from the 1st International Workshop CoBuild'98, Springer-Verlag.
Streitz, N. A. and Russell, D. M. Basics of Integrated Information and Physical Spaces: The State of the Art.
Summary Proceedings of CHI'98, pp.
Underkoffler, J. and Ishii, H. Illuminating Light: An Optical Design Tools with a Luminous Tangible Interface.
Want R., A. Hopper, V. Falcao, J. Gibbons The Active Badge Location System.
IEEE Personal Communications, December 1995, pp.
Weiser, M. The Computer for the 21st Century.
Wellner, P. Tactile Manipulation on the DigitalDesk.
Video in CHI'92 Special Video Program, ACM SIGGRAPH Video Review 79.
Wellner, P. Mackay, W., and Gold, R. Computer Augmented Environments: Back to the Real World.
CACM, 36, July 1993 Wisneski, C., Orbanes, J. and Ishii, H. PingPongPlus: Augmentation and Transformation of Athletic Interpersonal Interaction.
Summary Proceedings of CHI'98, pp.
