The study of computers as persuasive technologies  was introduced at CHI 97 as a new area of inquiry.
This paper proposes definitions, perspectives, and researchdirections for further investigation of this field A persuasivecomputeris an interactive technology that attempts to changeattitudes or behaviors in some way.
Perspective1 describes how computers can inherit three types of intentionality: endogenous, exogenous, and autogenous.
Perspective 2 presents the `Functional Triad," which illustrates that computers can function as persuasive tools, media, and social actors.
Perspective3 presents a `levels of analysis" approachfor captology, which include varying levels from individual to societal- Perspective4 suggests a simple method for exploring the design space for persuasive computers.
Perspective 5 highlights some ethical issues inherent in persuasive computing.
This paperfirst presents five perspectiveson computers and persuasion.They include the following: Perspective 1: Definition of persuasive computers Perspective 2: A functionalview of persuasive computers Perspective 3: Levels of analysisfor captology Perspective 4: The designspace for persuasive technologies Perspective 5: Ethicsof computers that persuade Each of these five perspectivesprovides a different way to view persuasivecomputers,while also describingexamplesof relevant technologies.After setting forth the five perspectives on persuasivetechnologies,this paperconcludesby outlining sevenprofitable directions for further researchin the area of persuasivecomputers.
To be clear, this papermakes a contribution by articulating a range of approaches to captology.
It is the role of later work to expandandrevisethe ideasproposedin this paper.
The discussionon captology at the CHI 97 SIG proved fruitful and enlightening, with participants concurring that captology was an intriguing area for further researchand design.
The group also agreedthat this domain had not yet been adequately definedor addressed by researchers and practitioners of humancomputerinteraction.
We found that our discussionsufferedat times because we lacked key definitions and frameworksfor understandingcaptology.The purpose of this paper, therefore, is to contribute to the CHI community's understandingof persuasivecomputing by proposing definitions, perspectives, andresearch directionsfor the field of captology.
Simply put, a persuasive computer is an interactive technology that changesa person'sattitudesor behaviors.This definition works well in many cases,but a more thorough definition gives a better understanding of persuasive computing.
After reviewing the work of persuasionscholars,I've synthesizedthe various definitions to define "persuasion" as "an attempt to shape, reinforce, or changebehaviors,feelings, or thoughts about an issue, object, or action."
PAPERS Persuasion and intentionality One key point in this definition is that true persuasionimplies an intent to changeattitudes or behaviors; in other words, persuasionrequiresintentionality.
Therefore,not all behavior or attitude changeis the result of persuasion.For example,a rain stormmay causepeople to buy umbrellas, but the storm is not a persuasiveevent becauseit has no intentional@ associated with it.
Becausemachines do not have intentions , a computer qualifies as a persuasivetechnology only when those who create,distribute, or adoptthe technologydo so with an intent to affect human attitudes or behaviors.
To be clear, the persuasive natureof a computerdoesnot residewith the object itself; instead, a computer being classified as "persuasive" depends on the context of creation, distribution, and adoption.
I proposethat if an intent to changeattitudesor behaviorsis a factor in the creation, distribution, or adoption of a technology,then that technology inherits a type of intent from humanactors.
Threetypes of intent- endogenous,exogenous,and aufogenous For the purposes of captology, I propose three kinds of inherited persuasive intent: endogenous, exogenous, and autogenous.
According to my definitions, a computer technology inherits endogenous intent when a designeror producer creates a technology with intent to persuade usersin some way.
A computer technology inherits exogenous intent when one person provides another person with a computer technology in an attempt to changethat person's attitudes or behaviors.
A computer technology inherits autogenous intent when a person choosesto use or adopt a technology in order to changehis or her own attitudes or behaviors.Table 1 makesthis idea clearer.
Furthermore, it is quite possible that a given interactive technologymay fall into more than one category.Despite the potential ambiguities, I find thesethree categorieshelpful in better understanding the range and roles of persuasive computing technologies.
PERSPECTIVE 2: A FUNCTIONAL VIEW OF PERSUASIVE COMPUTERS While Perspective1 provides an "intentional" framework for persuasivecomputers, Perspective2 presents what I call a "functional" view.
To explain Perspective2 clearly, I first describethe basicsof the "Functional Triad."
I then show how this framework can provide key insights into the study of persuasive computers.
The Functional Triad I proposethat today's computersfunction in three basic ways: as tooIs, as media, and as social actors.
Researchers and designers have often discussed variantsof thesefunctions, usually as metaphorsfor computer use.
However, I suggestthat these three categoriesare more than metaphors; they are basicways that peopleview or respondto computing technologies.
I refer to thesethreeareasas "functions."
As a tool, the computer provides humanswith new ability or power, allowing peopleto do things they could not do before,or to do things more easily .
As a medium, a computer can convey either symbolic content or sensorycontent.
Mappingthe funcfions One way to view thesethree functions simultaneously is to map the three categories into two dimensions.
Of course, in all but the most extremecases,thesefunctions mix and blur in any one given interactive technology.
However, consciouslymappinginteractive technologiesinto a triangular spaceI call the `Functional Triad" generates insight into the roles and relationships of different computer technologies.
Figure 2 represents the Functional Triad with some prototypical examples.
Persuasion and the functional view of computers Although the functional triad is a useful framework for understanding computertechnologiesin general,adoptingthis functional view of computers yields specific insights for analyzingpersuasive interactive technologies.
Although the abovecategoriesaim to distinguish amongtypes of persuasive technologies, I recognizethat thesecategories are not always precise, and they are not always mutually exclusive.Indeed,making inferencesaboutintentions is tricky business-we may infer intent where thereis none, or we may fail to perceive intent when intent does indeed exist.
As the Table 2 shows,computersfunctioning as tools, media, or social actors can change attitudes and behaviors through different means.
Examples of persuasivecomputers in each categoryfollow: Exampleof computeras persuasive tool Polar Heart Rate Monitor : This exercise devicesoundsan alarm when a person'sheart rate falls outside a pre-setzone.
The devicenot only can motivate a person to changebehavior during exercise,but it may also increaseselfefficacy about one's ability to exercise effectively .
Eirample of computer as persuasive medium HIV Roulette : A computerized exhibit at the San Francisco Exploratorium allows visitors to make hypothetical choices about sexual behavior and then vicariously experiencehow those choices would affect their chancesof contracting HIV.
This exhibit attemptsto motivate peopleto avoid unsafesexual behaviors.
By viewing a computertechnology as a tool, one can then ask how tools canbe persuasivedevices.In other words, `KOW do tools change attitudes or behaviors?"
While this paper will not fully answerthese questions, Table 2 highlights some persuasive affordances in eachof the threefunctional areas:
The functional view of persuasive computers offers key insights into the different affordances of persuasivecomputers.
Not only does this framework help differentiate among persuasivecomputers, but this perspectivecan also provide researchers with guidancefor primary and secondary research efforts.
Most people think of computer use as it applies to an individual-an individual interacts with or through a computer.The sameholds true for notions of persuasion:An individual changeshis or her attitudes or behaviors.
In both cases,this level of analysis focuses on the individual.
Even though both computeruseand persuasionare often thought to be most germane to individuals, other levels of analysis besidesthe individual level can generateimportant insights in researchingand designingcomputing technologies.
In recent years, HCI researchers have done admirablework in conceptualizingcomputeruse on a level of analysis other than individual .
PAPERS "computer-supported cooperative wore' this area examines computing asit pertainsto groups or organizations.
It is important for the HCI community to continue defining and exploring the various levels of analysisrelatedto computeruse.
The levels of analysisfrom thesefields include* intraindividuallevel l interindividuallevel 
To be sure,previousHCI work hasexaminedcomputing at all of the abovelevels, but our field can benefit from more clearly differentiatingthesedifferent levels andfrom deliberatelyusing theselevels more often as a driving force in researchingor designing computing technologies.
HCI and captology have much to gain from viewing computing from these various levels of analysis.
Different levels of analysis cause different variables to be salient, which generates new insights in researchor design.
The different levels also draw on different theoretical frameworks, methodologies, and measures.
For example, persuasion on the individual level is conceptualizedand measured differently than persuasionon the community level.
Although examining each level as it applies to persuasive computersis beyondthe scope of this paper, Table 3 gives someexamplesto help illustrate this point.
The table showsthat, at least in principle, certain technologies are best suited for different levels of analysis-some are individual-level technologies and some are community-level technologies.
Furthermore, the table implies that behavior change is not just an individual-level variable: families change, organizations change, and communities change.
Although this section of the paperonly begins to explore the benefits of conceptualizingpersuasivecomputersat different levels of analysis, the potential benefit to HCI and captology is substantial.
Although the ideasfrom the previous sections serveas analytical tools to study existing persuasivecomputing technologies, these frameworkscan also serve a useful generative purpose.
In otherwords,the previousframeworkscan help createideasfor new types of persuasivecomputing technologies.When used for their generativepowers, the three previous perspectives contribute to my fourth perspective: the design space for persuasive technologies.
The captologydesignspaceis large and relatively unexplored.
Because captology presentsa new perspectiveon the role of computers, it is relatively easy to conceptualize new technologies,or to add persuasiveenhancements to existing technologies.
To approachthis design spacemethodologically, I propose a two-step process: identify domainsand issues of interest, and  usethe aboveframeworksto gain new perspectives.
My efforts to identify persuasive interactivetechnologiesin today's marketplace also showedhealth as a central domain.
Of course, health and educationare still excellent areasfor researchand design of persuasive technologies, but many other domains remain relatively unexplored.
When my students and I set out to identify appropriate domains for captology, we first made an extensive list of pervasivesocial or personalproblems.
We then clusteredthe problems and nested them under broaderheadings.
Using captology frameworks Once a person selects a domain or issue, the next step in ,exploringthe design spacefor persuasivecomputersis to use the captologyframeworksdescribedin this paper to generatea variety of perspectivesand ideas about the selected domain or issue.For example,onemight ask the following questions: Levels of analysis: What do different levels of analysis offer to this issue or problem?
Which level of intervention is likely to be most productive?
Functional Triad: What functional areas will the persuasivetechnology leverage?Should it focus on computer as tool, medium, social actor, or combinations of the three?
Inteutionality: For this issue or domain, what are the possibilities for endogenously,exogenously, or autogenously persuasive interactive technologies?
An exampleof using thesefiameworks in design exploration follows.
The computeracting as a medium could then renderan image of a tree growing as paperis added to the recycling container.
Seeing the tree grow in size might provide motivation to recycle because the image helps people visualize a cause/effect relationship in recycling.
The computer as social actor could audibly thank people eachtime they addedpaper to the recycling container.A more extreme idea is to have an anthropomorphictree that smiles or tells humorousstories in responseto recycling efforts.
Intentionality perspective: The recycling technology described above would inherit both endogenous persuasive intent  and exogenous persuasiveintent .
To further explore the designspace,one might profitably ask, "How might au autogenously persuasive technology function in this organizational setting?"
Becausethis design examplefocuseson the organizationallevel, autogenous intent would imply that the organization as a whole  would chooseto adopt a technology to change their collective recycling behavior.
As the above exampleshows, the two-stepmethod of  identifying domains/issues andthen  applying the captology frameworks is a simple process that yields rich-and often surprising-results.
For this example,I have chosen recycling as the issue to address using persuasive technology.
Levels of analysis perspective: One can profitably conceptualizerecycling paper at various levels: individual, family, organization, or community.
Of these levels, I have chosen the organizational level for this example.
The goal, then, is to explore the possibilities for creating a persuasive technology for increasing paper recycling behavior at the organizational level.
Functional Triad perspective: One would also explore how the three different functions of computers might profitably motivate paper recycling behavior.
Even on the organizational level, many ideas are possible.For this example, one might proposethe following: A computeracting asa tool could weigh the recycled paper in the organization and calculatethe number of treessavedfrom recycling efforts.
Other types of calculations are also possible .
Knowing this information might motivate people in the organizationto recycle their paperproductsmore.
Ethics is yet another perspective from which to view computers as persuasive technologies.
Most examples of persuasive computers in this paper ate technologies that promote widely held conceptions of the "good" : a computerizeddoll motivates responsiblesexual behavior,a CD-ROM encourageseating fruits and vegetables, a ride-sharing technology cuts down on pollution in a city.
However, persuasive technologies can also serve ignoble purposes.Table 5 contains examplesof persuasivecomputing that may be ethically questionable, along with a brief gain/loss analysis for stakeholders .
Summary of persuasive technology in question A computertzed slot machine uses animation and narration to make the gambling experience more compelling.
A computer system records employees' activities on the Web.
A computer system monitors restaurant employees' hand washing behavior after using the restroom.
A software installation seems to require registration with the company in order to complete the installation.
The software automatically dia1.scompany to dovmload personal information.
Stakeholder analysis gain: manufacturer and casinos loss: indiiduals 
Those who study persuasive computersthen have an obligation to disclosetheir findings.
If needed, take or advocate social action.
Finally, if a computing artifact is deemed harmful or questionablein someregard,a researcher should then either take social action or advocate that othersdo so.
I propose that the best approach regarding the ethics of computersandpersuasion is to educate widely about this new areaof research and design.
Education about captology helps people in two important ways: First, increasedknowledge about persuasivecomputers allows people more opportunity to adoptsuchtechnologiesto enhancetheir own lives, if they choose.Second,knowledgeabout persuasivecomputershelps people recognize when technologies are using tactics to persuade them.
This paper represents one effort to bring such issuesto light.
I believe that the simple gaitioss analysis in Table 5 helps show why the above technologies could be ethically questionable.
In most casesabove, companiesstand to gain profit or information, while individuals standto lose money, privacy, or freedom.In contrast, a simple gain/loss analysis for the other persuasivecomputersin this paperwould likely show gainsfor all stakeholders, including individuals.
The ethical implications for those who design persuasive technologiesare similar to the ethical implications for other persuaders in society 
Becausevalues vary widely, no single ethical system or set of guidelines will serve in all cases,so the key for those designing persuasiveinteractive technologies is gaining a sensitivity to the ethical implications of their efforts.
High-tech persuaders would do well to basetheir designson a defensibleethical standardAt the very least,a few core valuesshould apply to all persuasive computing designs, such as avoiding deception, respecting individual privacy, andenhancingpersonalfreedom.
The ethical implications for those who study persuasive computersare somewhatdifferent from those for designers-I proposethat those who study persuasivetechnologieshave a responsibility to play a watchdog role for the HCI community, in particular, and for technologyusers,in general.
Ethical actionsfor those who study persuasivecomputersfall into four categories: 1.
By using the various frameworkssuggested in this paper, a researcher can better identify persuasive technologies, as well as the persuasive strategies a technologyuses.
As statedearlier, my definition of persuasionis "an attemptto shape,reinforce, or changebehaviors, feelings, or thoughts about an issue, object, or action."
Although this is a good definition, it is too broad to be useful in focusing research and designin the early stagesof captology.Therefore,at this point people involved in captology would do well to pursue behavior change as the test and metric for persuasive computers.
While captologyhasthe potential to generatenew theoriesand Cameworks-as demonstrated to some degree in this paperthose of us who study computersas persuasivetechnologies would do well to find extant persuasion theories and frameworksandinvestigatehow they apply to captology.
The field of psychology-both cognitive and social-has a tradition of examining different types of persuasion and influence.
The theories and methods from psychology transfer well to captology, enriching the field.
In addition, the field of communication has a history of examining the persuasive effects of media and other types of message sources.
Specifically, the applied domain of public information campaignshasa set of theories and practicesthat give insight into the study of persuasivecomputers.
From my vantage point, the most interesting interactive technologiestoday seem to fall in at least one of these three categories.
And it seems that most persuasivetechnologies of the future will not be associated with desktopcomputers;they will be specialized,distributed, or embeddedIf this is trne, then it would be a relatively poor use of time to examine existing desktopapplications or to designpersuasiveprograms solely for desktop computers.
Persuasive situations occnr most frequently in the context of normal life activities-not when peopleare seatedat a desktopcomputerDirection D: Captofogy shou/d focus on endogenously persuasive technologies.
Captology should focus both on existing persuasive technologiesand on potential persuasivetechnologies.A fairly good number of persuasive technologies already exist.
Researchinto the impact, uses, and implications of these technologiescan yield valuable insight for the field.
But captology also has a strong generative component.
Because this field provides a new lens for viewing computing technology, captology generates insights about novel possibilities for computers, as well as new ways to bring aboutattitude andbehavior changes.
The study of computers as persuasive technologies raises important ethical questions.
This is understandableand inescapable,given the fact that persuasionhas long been an areafor ethical debate,and that computertechnologyhas raised recent ethical questions.
As with any other means of persuasion, one could compromise values and ethics intentionally or unintentionally.
Therefore, those who study persuasivetechnologiesshould have a sound understanding of the ethical implications of this field.
A subfield on the ethics of persuasivecomputing is a worthy and important endeavor.
I've proposed three types of persuasive technologies: endogenously persuasive, exogenously persuasive , and autogenously persuasive.
Understanding endogenously technologies seems more essential to persuasive understandingcaptolo,v than the other two types.
According to my definition, endogenouslypersuasivetechnologies were created with an intent to changeattitudes or behaviors.
As a result, the strategiesand techniquesto persuadeare embedded in the technology itself.
In contrast, the other two types of persuasive technologies-exogenous and autogenous-rely heavily on externalfactorsfor their persuasivepower.
This paper has defined captology and has articulated five different perspectivesfor studying computers as persuasive technologies.
This paper also proposedseven directions for future research.
While these perspectives and research directions may be supersededby better ideas and new perspectives, this paper lays the groundwork for taking significant stepsforward in understandingthis new field.
Atkins, C., & Wallace, L. Mass Communication and Public Health.
Social Foundations of Thought and Action: A social cognitive theov.
Buxton, W. "Living in Augmented Reality: Ubiquitous media and reactive environments."
Rice, R. and Atkin, C. Public Communication Campaigns.
Salmon, C. Information Campaigns : Balancing social values and social change.
Sheridan, T. Telerobotics, Automation, and Human Supervisory Control.
Street, R., Gold, W., and Manning, T. Health Promotion ond Interactive Technology.
