While the domestic and workplace settings afford different scheduling behaviors, the calendar1 is a tool that is used in both domains.
Researchers have examined calendaring at work  and at home  and looked in general at interactions between work and personal lives , but there has been relatively little exploration of scheduling across these domains with the exception of Beech et al.
The work done by Beech et al.
We conducted 15 interviews and analyzed over 1400 events from our participants' calendars to understand how working parents engage in life scheduling, that is, the holistic management of personal, family, and professional schedules across settings and calendaring tools.
In this paper we describe how and why parents move scheduling information from the personal to the professional realm of life, and the challenges that arise in doing so.
Furthermore, we will discuss implications for the design of workplace calendaring software that adjusts to support the needs that result from individuals' multiple social roles.
We present the results of our study of 15 working parents, and how they manage their life scheduling needs, that is, how they manage their personal and professional schedules across settings and calendaring tools.
In particular, we discuss how their dual roles of parent and employee compel them to record personal information on their professional calendars and we detail the tensions that arise in doing so.
Finally, we present suggestions for future calendaring applications that better support working parents in managing their life scheduling needs.
During the course of each day, people move between numerous social roles that can in turn influence how they use technology.
As networked applications make personal information more easily accessible to others, people adjust how they use these applications based on the expectations associated with their varied social roles.
The workplace is one setting where the personal and professional aspects of one's life may come into conflict.
For example, when individuals make their private music libraries accessible to coworkers, they may intentionally include or exclude certain tracks to craft a certain work-appropriate image .
Managing one's calendar is another place where individuals, particularly parents, must balance multiple roles.
Previous research on working parents has identified the need to manage family and work as the defining feature of the working parent's life  while surveys  have revealed challenges individuals faced around synchronizing multiple calendars and sharing calendars.
We interviewed 15 people  working in a variety of occupations in the Seattle, WA area.
We recruited participants that had at least one child aged 4-17 and in school because they were likely to have a diverse range of scheduling concerns stemming from their need to manage their own appointments and those of their children.
While our participants varied in the control they had over their work schedules, all had control over what they chose to put on their calendars and who had access to it.
During the interview, participants showed us their work and family calendars , shared with us how they use these calendars to manage their personal and family activities, and described the appointments on multiple days of their calendar.
We used affinity diagramming to derive themes from the interviews.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
We obtained professional calendars from 12 participants and family calendars from 7 participants and examined a total of 1474 events.
Most of the participants who did not provide us with their calendar data were concerned with us maintaining records of their personal or business-confidential information.
All of our participants used the Microsoft OutlookTM calendaring application at work and varied in the tools they used for their family calendars .
For example, events on the work calendar were assumed to be professional events unless they were clearly personal based on discussions in the interview .
Calendars are clearly reminding tools, but we found it interesting that some participants felt that their work calendar was a more effective memory aid than their family calendar for personal events.
This seemed to be because the work calendar is visible more often, allowing them to explicitly look up events and to be reminded of upcoming events while browsing their calendar.
Having personal information on the work calendar also supported individuals in keeping their spouse informed of upcoming activities.
For example, P15's husband asks her to remind him of his appointments so she includes these events in her work calendar.
P14 and her husband communicate during the day to keep each other aware of new appointments and to remind one another of existing appointments.
Having children was a primary reason for why our participants put personal events on their professional calendar.
Of the 397 personal events we found across our participants' work calendars, 26% of these personal events clearly related to their children .
Our participants put these events on their calendars to keep themselves aware of what was going on in their children's lives.
For P1, the benefit of having her son's schedule on her work calendar is that she has numerous opportunities to be reminded of upcoming events.
She noted, "If I had  in my Outlook calendar, if I was reminded throughout the day then I could kind of prepare or plan a little bit better."
Parents also record events they are not attending, for example P4 included much of his daughter's soccer schedule on his calendar so that he could keep up with what was going on in her life, even though he did not plan to attend most of them.
Our participants' life scheduling practices were characterized by how they allowed scheduling information to flow between their personal and professional lives and among family members.
The most extensive flow was personal information moving into the professional realm of life, and it is here that we will focus our discussion for the remainder of the paper.
In particular, we will describe how the dual roles of parent and employee affect the ways that our participants use workplace calendaring tools, and the breakdowns that occur during this use.
Overall, participants were liberal in the amount of personal information they placed on their professional calendars.
In fact, we saw almost four times more personal events on professional calendars as professional events on family calendars.
Three of the five participants that maintained only one calendar  shared their calendars with us and an average of 60% of their events were of a personal nature.
Nine of the ten participants who maintained both a personal and professional calendar shared their calendars with us, and an average of 25% of their events were personal.
Examples of the types of personal scheduling information that people placed on their professional calendar include social activities, sporting events, medical appointments, birthdays, and school events for their kids.
In the following sections, we describe the reasons individuals wanted to bring personal scheduling information onto their professional calendars and the tensions that resulted.
We were surprised to see that many of our participants preferred planning and recording personal appointments in the workplace environment.
P14 relies on the calm of work to manage her personal and family appointments: "I find scheduling things after  hours - I really don't like doing it.
I'd rather do it at work, when I'm sitting here, because that way my calendar is right here...
This is the only free time I get to actually sit down and get to schedule anything or plan anything.
Because you know with two kids at home you really don't have a chance to sit down and do anything."
Of the five participants that do not electronically share their calendar, three indicated they would like to share with co-workers, but that their office network infrastructure did not support sharing.
Placing personal information on their work calendars was an important part of keeping coworkers aware of their whereabouts.
Facilitating this awareness meant including personal appointments that occurred during the work day or just outside of the working hours.
Our participants varied in their concerns over the privacy of the personal information on their calendars.
Some people indicated that keeping coworkers aware of their availability was worth any loss of privacy.
For example, P15, who shares details, puts doctor appointments on her calendar and does so because it is important to her that her coworkers know where she is during the day.
Surprisingly, only four participants made use of the `private' tag available.
The infrequent use of this feature may be due to a number of reasons, for example, in our interviews we saw that some people forgot to use this feature or did not realize it existed.
The aggregation problems that our participants face would not be solved simply by granting them access to their work calendars at home.
As previously noted, many of our participants valued placing personal information on their work calendars while at work.
The problem arises in trying to funnel personal scheduling information that is generated outside of the workplace into the work calendar.
One of our participants physically brought her paper-based appointment information into the workplace to enter it onto her calendar.
Thus, it was a challenge for our participants to move analog and digital information onto their calendars.
It was important for them to ensure that their work calendars are up to date with their personal appointments both for their own awareness and their peers' awareness.
Though our participants valued their work calendars as personal appointment repositories and awareness tools, they encountered significant problems aggregating information from multiple sources.
For example, participants had trouble managing the information sent home by their children's schools and extracurricular organizations.
P15, who has had problems getting her daughter's school schedule onto her work calendar, noted: "The preschool also sends home the school calendar and what I should be doing is copying that stuff into  `cause I have forgotten almost every special thing we were supposed to do, , `bring eggs to color for Easter'... You'd think that everything in the world was on  but it's not - it should be."
People also need the ability to modify the incoming events to better match how they manage their calendar.
For example, P9 would like to receive calendar information from his wife.
However, unlike him, she does not typically include the event start and end times in her calendar entries, causing a mismatch in calendaring styles.
Working parents may place personal appointments on their calendar just to keep themselves aware of what is going on in their family's life, not because they necessarily plan to attend those events.
However, by doing this they may be setting themselves up for incorrect judgment by their coworkers.
For example, P4 who had included his daughter's soccer schedule on his calendar even though he did not plan to attend the events, became concerned about judgments by his coworkers, because in his office culture people assumed that any appointment marked on his calendar meant he was busy.
He told us that many of his daughter's soccer events happen during his working hours and noted, "I don't want my boss to see it and think, you know, that I'm leaving early because I'm not... You know people look at your calendar and they think just `cause it's there that I did anything about it."
In 1999, Palen  also noted how shared work calendars can create the opportunity for peers or managers to make judgments about how people are spending their time.
Eight years on, we find that individuals are still struggling to manage peer judgments.
Furthermore, our findings highlight how incorrect peer judgments can result from the conflict of wanting to keep oneself aware of family members' lives and a workplace culture of assessing individuals' availability based on their calendar events.
Employers may not be comfortable with employees using office calendaring applications for personal reasons.
As mentioned previously, the inclusion of personal events is on the one hand necessary to keep coworkers aware of one's whereabouts.
At the same time, including personal appointments outside of working hours, or including appointments just to keep one's self aware of what is going on in family members' lives may or may not be acceptable in all workplace environments.
To address the tensions described above, we present the following recommendations for designing calendars that better support the flow of personal information into the realm of workplace calendaring.
While the desire to help users organize their calendar information is excellent, challenges arise when considering how this information will be shared with others.
This suggests the need to support more fine-grained control of how calendar information is shared.
More flexibility would allow users to share one subset of information with co-workers and another set with family.
Custom Subscriptions: Our study suggests people will need to customize the calendar information they receive and how it is displayed on their calendars.
For example, when subscribing to events from a child's school end-users will need the ability to specify which events are relevant and interesting to them, otherwise they risk being swamped by every event from the school or requiring that schools publish different feeds for every classroom and extracurricular activity.
This example illustrates the importance of calendar clients allowing users to easily customize subscriptions to calendar feeds and modify incoming calendar events .
Private Notes: In current calendaring software such as Microsoft OutlookTM, users have the option of sharing only free/busy information or complete information about an event.
This caused problems for our participants that wanted to share some information  but not all event details .
Having space to record event information that would never be shared with others would allow users a place to put particularly personal event details.
This approach would address some of the privacy concerns we saw in our study without forcing users to record personal details outside of their calendar .
These challenges suggest the need for more flexible calendaring interfaces that support individuals in managing their life scheduling needs, needs which are characterized by the competing demands placed on them by their roles of parent and employee.
Although our design recommendations are derived from our close examination of calendaring needs, they may be more broadly applicable to other technologies that cross role boundaries.
For example, social networking sites may want to further investigate role-sensitive sharing as more people create online content that is viewable by diverse social groups.
As the boundaries between technologies used for personal and professional reasons become less clear we anticipate an increasing need for applications that support the multiple roles people hold.
