Each category provides distinct advantages .
Real-time experiences provide the excitement of immediacy, and the potential for serendipitous moment-tomoment interaction between participants.
Several research projects aim to enrich the real-time "chat" experience among human users with multimedia data: Comic Chat enhanced text chat in the form of a dynamic, graphical comic strip .
Family Story Play supported video chat for grandparents to read books together with young grandchildren .
MapChat enabled users to discuss and navigate the location-based information synchronously on an interactive map .
However, few real-time systems focus on understanding the chat content between users at a story level.
They suffer from the problem that conversations can wander off-topic, or become shallow or incoherent.
Authored media provide the opportunity for greater reflection, structuring a story coherently and engagingly according to the narrative principles of literature or cinema.
Authored media can be composed by piecing together various elements from independently produced or independently captured media artifacts.
The elements can be arranged so that they make coherent points and present a meaningful narrative arc.
TELLSTORY, for example, was groupware that supported collaborative storytelling for documenting tacit knowledge .
Gervas presented a review of several narrative systems and discussed models of computational creativity .
However, authored systems inhibit possibilities for real-time interaction exploration and personalization.
These forms are prepared by an author in advance of interaction and are consumed by an audience.
The audience is usually passive, and does not contribute material at the time of consumption.
The aim of this paper is to introduce a new kind of hybrid of these two kinds of social media, which we refer to as assisted conversation.
The idea is to structure the media interaction between a storyteller and a story viewer basically as a real-time chat.
Social media enables people to share personal experiences, often through real-time media such as chat.
People also record their life experiences in media collections, with photos and video.
However, today's social media force a choice between real-time communication, and authoring a coherent story illustrated with digital media.
There is simply not enough time in real-time communication to select and compose coherent multimedia stories.
We present Raconteur, which introduces a new style of social media combining aspects of the real-time and authored styles of communication.
It is structured around a text chat, augmented by an agent that continuously interprets the chat text to suggest appropriate media elements to illustrate the story.
A small experiment shows that storytellers find Raconteur's suggestions helpful in presenting their experiences, and audiences find the interaction engaging.
Recent times have seen a great explosion in the popularity of social media, giving people new ways of connecting and forming relationships and communities.
Today's social media, however, are sharply separated into two distinct forms: * Real-time experiences, such as text chat, mobile text messaging, audio or video chat , Twitter, etc.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Commonsense knowledge base, and new reasoning techniques to suggest media elements that contribute meaningfully to telling a story in a coherent and engaging way.
In this way, we hope to recapture some of the narrative power of authored media, while retaining the immediacy of person-to-person real-time interaction.
A companion paper  explains in more detail the natural language processing and inference algorithms underlying the suggestion engine.
The present paper focuses on the motivation from literary theory, user interface design, and social media aspects of the user study.
An earlier paper  reported a formative user study, and briefly described an earlier version of Raconteur, emphasizing the story analogy features.
The present user interface, Raconteur 2,  has been completely redesigned from , and we feel this design represents an important contribution of this paper.
Second, story understanding requires connecting perceived story elements in a structured way.
The idea of a "story grammar" or "story skeleton" explains how humans construct and comprehend a story by a set of rules, as well as how the underlying story structure might alter the listening experience .
To assist authoring with connected story events, it is important to help storytellers structure their presentation during the chat process.
Our design is based on theories of conversational storytelling from literary criticism .
Conversation involves one speaker and one listener that jointly create stories.
For the speaker, the purpose is to share life stories, containing narrative elements such as characters, events, and causal connections.
For the listener, the aim is to respond to, and to acknowledge what has been said, as well as give feedback, and perhaps reciprocate by sharing his or her own stories.
Unlike speeches or interviews, conversational stories are created in a meaningful progression where either the speaker or the listener can introduce or react to particular topics.
Based on the studies, we defined the following three design principles:
Third, conversational storytelling provides the opportunity for intelligent systems to understand the narrative intent behind digital media elements, based on human dialogue.
As non-real-time conversations between online users over user-generated content become more widespread , we believe such integration of instant chats and authored media with personal life stories would contribute to both the author's and the audience's interests.
Consequently, we aim to provide an agent that assists, rather than replaces, human dialogue.
First of all, from the social perspective, "stories are told to make a point, to transmit a message - often some sort of moral evaluation or implied critical judgment - about the world the teller shares with other people" .
Our interface should assist a storyteller to stay on a topic, connect the events, and communicate his or her own experiences to a listener.
1 shows a partial view, a chat box, of the Raconteur's web-based user interface, for a storyteller and a story viewer to chat together in plain text by inputting in the chat box or chatting on any element directly.
The storyteller can see the suggested media files by Raconteur  and edit the story by drag-and-drop of elements .
In this interface, he can also see a preview window, the whole media repository, and story pattern suggestions, which are not shown to the story viewer on the other side.
This will motivate the viewer to follow the teller and remain engaged, without the temptation to independently browse the media.
The final output of the system can be either a chat log for private use, or a script with the selected scenes and users' narrations for later video editing.
Successive chats between the storyteller and different story viewers may generate different story paths, due to differing interests of the viewers.
Later iterations may be able to combine ideas from multiple paths, leading to semiautomatic generation of branching or personalized stories.
Teller:  "My trip to Spain was full of surprising stories."
Tell me more about the visit!
I'm curious about how the Spanish culture impacted his work."
2 presents a scenario of telling a travel story.
Raconteur enables storytellers to chat about their stories in a personal repository from an online media collection platform such as Picasa.
We assume that most of the media elements are annotated with a sentence or two in unrestricted English, usually describing the particulars of an event.
Annotation is entirely optional, and the user may also manually select unannotated elements to include in the story.
Full-sentence annotations are a much richer source of metadata than single-word "tagging".
Tagging is currently popular because keyword matching is more straightforward than determining relevance of sentences to each other, but our NLP analysis is indeed able to do this.
Our goal is to assist the real-time chat by presenting connected visual elements at a story level.
First of all, we perform natural language processing  on both the annotations and the chat text, using part of speech tagging , named entity recognition , and stemming and lemmatization .
Then, we extract and compute these concepts by representing as a list of computable vectors.
Based on a powerful analogical reasoning tool called AnalogySpace  analyzed from a large Commonsense knowledge base ConceptNet , we compare the users' chat message and the annotation on each media element to determine the similarity of semantic meanings.
For example, narrations that contain concepts of "art", "museum", "gallery", "sculpture", and "inspiring" will be classified in an art-related category.
Most interesting is that this analysis is used to recognize story patterns, high-level structures that make stories interesting to the viewer.
For one example, the text "trip" and "surprising stories" triggers one kind of story pattern -"expectation violation".
Unexpectedly encountering a Dali installation in a park, getting a wallet stolen, or juxtaposition of disparate cultures are possible matches to this pattern.
Additional details of the analysis and recommendation procedures are found in .
The topics chosen included: a 5-day sponsor visit to Italy, a one-week trip to Spain for a conference, two beach parties, and a weekend at Pittsburgh for a social event.
On average, the size of each uploaded repository was 70.2 media elements, containing 98.0% still photos and 2% short video clips .
97.2% of the files were annotated; the average length of each caption was 10.0 words.
Three of the five repositories were originally uploaded to Facebook that participants had already annotated files with textual captions.
The average time of a chat session was 23 minutes.
The conversations were generally balanced between the storytellers  and viewers .
On average, 33.1% of the files in a repository were used in a chat story.
We were interested in verifying two things about the user interaction.
First, that Raconteur was helpful to the realtime nature of the chat that it did not distract them from the friend's chat and that the visual material assisted engagement in the activity.
Second, we were interested in seeing if storytellers felt that Raconteur supported their ability as authors to generate coherent stories and communicate meaningful points.
Raconteur succeeded in finding supportive visual material in real-time.
All the narrations, comments, questions were on-topic.
Storytellers followed the system's suggestions 98.2% of the time, either by dragging-and-dropping a Raconteur-suggested media file into the conversation or chatting on a file, instead of looking for files from the repository .
We found storytellers saw a media element and decided to chat about that element, initiating by narration such as "This shows how ", "Like this one", "Check this out", etc.
That is to say, the real-time suggestions guided the storytellers to continue a topic and brainstorm the story development.
To understand if Raconteur succeeded in helping authors to communicate life stories with friends using personal digital media, we conducted a usability study with 10 participants as 5 pairs , of whom half were male and half were female, aged from 2332 years old.
All of the participants were frequent users of social network websites.
They updated their social network status once every four days on average, and updated personal albums with photos and/or videos once per week.
They expected their friends to respond by adding comments, ratings, or reciprocal sharing.
All story viewers reported high narrative engagement in the story.
Post-interviews showed they could remember and recall the story details.
The interaction helped the audience achieve control of the story content: "I also could see how my friend chose the specific scenes based on my questions.
I'm glad that my questions were heard and I could somehow control how the story could be developed."
The prompt response from the viewers  also suggested that the audience was engaged in the process and was willing to explore the story with the author.
Moreover, we observed storytellers often added new information to the media elements instead of just repeating the annotations.
This showed that storytellers were aware of the audience's story model.
Meanwhile, viewers all agreed that the resulting stories were more informative than only reading the captions .
This also indicated our approach would help the audience follow the content more smoothly compared to seeing a mundane slideshow simply in chronological order.
The high scores  to the questions from the questionnaire indicated Raconteur helped storytellers make impressive "points."
In the post-test interviews when we asked the viewers to recall the chatted stories, they were all able to recount the exciting, impressive points that they had not expected, such as an interesting game, a special performance, something the friend had achieved, etc.
This matched the important feature of sharing life stories with reportable events .
However, there were also some concerns.
Chatting with a friend can sometimes be very intimate because of the close relationships.
Chat messages, especially, tend to contain personal opinions, and conversational narrative is less structural for reading by outsiders.
Moreover, some participants were not sure how well the system would work if they were confronted by an aggressive viewer who frequently interrupted.
The nature of conversational storytelling makes this system most suitable for personal, one-time chat.
If a future system would be considered as a video-editing interface, it might be helpful to track the relevance of the chat messages and to incorporate a phase of reviewing a created story before final publication.
We have presented Raconteur, an enhanced text chat system that introduces a new style of social media, assisted conversation.
Raconteur combines aspects of the real-time and authored styles of communication.
Raconteur is augmented by a software agent that continuously interprets the chat text to suggest appropriate media elements to visually illustrate the story.
Our experiment shows that storytellers find Raconteur's suggestions helpful in making impressive story points, and keeping the audience highly engaged in the chat.
