CARD  is an influential technique for participatory design and participatory analysis that is in use on three continents.
This paper reviews three case studies that document the development of a layered CARD approach, which distinguishes among the following:  observable, formal components,  skill and craft, and  interpretative description.
The layered approach simplifies the CARD materials, and moves the deliberately informal technique toward a more principled analysis.
Tudor discovered the CARD technique in 1992, and refined it into a well-understood practice in 1993 .
It became a macroscopic or "task-level" participatory design technique that could be usefully applied in conjunction with a microscopic, "screen-level" participatory design technique such as PICTIVE .
CARD has been taught in conference tutorials on three continents, and has led to critical appraisals whose authors have created their own card-based methods .
Recent innovations have transformed CARD from an undifferentiated collection of materials into three conceptual layers of analysis, with additional depth of insight resulting from the interactions among these layers.
This paper presents the first published description of the more principled layered analysis.
The CARD technique is a game-like procedure through which a diverse group can lay out, design, or critique a task flow or activity flow.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Cards are printed on colored cardstock; the colors are used to indicate a high-level class hierarchy, with related cards printed in the same color.
Intangible outcomes often involve enhanced personal and organizational communication, improved teamwork, greater organizational cohesion, and stronger commitment by participants to the success of a project in which they  now have shared ownership.
The group then examines the cards that will be used in the session .
Each card contains an open-ended template to describe an activity, or a component of an activity.
The template asks questions whose answers may be useful in describing the activity.
The participants in the session will use the cards to lay out a sequence of activities, to explain not only what is done but also why it is done, and to add commentary and interpretation that helps people to understand the nature of the work and its context.
Emphasis is placed on the provisional nature of the cards' contents, and on the openness of the technique to innovation, including innovation of new cards.
There is usually a New Ideas card that explicitly invites the creation of new content, and participants are also encouraged to use the blank backs of the cards if the printed fronts contain insufficient  material.
More crucially, CARD is most often used as a means of enfranchising end-users as full and effective members of a participatory analysis, participatory design, or participato-ry evaluation activity .
The intended atmosphere of the session is presented as being open, non-judgmental, and safe for all participants.
Discussions focus on the issues, not on the participants, and the group attempts to remain committed to collaborative exploration and clarification of conflicts, with the hopes of resolving any conflicts that occur..
CARD is in some ways similar to the Organization Kit and Layout Kit participatory design approaches of , in the use of physical playing cards to facilitate egalitarian work with end-users in a small-group setting.
CARD differs from the Kits approaches in a number of ways.
In the Kits approaches, each card contains a workplace story or anecdote; the cards are used, one-at-a-time, to initiate discussions.
In the CARD approach, each card represents a component of the work; the cards are used in combination to construct or critique the flow of activities.
In the Kits approach, participants seldom write on the cards.
The main work of the session then begins.
In a participatory analysis session, the users describe their work, and the other members of the group ask questions.
In a participatory design session, the conversation may begin with the users' current work, or with someone else's ideas about innovations in practices, working relations, or technologies.
In a participatory assessment  session, such as Tudor's original work, the existing or proposed work practice is critiqued by the participants.
In all three sessions, the participants lay out the existing or proposed work practice , critique it, and explore alternatives.
The CARD materials must, of course, be tailored  to the type of activity  and  to the work domain.
CARD is in some ways similar to traditional card-sorting practices from cognitive psychology , in that people make patterns or sequences by placing the cards in a physical pattern.
CARD differs from the traditional cardsorting approaches in a number of ways.
In the traditional approaches, participants serve as data-sources for experimenters.
In the CARD approach, participants are coinvestigators, co-designers, or co-evaluators with other team members.
The traditional approach produces a single type of information .
CARD produces rich sources of diverse, complex, and interrelated concepts.
We had been asked to explore opportunities to automate the work of directory assistance operators.
We performed a very preliminary task analysis based on training materials, and derived a set of components of the work.
We then developed cards for each of these components - examples are shown in Figure 3.
These components addressed activities such as operators' questions and reports to customers, customers' r equests and clarifications to operators, operators' work with keyboard and screen, and recorded-voice technologies.
The preceding sections have described the CARD technique as understood in previous publications.
This paper describes a new approach to CARD materials, separating them conceptually into three layers of description and interpretation :Observable or Formal.2 The Observable or Formal category includes work objects and activities that would be visible to an outside observer, and that might be mentioned or even required in a work plan or work flow.
The Skill and Craft category includes details of work that might not be apparent to an outside observer.
In some cases, these details involve knowledgeable practice, such as following a particular process or practice, or selecting a specific tool or a specific type of material or medium.
In some cases, these details i nvolve purely internal activities, such as setting goals, developing strategies, making plans, and establishing motivations.
The concepts in Skill and Craft can often be used to interpret or provide depth of understanding to the more obvious and visible activities in the Observable or Formal category.
The Description category provides additional tools for interpreting the concepts covered in the preceding two categories.
Materials in the Description category are more likely to be used reflectively, in discussion or analysis of the work.
Major steps in the development of the layered approach occurred in three case studies, over a period of seven years.
These components appeared to map into an informal class hierarchy of activities and technologies.
We printed the CARD materials onto different colors of cardstock, using a different color for each of the different high-level classes .
Each of these classes contained multiple subclasses.
For example, within the class of operator utterances, operators might Ask Questions or Report on the results of database searches.
Similarly, keyboard activities might involve typing names or addresses into KeyFields or searching databases using Search keys.
We were concerned that there might be unrecognized components of skill, knowledge, and judgment in operators' work.
We therefore introduced the concept of Mental Work in the CARD materials for the first time, providing two Mental Work cards .
Over time, we discovered more categories of operators' Mental Work , resulting in a total of six Mental Work cards .
In each session, we collaboratively described a particular type of operators' work, using the CARD materials to construct a poster of the work flow.
We used the posters as second-order data for resource-timeline analyses.
We also used the posters to validate our analysis with telephone operators and officers of their union, and to communicate the results to upper management.
Initially, we did not think of this approach as a layered analysis.
Yet, we clearly had two distinct types of materials.
The first, larger set of materials consisted of observable, recordable, and measurable job performance attributes.
In retrospect, we now see that we had one layer of operators' observable, measurable behaviors , and a second layer of operators' skills and expertise .
The events in the first layer could be better understood in terms of the skills and expertise in the second layer.
In this study, the second layer of "invisible" components served initially as an interpretive layer.
We used our growing knowledge of operators' strategies to make sense of the operators' very rapid, precise, and masterful use of limited resources to provide high-quality service under extreme time constraint .
The Mental Operation and Strategy cards transformed  a sequence of five or six utterances and six keystrokes from an apparently rote, routine, overlearned sequence of unconsidered actions , into a bravura performance involving judgment, skill, extensive and highly structured knowledge, and on-going awareness of performance status with delicate weighing of competing priorities .
Some of the components in the Operators study recurred in this study.
However, we wanted to learn about a much broader set of contexts of use, and we wanted to learn about a far greater breadth of activities.
More importantly, we could not predict what these activities might be, and we wanted to be open to activities that we had not anticipated.
By contrast, the operators study had involved a single, well-specified set of users doing an extremely delimited set of job tasks, using well-specified resources.
We used a set of CARD materials that had previously been developed for participatory analysis in "generic" work settings, but which had never been applied in any published study.
These generic materials were both broader and shallower than those used in the operators study.
For example, we used a single card  to represent real-time conversations that might be face-to-face or telephone-mediated, in contrast to the much more fully developed  set of materials to describe conversations between operators and customers .
Similarly, it was inappropriate to re-use the detailed taxonomy of strategies and knowledges that we had discovered and documented in the operators study.
Nonetheless, we were convinced of the value of inquiring not only about observable events, but also about people's goals, strategies, motivations, intentions, and reactions to those events.
However, because we were particularly concerned to collect stories of people's problems in home computing, we introduced a Breakdown card, in the same class as the Mental Event or Operation card .
We used these analyses to help  make informed decisions regarding technologies, meeting economic business constraints while maximizing opportunities for operators to add unique value to customers' requests.
These analyses later helped us to * understand the reasons for early paradoxical outcomes with a new technology prototype * quickly reverse those paradoxical outcomes through modifications of the prototype * improve the user experience of the prototype and product to exceed planned levels of customer acceptance More significantly for the fields of HCI and CSCW, our analyses also helped us to * critique earlier analyses  of operators' work in HCI, exploring issues of how social assumptions may enter into technological analyses  * contribute to an emerging analysis of the importance of "invisible work"  .
Thus, this early and unintentionally layered approach contributed significantly to understanding work, improving technology, achieving commercial goals, critiquing work in HCI, and developing new analyses of human work .
Ten members of a product team  visited people in their homes to understand how they were using computers, with a particular focus on "good stories" and "bad stories."
User participants ranged from executives to firefighters to home businesspeople, and from third-grade kids to grandparents.
In a typical session, we talked with the participating family about their family structure and general computer usage, looked at the physical settings of all of their computers, noted relationships between the computer and the settings of other home activities, and inquired about the relationship of their computer's placement and usage with other key activities.
Finally, we spent the largest part of each visit using CARD to collect users' stories.
The second major use of a layered approach occurred in a study of home computing conducted Microsoft during 1997.
We wanted to understand how people experienced using  products in their homes, and how those products did or did not fit into their indivi-dual and family activities.
There were several important differences b etween this work and the operators study:
Unlike the operator study, we could not predict, prescribe, or proscribe the topics of the stories.
We learned about Mormon genealogy, subcontracting, home sewing business, homework, games, the complex mixes of individual and shared technologies in teenagers' social relations, and uses of paper and electronic calendars to support individual scheduling and especially family coordination.
The first intentional use of three layers of analysis occurred in a project to aid designers at Lotus Development Corporation to strengthen their community of practice.
Communities of practice are informal, horizontal networks of people who share a discipline, background, or job title, and who often work as the sole practitioner of their discipline within a team of people who have other skills .
People in this situation often have to abandon their own perspectives and practices, and adopt the vocabulary, methods, and work cultures of their co-workers - a situation that I have described as the problem of "minority disciplines" .
Communities of practice are intended to improve the working conditions and professional development of the minority disciplines by putting them in contact with peers who share their perspectives, vocabularies, ways of approaching problems, and criteria for quality work.
The Mental Work and Breakdown cards made a major difference in some of the narratives.
For example, if we had recorded one particular narrative solely in terms of the Observable or Formal layer , we would have seen a child create a file and then turn off the computer.
The child subsequently turned the computer on and explored the file system.
A parent then opened the file that the child had created earlier.
On the basis of these observable events, we might hypothesize that the parent was checking the child's homework, or was inspecting the computer for illicit actions by the child.
Examination of the Mental Work and Breakdown cards in the Skill and Craft layer shows a different story .
The child didn't know how to make sense of the file system, and therefore thought she had lost her file.
Her exploration of the file system was an increasingly desperate search for the file.
The parent successfully retrieved the file from an unlikely folder, saving the child's homework assignment.
Stories like these helped to show which aspects of applications and operating systems failed to make practical sense to users - often with dramatic breakdowns and considerable anxiety for users.
Analysis of these breakdowns helped the team to prioritize changes in software, and to propose radically different ways of locating and accessing files and other data elements for future research.
Based on analyses of trade-offs in design decisions for communities of practice , we wanted to get a detailed and strongly self-interpreted sense of the work of designers at Lotus, and so we used CARD in a three-layer participatory analysis.
We modified the materials used in the Home Computer Use study, to make them more suitable to the design community .
Sessions were conducted over a period of three months.
Most designers participated in only a single session; a few participated in as many as three sessions.
Project staff participants were an analyst who led every session, and a developer who joined roughly 50% of the sessions.
We asked designers to narrate a representative or characteristic work story.
In each session, we created a poster that showed the flow of design activities.
We learned about the diversity of designers' activities and roles on their product teams.
Graphic designers often work in a delimited world of graphical objects and visual impact.
By contrast, interaction designers  tend to have a broad and extremely flexible practice that shades into product design, product management, and development of user interface code.
Usability evaluators  tend to work similarly to graphic designers, but in their own domains: That is, usability evaluators tend work in an extremely delimited world of received prototypes  for test, and of documented observations and recommendations.
Designers readily used the Observable or Formal layer of cards, and often made use of the Skill and Craft layer.
They seemed to be comfortable and articulate with their actions, most of their skills, and their knowledge.
The major exception to that generalization occurred in the area of methods and techniques.
Interaction designers appear to improvise much of their practice, working opportunistically with multifunctional teams of varying composition.
They infrequently think in terms of methods as such in their ad hoc practice.
By contrast, graphic designers and interaction designers often mentioned specific methods or media, but often blurred the distinction between technique, on the one hand, and media and tool on the other.
Usability evaluators were usually quite clear about their methods.
These differences may reflect differences in backgrounds.
Designers tend to come from art programs or from user assistance work.
Historically, they have generally had to adapt their working practices to the dominant software engineering culture in which they work.
By contrast, usability evaluators tend to come from behavioral science or engineering programs.
These disciplines have asserted a scientific and engineering basis as part of the legitimation of their work, and have thus developed their own structures of activities, methods, and media that are somewhat distinct from those of software engineering.
Designers were less likely to make spontaneous use of cards from the Description layer without prompting.
We were particularly concerned to understand the various different definitions of "lifecycles" - i.e., is there a "design lifecycle," similar to the usability lifecycle described by Mayhew  and others?
With prompting, designers easily applied the Lifecycle Checkpoint card to their stories.
This card helped to show us major points of articulation and coordination, where one lifecycle intersects with another .
Lifecycle checkpoints may act as boundary objects  between the distinct lifecycles - that is, points of coordination and articulation, but also points at which the meaning of the checkpoint event is defined differently by the different lifecycles.
Examples include specification freeze  and usability testing .
Designers rarely - but very deliberately - made use of the Things that Worry Us card within the Description layer.
They frequently noted that "user interface freeze isn't a real freeze."
This is to say, the product lifecycle may call for user interface design and development work to stop at a particular date , but in fact the design continues to be refined, and post-"freeze" changes have to be inserted  into the design, and  into the product lifecycle.
We have not yet worked with product managers to understand their view of a product lifecycle.
On the basis of our work with designers, we are confident that there is a longterm design lifecycle, especially as regards product design, and to a lesser extent, interaction design.
These lifecycle concepts appear to cover several successive stages of a product lifecycle .
By contrast, graphical design and usability evaluation tend to be thought of as briefer, more discrete lifecycles that may fit into longer-term, largerscale lifecycle models, such as product lifecycles and interaction/product design lifecycles.
Although we have not done any formal testing, the layered materials and practice appear to be quite usable.
Participants easily make use of the materials.
The tangible outcomes clearly communicate both the words and the perspectives of the participants.
Teams have used the materials and the practices to develop new insights, product innovations, and commercially significant contributions.
The emphasis in this paper has been on layered participatory analysis.
Here are some untested ideas about how the layering approach could be used in participatory design: * Designers often make assumptions about users' goals, strategies, and motivations.
The Mental Work cards can be used to make these assumptions clear, visible, and open for discussion.
This activity often includes noting the users' background and training.
The Skill and Craft cards can help a group make these assumptions explicit - e.g., What skills are assumed at this step?
The Things That Worry Us card can help designers annotate design components, indicating which concepts should be revisited later, perhaps helping to choose issues for usability evaluation.
Similarly, we speculate that the layered approach could be used in participatory evaluation.
Tudor's original work is the strongest example of CARD in participatory evaluation.
Her users laid out the current sequence of activities, critiqued it, and then re-arranged it .
Tudor's records were simple sequences of cards - in the language of this paper, all of Tudor's materials were in the Observable and Formal category.
Using the layered approach, Tudor's procedure might be revised as follows: * The immediate problems caused by the original sequence of activities could be recorded on Mental Work cards, as Breakdowns or as changes in strategy, goal, or motivation - i.e., in the Skill and Craft category.
CUTA: A simple, practical, and low-cost approach to task analysis.
Learning across teams: The role of communities of practice in team organizations.
Knowledge Management Review, May/June 1999.
San Francisco CA USA: Morgan Kaufman.
Designing for and with a community of designers: Minority disciplines and communities of practice.
New York: Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility.
Invisible work of telephone operators: An ethnocritical analysis.
Social and computing solutions for voluntary communities of practice: Designing CommunitySpace.
In Proceedings of IEEE WET-ICE conference.
Telephone operators as knowledge workers: Consultants who meet customer needs.
Bifocal tools for scenarios and representations in participatory activities with users.
Computer-Supported Cooperative Work , 8  Nielsen, J.
PictureCARD: A storytelling tool for task analysis.
In PDC'96 Proceedings of the Participatory Design Conference, 183-191.
A participatory design technique for high-level task analysis, critique, and redesign: The CARD method.
Communities of practice: Learning as a social system.
The evolving layered approach described in this paper appears to make several contributions.
It helps to simplify the CARD method, grouping concepts and materials into relatively small sets of easily comprehended components.
It provides a useful way of considering users' work and the analysts' interpretation of that work, in layers of observable activity, skill and craft, and the analysts' interpretations.
These simplifications and clarifications should improve the accessibility of the technique for software professionals and end-users alike, thus strengthening the technique as a support for full exchange of information, knowledge, and perspective, and aiding teams in democratic, fullycommunicative work practices.
Finally, the layered work on participatory analysis encourages new research in bringing layered perspectives to participatory design and participatory evaluation.
This paper reflects eight years of methodology and practice work by a large number of people, including Catherine Ashworth, Rebecca Carr, Joan Clonts, Tom Dayton, Susan Davies, Barbara Diekmann, Elizabeth Dykstra-Erickson, Cheri Eickstadt, Daniel Lafreniere, Monica Marics, Merry Morse, Kent Sullivan, Leslie Gayle Tudor, Jayson Webb, and Cathleen Wharton.
Frank Aiello and Tony Pinto helped generously at the last minute.
