ABSTNACT Much is known about depth and breadth tradeoff issuesin graphical user interface menu design.
We describe an experiment to see if large breadth and decreaseddepth is preferable, both subjectively and via performance data, while attempting to design for optimal scent throughout different structuresof a website.
A study is reported which modified previous procedures for investigating depth/breadth tradeoffs in content design for the web.
Resultsshowed that, while increaseddepth did harm search performanceon the web, a medium condition of depth and breadth outperformedthe broadesf shallow web structure overall.
Keywords Information retrieval, memory, depth and breadth in information design,web pagedesign,hypertexf searching.
Of particular interest was the optimal depthversusbreadth of the hyperlii distribution across expertly categorizedweb content, with an emphasis on the importance of structure.
In addtion, an effort was made to tie the findings both to current research in information retrieval and web design for large information spaces.
The differential effects of short-term memory and visual scanning were examined as cognitive covariates in the experiment.
Most studies concluded that breadth was better than depth when it came to organizing menu contents, althougb the breadth of the menus examined has varied from study to study.
Permission IO make digitalhrd copies of all or part ofthism~lerial for pca-sonalor classroom use is granted w&out f= provided U~atthe copies are not made or distnbuted for profit or commercial advaotage, the copyright notice, thetitle ofthepublication and its date appear.
The 8z condition allowed the fastestacquisition and fewest errors of the four structures.
D. Miller suggestedthat depth of a hierarchy should be minimized, but not at the expense of display crowding.
Snowberry, Parkinson & Sisson  replicated and extended D. Miller's  study by examining the same for depth/breadth tradeoff conditions .
They included an initial screening session during which subjects were administered memory span and visual scanning testsin an effort to teaseout their contributions in subjects' performancedata.
They found that memory span was not predictive of performancein any of the conditions, but that visual scanning was predictive of performance, especially in the deepest hierarchies.
Kiger  testedfive structureswith 64 bottom level nodes  and collectedboth performanceand preference data The 4x16 structure  had the fastest reaction times, followed closely, and not reliably different from 16x4 and 8'.
The 4x16 structure also had the fewest errors, followed closely, and again not reliably different from the 8* and 16x4 conditions.
Subjectively, subjects favored the 8* structure when asked about both ease of use and preference.
For both easeof useand preference,the 43 and 4x16 conditions followed behind by a non-reliable difference.
Jacko & Salvendy  tested six structures varying both depth and breadth without controlling for the size of lowest-level search area.
Jacko & Salvendy found reliable differences in reaction tune for depth, breadth, subjects, and the depth by breadth interaction.
There were reliable differences in accuracyand perceivedcomplexity only for depth Relating these findings back to complexity theory , they concluded that as you increase breadth and/or depth.
PAF%FtS complexity was assumed to be short-term memory .
This stands in contrast to Snowbetry et al.`s conclusions that found visual scanning to be more predictive of performance,especially in deepstructures.
While on the surfacethis was a soundexperimentalcontrol, it had the side effect of creating somewhat unwieldy category structures.
For instance, "Science News: Psychology", "Science News: Biology", `Science News: Physics", and "Science News: Chemistry" all existed together on a level of one structurewherethe four sciences were all under the category "Science News" in another structure.
In effect the samecategorystructure existed in both hierarchy levels, but countedas one level of depth in the first instance, and two Ievels of depth in the second instance.
Note that this experimental control could be related to the theoretical notion of "scent" 1123, where scent has been described as conveying distal target information via category labeling.
Therefore, in thesestudies,somestructuresmay haveperformedbetter than others because they had strongerscentfor the target at the top levels of the hierarchy .
Couched in these theoretical terms, the views of the information structures were examined, but not their navigability .
As mentioned earlier they re-ran the D. Miller  study, but they did so with one additional structure.
One form of the 64' structure was similar to D. Miller's, with items randomly grouped on screen.
The other 64' structure included items grouped into coherent categories.
Thii was not true for the randomly organized64' structure.
Landauer & Nachbar  presenteda predictive equation for amount of time to make a decision given X number of extremely grouped alternatives.
The bottom level nodeswere the numbers 1 through 4096, and at higher levels the numbers were grouped into equal categories,such as I-2048 and 20494096 at the top level of the stmcture with 2 items of breadth.
Landauer and Nachbar found that the reaction time for any given screen would increase linearly with number of alternatives.
An important issue in both D. Miller's and Snowberry et aI.`s studies was that subjectswere given the hierarchiesto study for rather long periods of time, and given extensive feedback during testing when correct or incorrect categorical choices had been made during searches.
This could have contributed to subjects' relying much more heavily upon a learnedstructure than they normally would or could when traversing the World Wide Web.
Sincemost of the studies reviewed showed significant effects of training on performance, these studies were clearly examining best case performance.
Given that the World Wide Web is constantly being altered and extended,how generalizableare thesefindings to web design?
Will broad, shallow web pagesreally provide a performanceadvantage when searching through unfamiliar or loosely related constructs?
The Magic Number 7 Four decadesago, G. Miller  offered a general rule of thumb that the span of immediatememory is about 7 +/- 2 items.
When people are asked to distinguish between different tones, if the number of tones presentedis over about5, their accuracyat this task decreases rapidly.
When asked to recall a series of unrelated words or numbers, peoplefail when the size of the seriesincreases to 6 or 7.
In other words, the span of immediate memory imposes severe limitations on the number of items we are able to receive, processand remember.
Although there has been much controversyover the "magic number7", as it is often referred to, G. Miller recognizedthat by organizing items into categorical units or chunks, we can at least stretch an apparentshort-termmemory bottleneck.
A commonality with the D. Miller, Kiger, and Jacko & Salvendy papers is that the breadth of the structureswith superior performancefalls in the rangeof 7 H- 2.
Kiger  says, "--- the data seem to indicate both preference and performance advantage for broad, shallow trees.
Interestingly, the tree structure resulting in best user performance used a menu breadth that falls within G.A.
Miller's  `seven plus or minus two' estimationof shortterm memory capacity... As a genera1 principle, the depth of a tree structure should be minimized by providing broad menus of up to eight or nine items each."
Miller's findings that people are only able to make quick, accuratedecisionswith a small handful of objectsat a time has had wide support across studies, and may provide useful guidance in the design of web hyperlinks across pages.
There are numerous examples of structures with enormousbreadth.
One need not trave1 far to see structures with breadthswider than what were covered in the studies mentioned above.
In their study they attempted to replicate Kiger's structures, but using web hyperlinks.
They found that of the 5 structurestested the 8' structure was the l&test to search, followed by the 4x16 structure .
Subjects ranked the structures in order of ease of use from easiest to hardest: 16x4, 4x16, 4s, 8*, and 2", though there were no reliabkle differences among the top 4.
Zaphiris & Mtei overah our results are in agreement with those of state, LL--.
Kiger  where it has been proven that accesstime is proportional to depth in menuselection".
While there is overwhelming evidencethat structureswith a breadth less than G. Miller's magical number are not optimal , there is less evidence that structures with greater breadth are to be recommended.Snowberry et al.
It remains unclear which of thesedesignprinciples  holds more weight, and how tightly they are coupled to the categorystructure of the information space.
Accorclmgto thesetheoretical perspectives, the design challenge is to distribute "scent" optimally throughout a well-partitioned information structure.
We descnbe an experiment to see if lape breadth and decreaseddepth is preferable, both subjectively and via performance data, while attempting to design for optimal scent throughout different structures of a website.
METHODS Subjects 19 subjects were taken from the Microsoft databaseof people who identify themselvesas willing participants in computer related studies.
Subjects were rewarded with Microsoft software for participating in the study.
Materials The visual scanning and memory span pre-tests were chosen from the Kit of Factor-Referenced Cognitive Tests .
The Memory Span pre-test chosen was the Auditory Number Span Test : the visual scanning pre-test presentedto subjectswas the Finding A's Test  from the Perceptual Speed sub-tests.
Due to time constraints, only one fifth of each sub-test was included in this study.
The visual scanning sub-test took 30 secondsto complete, while the memory span test was verbally presented to subjects, at the rate of one digit per second.
The test administration took approximately 3 minutes.
Both the content and the categorization scheme that subjects searched were pulled from the Encar&@ encyclopedia.
There were three different categorization structures, each with 512 bottom level nodes.
The three different structures were 8x8x8 , 16x32 , and 32x16 .
One problem with previous studies on this topic is that category "soundness" or naturalness was confounded across depth and breadth conditions.
In order to create natural categories, therefore, it was not optimal to use identical content level categoriesfor each structure.
The emphasis was to create category labels that would be sensible to users, or to maintain good scent throughout the structures.
Instead of choosing 512 bottom level nodes, then fitting different structuresto those items, three sensiblestructures were created and popuIated with items that naturally belonged to the structures.
Becauseof this, only a quarter of the total 512 items in each structure  appeared in all three structures.
These 128 overlapping items therefore becamethe set of possible searchtargetsfor the study.
A nagging problem for us was that these structures were not user tested to control for category soundness,which would have been optimal.
Instead, due to time constraints, we invited an editor to establish the category contents for each structure, which resulted in categories that appeared natural to us.
This therefore resulted in at least an initial effort to teaseapart the effects of structure, scent and category soundness.A portion of each of the three category structures is included in Appendix A.
Since the same 125 targets appeared in each of the hierarchies, subjects' semantic knowledge of the target as well as the target word's length and frequency was controlled.
Becauseitems outside of the target searchset varied from hierarchy to hierarchy, subject's semantic knowledge, as well as word frequency and length, were not controlled among those non-target items.
As stated above, the items used in eachstructure were picked from Encarta by an editor with the instructions to pick items that are representative of eachcategory.
Each web page was marked with title information indicating where this page was located in the hierarchy.
The top page of each hierarchy was marked either `hierarchy I:`, `hierarchy 2:`, or `hierarchy 3:`.
Second level pages were marked `hierarchy X: appropriate page title:' where X was replacedwith the appropriatehierarchy numberand the appropriatecategorytitle was filled in.
On secondlevel pages`hierarchy X' was a link back to the toplevel page of the hierarchy.
If there were three levels, the third level was titled `hierarchy X: appropriate sub-level category name: appropriate bottom level category name:' and the appropriatesub-level categoryname and hierarchy X were both backwardslii.
Under the categorynameon each page was a vertical list of all the items in a randomizedorder.
The items were formatted on the web page following conventional web style guidelines for optimal scanning  and for more efficient view traversability - If the pagehad 8 or 16 items, they were arrangedin a single column.
If the pagehad 32 items,they were arrangedin two columns,so that scrolling was never necessary.
Example pages from each hierarchy are included in Appendix B.
They were told that when this happens, they should try to find anotherroute to the target.
Data for three kinds of analysis was collected: lostness measures,reaction times, and subjective ratings.
Smith  defined lostness in hyperspace as distance on the hypotenuseof a right triangle where one side of the triangle is the number of different nodesaccessed over the number of total nodes accessed, and the other side is number of nodes required to complete the task over the number of different nodes accessed.
Lostness scores can be helpful in identifying when subjects are .effectively "going around in circles".
In addition, reaction time was measured.
There was a start screen for eachtrial with links to `hierarchy I', `hierarchy 2', and `hierarchy 3'.
The reaction time measurewas initiated when the subject pressedthe link to the appropriate structure and stopped when the link for the target item was selected.The web serverwas locatedon the subjects'computer, in an effort to control for any problems with differential web download and lag times-After the subjects fmished all 24 trials, subjective preference and rank order responses were collected for the three hierarchies.
Finally, subjects answeredthe following five subjective questions on a 5 point Likert scale about each hierarchy: "I liked this structuren," Right when I started I knew what information was available", " It was easy to get where I wanted in this structure", "This structure is easy to use", and "This structurefeels familiar".
Subjectswere allowed to go back and review the hierarchieswhile answering all but the fitst subjectivequestion.
Each subject performed 8 searchesin each structure for a total of 24 searches.
The searchtarget was always one of the 128 bottom level nodesthat overlappedwith all three hierarchies.
Target items for eachhierarchy were chosenat random from the 128 possrbletargetswith two restrictions: eachsubjectwould searchfor a target only once regardless of hierarchy, and, within a hierarchy, no more than one target was chosen per category.
The 24 trials were not blocked by hierarchy, but presentedin a random order.
Subjects were given both the search target and the hierarchy to search in directly preceding each trial, and were not told about future targets.
Each trial's target and hierarchy information was presented to the subjecton paper next to the computer so it was constantly available as a referencematerial, with one target and hierarchy presented per page.
At the start of eachtrial, the subject was askedto turn the pagein order to seethe new target and hierarchy to be usedfor the next trial.
Subjectswere told the purposeof the experimentaheadof time.
They were told that we were interested in determining the optimal numberof links on a pageand that we were having them perform searchesin three different hierarchies to explore this issue.
They were asked to perform all searches as quickly aspossiblewhile making as few mouseclicks as possible.
Subjectswere not told about the experimenters' expectationsof the results.
Subjects were warned that the hierarchies did not contain cross-
A post-hoc analysis using the Bonferroni method showed that the 8x8~s hierarchy was significantly slower than both of the broader.
However, there was no significant difference between the 16x32 and the 32x16 hierarchies for reaction time.
No meaningful pattern in the error datawas observed in this study, as subjectswere for the most part required to continue searching until the target item was found.
In the fourteen caseswhen this happened,the reaction time was recorded as five minutes.
Table 1: Correlationsbetweenvisual scanningand memory spanand reaction time in eachof the hierarchies Subjective Ratings and Preference Measures Subjectsfilled out subjective ratings for each hierarchy, as well as a forced-choice preference after completing their searches in all of the hierarchies.
In the forced choice preference data, Table 2 shows that the 32x16 hierarchy was ranked as most preferredmore often than the other two hierarchies.
LotneS An analysis of the number of unique and total links visited in comparisonto the "optimal" path was performed.
Post-hocanalyses  showed that the 8x8~8 hierarchy contributed to significantly more usersbeing lost than did the other two hierarchies.
Although the relationships were nonsignificant the memory span scores were slightly more correlated with subjects' reaction time overall, r = -0.27, than were the visual scanningscores,r = -0.12.
A negative correlation means that better memory span and visual scanningscoreswere predictive of fhster searchtimes.
Further analyseswere carried out checking for whether or not memory or scanningpretestscoreswere more likely to be predictive of one of the threehierarchies.
Table 1 shows the correlation between the cognitive tests and reaction time in each hierarchy.
Greater memory and scanning ability was most highly correlated with faster reaction times in the 16x32 hierarchy.
Memory span scoreshad no correlation with reaction time in the 8x8~8 hierarchy.
None of these correlations were statistically reliable.
The averagescore on a 5 point Likert scale and standard deviation for each subjective questionnaire item are provided in Table 3.
Although the 32x16 hierarchy had the highest average ratings overall, there were no significant differences across any of the questionnaire items for the three hierarchies.
This corroborates previous findings that demonstrated that increasingthe levels of depth hurt user performanceduring search.
Both of the hierarchies with two levels of depth resulted in better user performancethan did the hierarchy with three levels of depth.
But the findings stand in contrastto recent web design and information visualization techniques that herald increased breadth of items to extremely large sizes on the top page of a website.
Although not statistically reliable, the hierarchy with 32 top-level items resulted in not only slower searchtimes, on the average, but also more subjects feeling "lost in hyperspace"Our findings that memory span was a slightly better performance predictor than visual scanning differed from Snowberry et al.`s  findings .
They also founda slightly better correlation between memory span and accuracy in the deepest structure.
The differences behveen the findings in the two studies are likely the product of different methodologies.
In Snowberry et al., subjectswere required to remember the target item , as well as index the target, retain that index in short-term memory, and map the index to a response.
Under thesehigh cognitive load conditions, only people with large memory spans may have correctly retained the target through deep structures.
In our experiment, subjects were given paper instructions presenting them with the target item, and this paper remained with the subject throughout the trial.
Therefore, in the presentstudy, both memoryspanand visual scanning may have been taxed more in the large breadthhierarchies, explaining why people with higher scores on these tests exhibited accelerated performance.
In a forced choice preference question,most subjects preferred the 32x16 hierarchy over the other two hierarchies .
While the 32x16 hierarchy scored slightly better on avemgefor the five Likert scale questions on appeal, there were no large differences between the three hierarchies.
The magic number 7 +I- 2 At the onset of this study the authorswere convinced that short-term memory limitations would play an important role in users' ability to learn and rememberthe structure of a website, to aid information rettie& Instead we have shown that memory is only one variable in this debate,at least over the short course of time that users searched through the web pages used in this study.
The present results demonstratedthat depth, or the number of levels inherent to a web structure,was a stronger determinant of performance, and that three levels of depth resulted in significantIy more problems during searching than two, regardlessof breadth.
So, our fmdmgsare consistentwith those reviewed earlier that favored breadth over depth.
We did find stronger correlations between memory span and the two hierarchieswith greaterbreadth.
Subjectswith better memory abilities were able to perform better in these hierarchies.
Apparently the breadthof the 8x8x8 hierarchy was small enoughthat it did not tax users' memory, so subjectswith better or worse than averagememoryperformedequally well.
Implications for design This study was an investigation of the effects of memory, responsemapping, structure, and scent on designing web sites for efficient information retrieval.
We have tried to couch the last hventy years of research on depth and breadth in menu design in a current theoretical framework for information design on the web.
The danger of generalizing from earlier researchto web design is that there may be a tendencyto assumethat broader,shallower web site designsare always preferable.
The current study has demonstrated that, for one well-organized, large information space, our moderate level of breadth  may actually afford optimal user performance.The results of this study map nicely into the information foraging and effective view navigation lines of research.
As has been demonstratedin previous work on that topic, it is extremely dif5cult to distribute residue, or scent, throughout an information structure effectively .
For this study and its expertly organizedcontent,the 16x32 and 32x16 information structures most likely afforded optimal performance becausetheir category labels were more distinct at the top levels  than those of the 8x8x8 hierarchy.
The 8x8x8 structure suffered from the fact that subjects had to make another categorical decision at the second level of the hierarchy.
It seems reasonabIethat the 16x32 hierarchy performed better than the 32x16 hierarchy  because there were fewer categoricaljudgmentsto be made at the top level.
In summary, one implication for design based on the current set of results is that web designersneed to balance the number of categorical decisions made for their information structure againstthe number of items needing to be visually searchedon the web page.To help designers with understanding this tradeoff, the authors wish to emphasizethe need to consider the layout as well as the semanticsand labeling of web content.
More researchon matching category soundness and labeling to a user's understandingof the information spaceshould augmentour understanding of how to best design for large-scale information spaces, such asthe World Wide Web.
The authors would like to acknowledgeBen Shniederman, Andrew Sears and Julie Jacko for their guidance in the early stagesof this research.Early commentsfrom George Robertsonand Sue Dumais were very helpful in refming rough drafts of this paper.
We would also like to offer special thanks to Linda Loba for her help with developing the web hierarchies.
The magical number sevenplus or minus two: Some limits on our capacity for processing information.
Psychological Review, 63, Appendix A Comparisonof semanticcontent in the 3 hierarchies.
64  bottom level categoriesare shown from eachstructure.
The 16  items that appearin eachof the threehierarchies are bolded.
Four of the top 32 levels are shown.
Items that match items in other hierarchiesare bolded.
Two of the top 16 levels are shown.
Items that match items in other hierarchies are bolded.
Krill, Leech.Mollusk, Moss Animals: Nautilus, Portuguese Man-of-War, SandDollar.
Symbion, Walkingstick, Water Bug African Violet, Alder.
