Absolute indirect interaction maps the absolute position of a device's end-effector to the absolute position of a remote onscreen object.
Despite its long-time use with graphics tablets and growing use in research prototypes, little is known on the influence of form factors and input conditions on pointing performance with such a mapping.
The input and display can have different sizes and aspect ratios, for example.
The on-screen targets can vary in size.
Users can look solely at the display or at the input device as well.
They can also hold the input device in certain cases, or let it rest on a table.
This paper reports on two experiments designed to investigate the influence of all these factors on absolute indirect-touch pointing performance.
We also provide design guidelines for interaction in these situations based on the observed impacting factors.
The absolute direct mapping of many multi-touch interfaces contributes to a high feeling of directness , as it provides the illusion of touching the manipulated objects.
But it can make small targets difficult to acquire and fatigue can quickly set in with large screens, due to important distances to travel, or vertical ones.
Relative indirect multi-touch interaction could help alleviate these problems, but it requires the control of several remote pointers at the same time, a difficult task despite attempts at improving it .
Absolute indirect mappings support easier multi-touch interaction at a distance, especially when combined with specific feedback.
Graphics tablets usually provide hovering information allowing the visual representation of imminent contacts, for example.
Most multi-touch systems do not, however.
A camera mounted above the input surface is thus sometimes used to remotely display a silhouette of the arms and fingers .
Absolute indirect mappings have been used for the control of multiple cursors , interaction with large screens  and on-body interaction .
But in each of these works, the characteristics and configuration of the input and output surfaces were fixed and determined for unknown reasons.
Little is actually known about the influence of input and output parameters on users' ability to manipulate or simply point at objects in these situations.
Most commercial touchpads provide absolute finger position information, even if it is most commonly used to compute relative displacements.
Absolute indirect interaction is thus not bound to hardware limitations or hardware availability, but to the development of proper knowledge and interaction techniques.
This paper reports on two experiments investigating the influence of form factors of the input device , form factors of the display  and input conditions  on participants' performance in absolute indirect-touch pointing tasks.
We also provide design guidelines for interaction in these situations based on the observed impacting factors.
Touch-based interactions use either an absolute or a relative mapping.
The relative one maps the displacement of a contact on the input surface to that of an on-screen object.
It generally uses a non-linear transfer function to support fast movements over large distances and precise interactions with small objects .
In contrast, an absolute mapping establishes an homothetic correspondence between the position of a contact on the input surface and that of an on-screen object.
A mapping will be said to be direct when the touched surface and the screen are co-localized.
A relative direct mapping is quite unusual, but possible .
Smart phones normally use an absolute direct mapping and touchpads a relative indirect one.
Graphics tablets often support both a relative indirect and an absolute indirect mapping.
Absolute indirect mappings have also been used in various research prototypes.
Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
The authors report that ARC-Pad's absolute positioning reduced clutching by half when compared to relative positioning alone .
This suggests a good level of performance for participants in absolute indirect pointing tasks.
But as the technique was evaluated with a single input device and a single screen, it is unclear whether their characteristics played a part in participants' performance.
To avoid large scaling effects when interacting in absolute mode on a large screen with a small input surface, a solution is to map the latter to only a sub-region of the former.
The left half of the touchpad was mapped to the whole screen and allowed to control the absolute position of an on-screen delimited workspace.
The right half was mapped to the workspace, allowing finer absolute interaction inside it.
The workspace was set to a size "such that every pixel on the display can be reached using a combination of coarse and fine positioning" and could be resized.
Some users reportedly felt that the default precision on the right side was too coarse.
But the impact of the sizes of the manipulated objects and input and display surfaces was not investigated.
Indirect multi-touch cursors have been proposed for touchpads and mice that allow the relative positionning of the cursor space on the display and the absolute positioning of cursors within .
In both cases, however, nothing was said about how the cursor space should be defined, its relation to the size of the input surface, the characteristics of the task or users' capabilities.
Absolute indirect mappings have also been used for screenless imaginary interfaces, where people point in empty space or onto their own body.
But both have relatively similar sizes, and it is unclear whether spatial memory would have transferred if it was not the case.
This, according to the authors, might partially explain the observed degradation of performance.
Most studies on touch accuracy were conducted using an absolute direct mapping.
An early study from Hall et al.
In their study of the Shift technique on a PDA, Vogel and Baudisch found a minimum size for reliable acquisition of 10.5 mm .
In another study on a FTIR table, Wang et al.
Using a FingerWorks iGesture touchpad, Holz and Baudisch found 15 mm .
In the specific context of touch typing, studies showed that participants favored and were more efficient with keys larger than 19 mm, the size typically used for physical keyboards .
Touch accuracy has also been studied in screen-less absolute indirect mappings.
Participants were asked to touch one of 5 to 9 points between the wrist and elbow of their non-dominant arm .
The setting prevented them from seeing their arms while doing so.
Participants were able to acquire 6 different points, and exceptionally 8.
Participants were asked to tap on their non-dominant hand or in an empty space beside it at a position learnt on an iPod Touch.
The minimum size for reliable acquisition was 27.9 mm for the empty space and 17.7 mm for the palm.
In a subsequent study, tapping was replaced with a browsing task .
Participants were asked to search and select a target by moving a finger accross their palm, the name of hovered targets being audibly announced.
Focusing on selection time, the authors found that the ability to see the hands outperforms the tactile cues they provide.
When blindfolded, the tactile cues from the palm were more important than those from the fingertip.
Pietroszek and Lank used separated input and output surfaces with the same aspect ratio  and targets of different sizes always visible on the output surface and either visible or not on the input one.
They found a high level of accuracy for targeting without visual cues on the input surface, which was quite surprising to them, and a two-fold increase in accuracy with them.
They acknowledge in  that form factors can affect performance and that "additional evaluation is needed for non-matching aspect ratio".
To summarize, previous works have largely ignored the potential influence of the form factors of the input device and display on absolute indirect-touch pointing performance.
Knowledge on this matter could help better understand the performance observed with techniques based on such a mapping.
It could also help adjusting some of their parameters, such as the dimensions of a virtual workspace .
In what follows, we report on two experiments on absolute indirect-touch pointing.
The first one focused on the influence of the input device size and other input conditions on performance, while the second one focused on scale effects and aspect ratio.
The same task was used in the two exper-
Participants predominantly preferred a display space location offset 45 from a facing position .
The most suitable orientation of input space varied with screen position.
For front screen positions , best performance was obtained with a 45 offset from straight-on in controlorientation.
The indirect mapping used video feedback to show hand contours and circles as feedback for contacts.
Completion times were found to be shorter and error rates lower in the direct condition.
Participants were shown a target on a display and asked to point at the corresponding location on a separate touch-enabled surface using the index finger of their dominant hand.
No artificial feedback of any kind was provided to help them in this task.
We did not include a condition where the targets would be displayed on the input surface, as the task would then reduce to an absolute direct mapping for which targeting accuracy has already been studied in the literature.
The goal of this experiment was to evaluate how the size of the input device affects the minimum target size users can successfully acquire on first attempt.
We hypothesized that despite the lack of visual feedback on this device, looking at it would help position the index finger.
Based on , we also hypothesized that the non-dominant hand could act as a reference frame to position the finger if users were unable to look at the device.
Figure 2: Possible image sequence for a trial:  the trial starts with a target to acquire;  contact is detected on the input surface, but the attempt failed;  contact is lost, the trial continues with a new attempt;  contact is detected again and this time, the target was successfully acquired;  contact is lost, which initiates the next trial.
This particular example would be marked as an error since the target was not successfully acquired on first attempt.
We used two input devices.
The first was an iPad 1 featuring a 196 x 147 mm input surface.
The second was an iPod Touch 3 whose input surface was downsized to 66x50 mm using a cardboard overlay to have the same 4:3 aspect ratio as the iPad .
The laptop was set up on a desk in front of the participant, its screen tilted 30 backward about 60 cm away from the eyes.
The input device  was placed on the laptop's palm rest, about 50 cm away from the eyes.
The thickness of the palm rest made it possible to hold the input device in place with the non-dominant hand, without moving it.
The software used was coded in C++ using the Qt toolkit.
TUIO was used over UDP to send touch events from the input devices to the laptop, the three of them being connected to the same wireless network.
Custom-made blinder glasses were also used in certain conditions to prevent participants from seeing their hands and the input device .
The laptop's screen showed a black background with a white rectangular workspace the same size  as the white input surface.
Within this workspace, the target to acquire was shown as a blue disk with a black cross-hair at its center .
Participants were asked to point on the input surface at the location corresponding to the cross-hair.
Touching the input surface resulted in the display of a mark at the corresponding screen location, a semi-transparent blue disk with a white cross hair at its center .
This mark remained visible as long as contact was detected, but it could not be moved.
Missed targets turned red and there was no way of correcting the selection other than retrying .
Targets successfully acquired turned green .
After each block of trials, participants were encouraged to take a break before moving to the next one by pressing a button.
Participants were instructed to balance speed and accuracy: they were asked to do their best to select targets while keeping quick and relaxed gestures.
D EVICE SIZE was evaluated with 2 levels .
TARGET SIZE was evaluated with 3 levels consistent with the minimum target sizes found in the literature .
TARGET POSITION was evaluated with 9 levels corresponding to selected intersections of an imaginary 5 x 5 grid centered on-screen and numbered from top to bottom and left to right .
These positions were limited to 9 to shorten the duration of the experiment but nonetheless chosen to cover at best the entire input surface.
We used a discrete 2D pointing task.
Each trial began with a new target appearing on-screen and ended with its successful selection, by touching the input surface at the corresponding location and lifting the finger, or after 5 failed attempts.
Every time a participant missed a target, an error was logged.
Pairwise comparisons1 showed significant differences between the first block and the two subsequent ones for the success rate , and between the first block and the second one for the mean number of failed attempts , showing a learning effect.
The first block was thus removed from subsequent analysis.
We also considered trial positions at least three standard deviations away from the mean position for each condition as outliers and removed them from the data analysis .
The mean number of failed attempts fell from 0.66 with L ARGE to 0.23 with S MALL.
Post-hoc analysis for TARGET POSITION did not reveal any significant difference in spite of the main effect.
The number of failed attempts for each condition is represented on Figure 5.
Overall participants were more successful when they could see the input device, used the smaller input surface or selected larger targets.
In 1H AND and 1H AND B LINDERS, participants were not allowed to use their non-dominant hand which had to stay away from the desk and the input device.
In 2H ANDS B LINDERS, they were asked to hold the input device with it in place, without moving.
To summarize, participants could always see the laptop's display and use their dominant hand's index finger to point at locations on the input surface.
Their non-dominant hand was used only in 2H ANDS B LINDERS where it held in place the input device, and they could look at the input surface only in 1H AND.
The presentation order of I NPUT CONDITION and D EVICE SIZE was counterbalanced across participants using a balanced Latin Square design.
TARGET SIZE was presented in descending order.
Each B LOCK consisted of 3 repetitions of the 9 TARGET PO SITION presented in a pseudo-random order.
For each trial, we recorded the first touch position of each attempt and the number of attempts to select the targets.
The experiment lasted around 50 minutes for each participant.
Targets that were not selected on first attempt were marked as errors.
In what follows, the success rate is the percentage of targets successfully selected on first attempt.
The mean number of failed attempts is the average number of times the participant attempted to select the target and failed .
Targeting error is computed for all trials, whether succeeded or not, as the distance  between the location of the first attempt and the target center.
A low targeting error corresponds to a high accuracy.
Friedman analysis showed a significant effect of B LOCK  on targeting error and pairwise comparisons showed a significant difference between the first block and the following ones .
As a result the first block was removed from subsequent analysis.
As the targeting error did not follow a normal distribution, we used the "Aligned Rank Transform"  and ran a repeated measures ANOVA on the aligned ranks to investigate possible interactions between the factors.
Mean targeting error for S MALL and L ARGE were respectively 5.9 and 11.1 mm.
We hypothesize the lower targeting error obtained in the S MALL condition could be explained by the smaller displacements to perform on the small device: participants could perform small movements more precisely than large ones.
Pairwise comparisons showed significant differences between all levels of I NPUT CONDITION .
Looking at the input surface clearly reduced targeting error, even though nothing was displayed there.
Overall, 2H ANDS B LINDERS reduced targeting error by 4% compared to 1H AND B LINDERS, and 1H AND reduced it by 37%.
But the significant interaction of D E VICE SIZE x I NPUT CONDITION revealed there was no significant difference between 2H ANDS B LINDERS and 1H AND B LINDERS for S MALL, while there was a significant difference between these two conditions in the L ARGE condition .
Participants may have been less careful with large targets, which may have seem easier to select.
Pairwise comparisons also revealed that targeting error stopped decreasing for the L ARGE condition below target size W M: no significant difference was found between W S and W M for L ARGE while significant differences were found between these two sizes for the S MALL condition.
Targeting error was minimum for the target located at the center, followed by targets in the upper left quarter and then targets on the diagonal .
Most participants let their fingers centered above the device which required them to fold the fingers to reach targets at the bottom right corner.
For these targets , the targeting error was the highest.
Post-hoc analysis revealed that targeting error for target 25 is significantly lower in the 1H AND condition.
However for targets 9 and 19 targeting error is significantly higher in the 1H AND condition, probably because these targets are neither positioned on borders nor at the center so they do not benefit from visual guidances to estimate their position.
The corresponding minimal target sizes are reported in Table 1.
These results show that the ability to look at the device results in higher precision than holding it with the nondominant hand.
It also confirms that participants were almost two times more precise on the small device .
Ovals represent the bivariate normal distribution of first touch positions for each TARGET POSITION, represented by cross-hairs.
Across all conditions, touches tend to be shifted towards the center of the device even though the presentation order of target positions was randomized.
This can be explained by the dominant strategy which consisted in keeping the fingers around the center of the device.
In addition to this deviation, the distribution of the 1H AND condition is moved towards the bottom right in comparison with the two other input conditions.
The center of the ellipse for 1H AND is generally on the bottom right side of the other centers.
Vogel, Baudisch and Holz  have shown that most users assume the contact point considered by the machine to be located above the nail center, or at its extremity.
Yet touch interfaces use the centroid of contact shapes which is shifted towards the south-west for right fingers.
This offset between what people consider doing and what the computer interprets introduces a misunderstanding of the perceived input point model.
In our experiment, when participants were allowed to look at the device, we assume they mentally projected targets and put their finger at the corresponding locations.
The specific offset observed in this condition can be explained by the above perceived input model.
To evaluate a larger range of display sizes and aspect ratios, we replaced the display used in Experiment 1 by a 50" monLarge device itor .
Part of the display was masked to simulate the different display sizes and aspect Blind 1 hand Blind 2 handsdensity across conditions.
The monitor was positioned vertically 90 cm away from participants.
The input device was positioned horizontally on a desk, 60 cm away from participants' eyes.
The task and procedure were the same as in Experiment 1 except that the size and aspect ratio of the on-screen workspace varied accross conditions.
Targets were always presented as disks on the display but stretched on the input surface to accomodate the possible differences in aspect ratios.
As in Experiment 1, targets were never shown on the input device.
To summarize, the main finding of this first experiment is that targeting error is not constant across different input device sizes: it was smaller with the small device.
We have also shown that looking at the input device helps acquiring targets while using the non dominant hand as a reference frame does not help significantly.
The position of targets also matters with the ones positioned on the dominant hand side being the most difficult to acquire while targets at the center and corners being easier to select.
This experiment did not examine the effect of the scale at which targets are displayed, nor the difference of aspect ratio between the input surface and the display.
These factors are examined in the next experiment.
In the  condition, on-screen targets would have been mapped to 1.05 mm targets in motor space, a size most probably too small to be selected anyway.
Table 3 shows the target sizes in motor space corresponding to W M and W L for the different combinations of A SPECT RATIO and W ORKSPACE HEIGHT.
As the effect of TARGET POSITION had already been evaluated with 9 levels in Experiment 1, we decided to evaluate it with fewer levels this time.
We chose 4 positions with contrasted effects: the easiest target at the center , the top left corner position also easy to acquire , a more difficult one on the diagonal , and a difficult one most probably covered by the hand .
The presentation order of W ORKSPACE HEIGHT and A SPECT RATIO was counterbalanced across participants following a balanced Latin Square.
TARGET SIZE was presented in descending order.
Each B LOCK consisted of 3 repetitions of the 4 TARGET POSITION presented in a pseudo-random order.
For each trial we recorded the first touch position of each attempt and the number of attempts to select the target.
The experiment lasted around 20 minutes for each participant.
A Friedman analysis showed a significant main effect of B LOCK  on targeting error, but post-hoc analysis did not reveal any significant difference between the blocks.
As a result the three blocks were conserved for subsequent analysis.
The larger workspaces resulted in smaller targets in motor space.
The lower targeting error observed for H M and H L might result from increased participant attention in response to their lower success rate .
Post-hoc comparisons showed significant differences between R XL and the two other aspect ratios R M and R L .
Targeting error increased as the aspect ratio increased: the horizontal stretching impaired the correct estimation of target position.
The analysis showed a significant main effect of TARGET SIZE As in Experiment 1, smaller targets led to reduced targeting error .
We again hypothesize that participants may have been less careful with large targets which appear easier to select.
A significant interaction was found between A SPECT RATIO and TARGET SIZE  but post-hoc comparisons did not reveal any significant difference.
Targeting error decreased when the target size decreased in motor space, and as the workspace and input aspect ratios got closer.
It appears to reach a floor for the smallest target size  with the aspect ratios R L and R M .
Participants could not further reduce the error when the aspect ratio became smaller .
Post-hoc comparisons showed significant differences between all target positions  in the same order as in Experiment 1 .
Post-hoc analysis revealed that the significant interaction comes from targets 13  and 22 .
Although not significant, targets 1 and 19 also led to higher targeting error for the larger aspect ratio.
The center of the workspace remains a position easier to reach even when targets are stretched in motor space.
Target sizes in motor space were largest for H S and it appears their larger size made them easier to select in spite of their stretching in motor space.
As a result it is most likely that participants did not reach their limit in minimum target size for that workspace height.
The effect of the visual scale on precision can be analyzed for conditions giving the same target size in motor space.
H M,W M and H L,W L produce identical target sizes in motor space  but the corresponding displayed targets are two times bigger in the second condition.
The resulting minimum target sizes shows a difference equal to 1.3 mm , suggesting that visual scale has little influence on precision.
Figure 11 shows all trials split by A SPECT RATIO.
Ovals represent the bivariate normal distribution of first touch position for each TARGET POSITION represented by cross-hairs.
The center target shows an homogeneous distribution compared to the other ones and the corresponding accuracy remains steady across all A SPECT RATIO, confirming this target is easier to select regardless of the aspect ratio.
For the other positions it is interesting to notice how the ellipses get shifted across the different aspect ratios.
In particular the ellipses for R XL show the highest deviation, confirming the higher difficulty to point at target centers when they are stretched in motor space.
Minimum target sizes containing 95% of first touch positions across W ORKSPACE HEIGHT and A SPECT RATIO are presented in Table 4.
The size obtained for the R M,H M condition  is consistent with the one obtained for the L ARGE,1H AND condition of Experiment 1 .
Overall, the average touch position is offset towards the bottom-right direction of the target center .
A repeated measures MANOVA on the first touch position showed a significant interaction between W ORKSPACE HEIGHT and A SPECT RATIO .
Posthoc comparisons revealed the interaction is due to H S for which no significant difference was found across the aspect ratios while significant differences were observed for the other workspace heights.
Experiment 1 shows that being able to look at the input surface improves performance compared to blinders conditions.
When participants relied solely on proprioception, they were moderately but significantly less efficient .
In this experiment, we could not strictly control or measure how often participants looked at the input surface, but we can hypothesize that seeing it at least from time to time facilitates finger positioning, even if nothing is displayed on it.
Recommendation 1: Even if not a display, users should be able to see the input surface in absolute indirect-touch pointing tasks.
As a consequence, the boundaries of the surface should be clearly distinguishable.
Target position also influences success rate and accuracy.
Targets near the center or in the corners of the input surface are easier to select.
For right-handed people, targets in the NorthWest quadrant of the workspace are also relatively easy to select.
The North-East and South-West quadrants are equally difficult.
The most difficult targets are those in the South-East quadrant which require to fold the finger.
Recommendation 2: Designers should take the handedness of the users into account for all absolute indirect-touch pointing tasks.
When possible, frequently accessed objects should be put in the middle, in the corners or in the easier quadrant of the workspace .
The difficult quadrants  could be used for less frequent targets.
The most difficult one  could be used for irreversible actions, for example.
Experiment 2 shows that success rate and targeting error are not affected by the scale at which targets are represented onscreen: for a given size in motor space, a target displayed two times bigger is not easier or more difficult to select.
The first experiment shows that the distribution of touches is shifted towards the center of the input surface.
In Experiment 2, the shift gets more pronounced as the aspect ratio of the workspace diverged from that of the input surface.
Recommendation 3: In absolute indirect-touch situations, the display scale does not matter, but input and output aspect ratios do.
To increase the success rate and reduce the targeting error of pointing tasks, designers should use similar ratios for the input surface and the on-screen workspace.
Our participants were more precise with smaller targets and 16.8 mm, about the width of a finger, was the limit in size they could reliably acquire on first attempt when they could see the input surface .
This value is larger than the 10.5 mm found by Vogel and Baudisch using an absolute direct mapping on a PDA .
The co-localization of the input and display surfaces probably explains the higher accuracy they observed.
Our value is closer to the 15 mm found by Holz and Baudisch  on the iGesture touchpad  and the 17.7 mm found by Gustafson et al.
Most importantly, we have shown that the size of the input surface noticeably affects success rate and accuracy.
In Experiment 1, accuracy was higher on the small input surface .
The ability to acquire small targets decreases if the size of the input surface increases, which seems counterintuitive.
We hypothesize the lower accuracy observed with the large input surface is due to the larger distances to cover in motor space.
In absence of visual feedback during the task, the movement to execute can be considered a ballistic one.
And due to noise in the motor system, the endpoint of a ballistic movement may not exactly occur at the anticipated location.
We can thus assume that the targeting accuracy is linearly related to the size of the input surface.
Further experiments and analysis are required to validate this hypothesis and understand the exact relation between the size of the input surface and the minimum target size in motor space.
This could have important implications since the minimum target size in motor space has a direct impact on the size of on-screen objects: to reliably acquire targets on first attempt, their on-screen size should be larger than the minimum size in motor space times the ratio of the diagonals of the workspace and the input surface.
Recommendation 4: Designers of absolute indirect-touch interfaces should pay attention to the minimum target size in motor space and use it to check whether the on-screen interactors can be reliably acquired.
Researchers should further investigate the nature of absolute indirect-touch pointing tasks and the effect of larger movements on accuracy.
To conclude, we would like to propose a few examples in which the results of our two studies might be useful.
Let us consider the owner of a laptop with a 15"  monitor and a 105 x 76 mm touchpad who would want to use it for absolute pointing.
In this configuration, a minimum target size in motor space of 21 mm  leads to a minimum size for on-screen objects of 62 mm.
The form factors of current touchpads do not favor absolute interaction.
Nevertheless, considering the size of the objects typically displayed on a laptop screen, a reasonable use would be for managing windows, for example.
The user could enter a special mode, by pressing a key for example.
While in this mode, she would be able to select and move windows with absolute taps and drag gestures on the touchpad.
Using this absolute mode instead of the traditional relative one, she would be able to manipulate several windows at the same time.
The same person might have access to a wall display made of multiple similar screens.
In this situation, she could use absolute indirect-touch pointing to indicate where she wants to send a window displayed on her laptop.
Considering the 21 mm minimum size in motor space, the touchpad could be divided in 5 horizontally and 4 vertically and could thus address 5 x 4 screens.
A last scenario would be using a wearable multi-touch touchpad on the arm to interact with a wristwatch presenting a high resolution display.
Considering a 30x30 mm screen and a 70x70 mm touchpad, then the smallest target size in motor size would be equal to 18 mm and the corresponding smallest target size on screen would be equal to 8 mm.
Considering the lack of knowledge regarding the form factors and input conditions affecting performance on absolute indirect-touch pointing tasks, we ran two experiments to systematically investigate these factors.
The first experiment focused on input device size and input conditions and revealed that users get higher performance when they can look at the input surface .
In addition we found that the smallest target size users can acquire in motor space is not constant across different input dimensions but degrades as the input size increases.
The second experiment focused on scale effects and aspect ratio and revealed users' performance is not affected by scale but that aspect ratio matters: similar input and output aspect ratios lead to better performance.
This findings led us to list four main recommendations for the design of touch input surfaces with applications supporting absolute direct interaction.
Our results suggest the minimum target size in motor space linearly increases with the size of the input surface.
As future work we plan to investigate in a systematic way the influence of input surface dimensions on this minimum target size.
