The translation and rotation of objects with two fingers is a well explored multitouch technique.
However, there are some unsolved questions regarding the optimal conditions under which this technique functions best.
Does it matter in which direction the movement is oriented?
Does parallel or sequential performance of the two operations work best?
This study attempts to answer this question using a typical Fitts' Law setup but with varying translation-rotation orientation combinations.
The results show that right-oriented movements were faster and easier than left-oriented ones.
Movement combinations which went in different directions  were found more tiresome and resulted in more strategy switches compared to equi-directional combinations.
Our findings can inform positioning decisions in interaction design and contribute to theoretical adjustments to Fitts' Law.
However, in other contexts studies suggest that a clear separation of translation and rotation, i.e.
Most studies evaluate the interaction with specific tasks or applications such as moving or translating images or other objects  or controlling and moving an arm of a virtual puppet .
This context specificity makes it hard to generalize the results.
In contrast, several studies devised abstract task designs based on the original work by Fitts.
Stoelen and Akin show that rotation and translation have the same difficulty and complexity which may indicate that parallel execution is efficient .
They used a magnetic sensor system instead of multitouch.
In this study, 12 out of 13 participants performed the combined movements in parallel, and 1 performed them strictly serially.
A reason for the often parallel excution could be the fixed configuration in terms of movement direction: translation was always to the right, rotation always counter-clockwise.
It is possible that changing the orientation of these operations  modulate the results which may in turn explain the inconsistent research finding with regard to parallel vs. sequential execution.
Our study intends to fill a gap in existing work by systematically examining the effects of combining translation and rotation under varying conditions and looking at execution strategies by the users.
We took Stoelen and Akin's experimental design and varied movement direction.
We evaluated performance, subjective impression and choice of strategy.
We consider our work a puzzle piece in the search for theoretical models that explain and predict such conditions.
However, there are open questions regarding the optimal usage conditions and execution strategies.
Table 1: Configurations with ID .
Each participant did 256 trials .
Trial order was balanced across subjects using a Latin Square design.
All participants completed a practice phase with 48 trials up front.
In the actual study, 256 configurations were presented in 4 blocks of 64 trials each with a 15-second break between blocks.
Participants could make additional breaks at any time.
The subjects were instructed to perform the task as quickly and as error-free as possible.
During practice the error rate was displayed to make the participants more aware of their current performance and to motivate them to reduce errors.
During the actual study, the error rate was not displayed.
A trial was started when the finger touched the cursor on the multitouch screen.
Then, the color of the objects on screen changed from white to blue when the first finger touched the first cursor.
They became green when the second finger touched the second cursor.
Time measurement started when objects were actually moved.
In the pre-studies we fixed the finger distance but the participants wished for more flexibility because a fixed distance can lead to uncomfortable poses, so that the finger is lifted which caused errors.
One trial ends as either  success: object is in the target zone when fingers are lifted.
A green check mark appears and an high tone is played.
A red cross mark appears and a low tone is played,  interruption: a finger is lifted without moving the cursor.
A yellow exclamation mark appears and a sound is played.
The interruptions were logged but were not counted as errors to avoid counting unintentional interruption.
In case of error/interruption the participant repeated the trial.
After the experiment, the participants completed a questionnaire.
Each session took between 25-60 min.
16 participants , aged 21-31, were recruited via notice boards, facebook and email lists and were paid 8 EUR.
One was left handed, all others right handed.
The left-handed one used the mouse with his right hand.
In our questionnaire participants said to have experience with single- or multitouch devices.
Eight used such devices often or very often, the other eight rarely or very rarely.
In our experiment participants had to move an object  into a target translation zone and rotation zone, both colored green.
The object had to be dragged with the index finger into the green target translation zone, depicted by a center line with dashed boundary lines.
We define the distance as shortest path from the circle to the center line.
All participants performed all four task variants.
We generated 16 different task configurations .
We decided to use only two values for translation and rotation to keep the experiment feasible.
A similar design was used by Hoffman et al.
This experiment was designed to test two hypotheses: 1.
Interactions with translation to the right are faster than ones with translation to the left 2.
Interactions with the same direction for translation and rotation  are faster than interactions with different directions 
But for configurations with a small rotation Parallel was preferred , for large rotations Sequential-Trans-Rot was the most common strategy .
For RR the participants worked more in parallel and used the strategy Parallel in 56% of the trials.
However the second most common case for RR was Sequential-Rot-Trans .
For the counter-directional movements RL and LR the participants switched more between strategies.
Sequential-TransRot and Sequential-Rot-Trans-Rot was used very rarely .
In LR Parallel was used five times more often for short translation movements  than for long translation movements .
The most commonly used strategy for long distances in RL was Parallel-Changed-Pivot .
In contrast Parallel was used just in 8%.
But for short distances Parallel was the most used strategy  and Parallel-Changed-Pivot the second fewest .
Figure 2: Expected strategies for parallel  and sequential  execution with translation first for movements with translation to right.
We expected the mirrored version of these strategies for movements with translation from from right to left.
The black line indicates the start position of index-finger  and thumb .
The green line the end positions.
On top of this, we wanted to explore the strategies the participants would use to perform the tasks.
Sequential strategies: with the two subcategories translation first  and rotation first .
As an indicator for task complexity we measured the average number of different strategies a user would utilize per task across trials.
For the counter-directional RL, for example, participants used 2.48 strategies on average.
In contrast, for the equi-directional RR they just used 1.7 different strategies.
The complete order was 1.
In a one-tailed ttest the counter-directional tasks RL and LR showed significantly more strategy switching than the equi-directional tasks LL and RR  = 3.79, p < 0.005.
To identify the used strategies motion paths were manually analyzed and discussed with at least two people.
Remember that, by default, participants should use the index finger for translation and the thumb for rotation .
Parallel: parallel execution of translation and rotation.
Parallel-Changed-Pivot: rotation was performed around the thumb instead of the index finger, achieving translation and rotation simultaneously with little effort.
Sequential-Trans-Rot: translation of both index finger and thumb and a final rotation around the index finger.
Sequential-Rot-Trans: first a rotation, then the translation.
Sequential-Rot-Trans-Rot: a rotation, a translation and a final rotation.
This experiment indicates that right-oriented movements were performed faster than left-oriented movements.
One possible explanation for this phenomenon could be the righthandedness of all participants except for one and also the habit of reading and writing from left to right.
To our surprise the participants used two strategies we did not expect: 1.
Parallel-Changed-Pivot  was used for counter-directional tasks RL  and LR .
Changing the pivot finger to rotate around the thumb may have been more economic in certain configurations.
Sequential-Rot-Trans-Rot  was used in a few cases.
Right-oriented movement are also found easier and less tiresome than left-oriented ones.
In the questionnaire, participants found that LL was the hardest and most tiresome task, followed by LR.
RL and RR were the easiest and least tiresome tasks.
For RR the participants used mostly parallel strategies, whereas for the other cases the used sequential strategies.
It seems to be clear that right-oriented movements yielded better performance and subjective judgment than leftoriented ones.
In terms of strategies, an interesting observation is that Sequential-Trans-Rot was used just in 8% of the trials.
Bi, X., Li, Y., and Zhai, S. Ffitts law: Modeling finger touch with Fitts' law.
Hancock, M., ten Cate, T., and Carpendale, S. Sticky tools: full 6 DOF force-based interaction for multi-touch tables.
Performance in one-, two- and three-dimensional terminal aiming tasks.
Hoggan, E., Williamson, J., Oulasvirta, A., Nacenta, M., Kristensson, P. O., and Lehti o, A. Multi-touch rotation gestures: Performance and ergonomics.
Kipp, M., and Nguyen, Q. Multitouch puppetry: creating coordinated 3D motion for an articulated arm.
Kruger, R., Carpendale, S., Scott, S. D., and Tang, A. Fluid integration of rotation and translation.
MacKenzie, I. S., and Buxton, W. Extending Fitts' law to two-dimensional tasks.
Martinet, A., Casiez, G., and Grisoni, L. The effect of DOF separation in 3D manipulation tasks with multi-touch displays.
A screen-space formulation for 2D and 3D direct manipulation.
Stoelen, M. F., and Akin, D. L. Assessment of Fitts' law for quantifying combined rotational and translational movements.
Veit, M., Capobianco, A., and Bechmann, D. Influence of degrees of freedom's manipulation on performances during orientation tasks in virtual reality environments.
Wang, Y., MacKenzie, C. L., Summers, V. A., and Booth, K. S. The structure of object transportation and orientation in human-computer interaction.
Zhai, S., and Milgram, P. Quantifying coordination in multiple DOF movement and its application to evaluating 6 DOF input devices.
Figure 3: Path of the unexpected used strategies.
It seems to be preferable to rotate first.
Looking at strategy switching, counter-directional movements showed much more switching.
This could be an indication for the higher complexity of this kind of task so that participants are uncertain which strategy is the best one.
Our study explored the conditions under which a combined translation-rotation movement with a common 2-finger multitouch technique performs well and which execution strategies are used.
First, right-oriented movements were performed faster and perceived as easier than left-oriented ones.
Second, counter-directional combinations  were found more tiresome by users and resulted in more strategy switches compared to equi-directional combinations.
These findings could guide interaction designers when deciding on placement of interactive elements, or make performance predictions about existing interfaces.
Adaptable interfaces could use our results to automatically adjust interface elements, their parameters  or the view perspective to optimize conditions for translation-rotation.
How can these findings be used to adjust Fitts' law?
We suggest to introduce a weights  that modifies the Index of Difficulty  part of the formula .
We intend to investigate the precise relationship between translation and rotation difficulty in the future.
Another future issue is the question of how handedness influences our findings which can only be held valid for righthanded people for the moment.
