In most online citizen science projects, a large proportion of participants contribute in small quantities.
To investigate how low contributors differ from committed volunteers, we distributed a survey to members of the Old Weather project, followed by interviews with respondents selected according to a range of contribution levels.
The studies reveal a complex relationship between motivations and contribution.
Whilst high contributors were deeply engaged by social or competitive features, low contributors described a solitary experience of `dabbling' in projects for short periods.
Since the majority of participants exhibit this small-scale contribution pattern, there is great potential value in designing interfaces to tempt lone workers to complete `just another page', or to lure early drop-outs back into participation.
This includes breaking the work into components which can be tackled without a major commitment of time and effort, and providing feedback on the quality and value of these contributions.
Whilst prior research has defined motivational success in citizen science in terms of sustained contribution , we focus instead on the experiences of those majority of participants who contribute to the project in small quantities or in short bursts.
Studying the experiences of participants who contribute fleetingly or intermittently may seem counter-intuitive.
Drop-outs would appear to be indicative of a lack of motivation to continue participation; micro individual contributions might suggest that motivation to participate is weak or not prioritised against competing demands on volunteers' time.
Yet the majority of those involved in citizen science will have precisely this experience of participation .
Where tasks can be completed by individuals working alone without being contingent upon the work of other participants, each person's input, however small, is valuable.
We begin by introducing Old Weather - a project that fits a characteristic skewed pattern of participation in citizen science: over the period covered by this study , 94% of participants contributed in aggregate 15% of project input.
This is followed by a review of relevant literature which attests to a complex framework of motivational factors  that impact upon both intention to participate and actual contribution behaviour.
Then we present two studies on participation in Old Weather: Study 1, a survey study, revealed several significant relationships between intrinsic motivation, extrinsic motivation, and contribution behaviour.
Study 2, an interview study, revealed factors that led volunteers to `dabble' and/or drop-out.
We finish by presenting recommendations for designing for dabblers and deterring drop-outs.
Citizen science involves scientists partnering with volunteers to assist with the research process, and is gaining in popularity due to the innovative use of web and mobile technologies .
Success is dependent upon the active participation of volunteers, hence a growing number of researchers are now investigating what prompts or sustains participants' involvement in citizen science .
Copyrights for thirdparty components of this work must be honoured.
For all other uses, contact the Owner/Author.
Copyright is held by the owner/author.
Old Weather  was launched in 2010 as part of the Zooniverse, a consortium of virtual citizen science and humanities projects .
Volunteers can also, optionally, transcribe additional `event' information they deem important, such as battle action or personnel changes.
Scientists use the weather data for climate modelling.
The edited log books are of interest to both naval and family historians.
Elsewhere, as Nov et al.
There is variation in both quantity and depth of participation between committed `super-volunteers'  and more casual visitors which is poorly reflected in existing studies of citizen science .
For example, only a small proportion ever participate in project forums .
This stratification of participation is acknowledged in Reed et al.
Considering that previous citizen science research tends to concentrate on sustained participation and the positive motivations of high contributors, one goal for our research was to uncover more about casual engagement and factors which discourage participation.
Another aim was to investigate the extent to which intrinsic and extrinsic motivations influence both quality and quantity of contributions.
Unusually, Old Weather can appeal to participants with scientific or historical interests , and produces outputs useful for research in both fields .
Although participation in Old Weather is open to anyone who signs up, a ranking system recognizing the quantity of weather transcriptions made by each volunteer aims to motivate sustained and loyal participation through competition to become `Captain' of each ship.
A community forum is also provided where participants can post queries and discuss progress .
Haythornthwaite  identifies two models of open collaboration operating on the Internet: a lightweight model based on small scale contributions from the widest possible pool of participants, and a heavyweight approach drawing upon traditions of volunteering and peer-review.
At a conceptual level, Old Weather fits into the lightweight category.
Wiggins and Crowston  suggest that in such circumstances, project sustainability results not so much from persistent and committed individual effort as from a ready supply of fresh participants.
Yet empirical research into participation in citizen science has largely proceeded under the assumption that `sustained contribution by individual volunteers is critical for the viability of such communities' .
Researchers are aware that contributors often slow down or drop out of projects after an initial flurry of activity, and are troubled by this `alarmingly high attrition rate' , but choose nevertheless to concentrate on encouraging in-depth, committed involvement rather than facilitating occasional participation.
This jeopardizes not only project sustainability but also the scalability of citizen science: as the range of initiatives on offer continues to grow, projects cannot afford to rely upon intrinsically-motivated core groups of participants willing to devote considerable personal effort in every niche investigation .
In part this focus on sustained participation has arisen because of the practical difficulties of recruiting research participants who are only briefly involved with a project, and the greater likelihood that committed participants will respond to surveys and interview invitations.
The sampling strategy used by Reed et al.
Crowston and Fagnot are careful to identify separate motives for each contribution level.
They suggest that the initial motivation to contribute is a curiosity-driven exploration spurred by a combination of awareness, the volunteer's perceived capacity to complete the task, and an evaluation of the costs and benefits of contributing; a more complex motivational framework is only pertinent at sustained and meta contribution levels.
Comparing the results of empirical studies of motivation in citizen science is complicated because of the diversity of contributions  and because participants are typically motivated by more than one factor simultaneously  and also due to the variety of different frameworks used to study motivation .
Motivators can be broadly divided into intrinsic  and extrinsic  .
In the context of Old Weather, examples of intrinsic factors include subject interest and curiosity, competence in the transcription task, and an enjoyment derived from taking part in the project.
Several recent studies have underlined the importance of these intrinsic, often egoistic, factors to citizen science participants , although any bias in survey samples towards more active, committed members may have affected these results since core participants are likely to have a high degree of intrinsic motivation .
Extrinsic rewards are nevertheless attracting increasing research attention, particularly in the context of `gamification' and the search for motivational features which can be easily operationalized  through competition and target-setting, or by providing a forum to encourage discussion and interaction around project tasks.
Even so, the focus remains on sustaining rather than attracting participants .
In July 2012 we sent an invitation to the Old Weather forum and mailing list to take part in an online survey about the experiences of participating in the project .
We received 545 responses, or 1.92% of registered users; this underestimates the response rate, since we cannot tell exactly how many people received the invitation.
299 provided their Old Weather username and consented to us matching their survey responses with their project records.
Therefore our study sample is 299 participants.
The first aim of Study 1 was to investigate how intrinsic and extrinsic motivations affect both the quantity of contributions; and the depth of participation.
We predicted that intrinsically motivated Old Weather participants are more likely to engage with the project in depth, whereas extrinsically motivated Old Weather participants will engage in the project in a more casual way and are unlikely to contribute anything more than the basic weather observation data.
Our hypotheses were: * H1: Intrinsic motivation is positively correlated with  total number of transcriptions,  transcribing nonmandated `event' information from the ship' logs , and  total forum posts.
The second aim of Study 1 was to explore differences between low contributors  and high contributors .
We hypothesised that: * H3: High C will have more forum posts than Low C and will be more likely to transcribe event information.
The online survey1 was made available for 4 weeks.
It comprised 16 questions covering participants' background, why they joined the project, and their motivations for taking part.
It took approximately 15 minutes to fill in.
No monetary reward was offered for completing the survey.
For our hypotheses, we draw upon data from two of the survey questions - Q4 and Q11.
Or are you involved in editing ship' histories for Naval-History.Net?"
Respondents were asked to select "Yes" or "No."
If they selected "Yes", they were asked to provide more details .
Q11 consists of 30 statements about motivations to participate in Old Weather.
We created these statements by adapting the Work Preference Inventory , using a methodology similar to .
For example, questions included `Curiosity is the driving force behind much of my participation in Old Weather'  and `I am strongly motivated by becoming  Captain of my ship on Old Weather' .
The 30 items  were presented in a random order and respondents were asked to rate their agreement on a 5 point scale, from 1= disagree strongly to 5= agree strongly.
A sixth option `Not applicable to me' 
Total scores for intrinsic and extrinsic motivations were calculated for each participant.
Data was obtained from two sources - project records of contributions and an online survey.
Scores for `intrinsic motivation' and `extrinsic motivation' were also calculated from survey answers .
High C were 6 times more likely to transcribe event information .
High C had 500 times more forum posts than Low C .
Statistical tests confirmed that these differences were highly significant .
The number of transcriptions each person had completed ranged from 0 to 46417, the mean being 1568 classifications , and the median number being 52 classifications.
The distribution of contributions had a positive skew .
This pattern of contributions is typical of citizen science projects .
Intrinsic and extrinsic motivation scores were computed for Low C and High C, see Table 2.
H1 and H2 were supported: higher intrinsic motivation was associated with a greater number of contributions  and greater depth of participation ; higher extrinsic motivation was associated only with greater number of contributions.
In line with Haythornthwaite's theory , this suggests that intrinsically motivated volunteers are more likely to contribute in depth and form a core community on the project forum, whereas extrinsically motivated volunteers engage in the project in a more casual way.
H3 was supported: High C posted over 500 forum posts on average, whereas Low C posted <1 on average.
We also found a significant relationship between total transcriptions and total forum posts.
These results are in line with Reed et al's  finding that social engagement - awareness and interaction with other members - is an important motivating factor for a core subgroup of volunteers.
Also 81% of High C transcribed event information, compared to 31% of Low C. This suggests that High C do more detailed work, possibly aided by their greater experience in the project.
Again this is in line with past research suggesting a preference for complex or varied tasks  amongst this subgroup of participants .
H4 was also supported: High C scored significantly higher than Low C for both intrinsic and extrinsic motivation.
This suggests a relationship between motivation and contribution which few empirical studies have explored explicitly .
Whilst the experiences of highly motivated supervolunteers have received some research attention , there is still a lot that is unknown about the motivations and experiences of low contributors.
This led us to conducting Study 2 to find out more about participants' motivations and experiences.
Building upon this existing work, our goal was to investigate enablers and barriers for casual participation in Old Weather.
In Study 2, we analysed the free text comments from the survey and conducted semi-structured interviews with a subset of Study 1 participants.
We particularly considered: * The participation experience: why, when and in what contexts do people participate?
Only a handful of studies have investigated casual participation in citizen science projects as of yet.
One highlight of Rotman et al.
The authors identify two pivotal points: the initial decision to participate and subsequent resolution to continue, and argue that different motivations come into play at each stage.
At an early stage, the motivation to participate may be only tangential curiosity.
Later, participants are motivated to continue by a more complex framework of factors .
Barriers to participation are also discussed in Causer and Wallace's  evaluation of a humanities project whose manuscript transcription task is similar to Old Weather.
Identified factors included a lack of time, feeling daunted by the task and worrying that a contribution might not reach expected quality standards.
In the context of environmental data crowdsourcing, Massung et al.
Their finding that motivation alone was not enough to entice casual use of a data collection app, and the suggestion that contextual facilitators of participation  need to be considered alongside motivating factors, turns the time opportunity barrier on its head and could have important bearings on the design of citizen science platforms to appeal to a wider volunteer public.
Potential interviewees were identified according to top and bottom scores on the intrinsic and extrinsic scales in the survey, and high and low contribution records.
This crosssectional recruitment strategy aimed to ensure that the interviews covered a range of contribution levels and a mix of declared motivations.
Invitations to participate were sent to respondents' email addresses registered with the Zooniverse.
Of the 43 respondents contacted, 16 were interviewed and 1 sent a detailed email response.
We achieved an approximate balance between low  and high  contributors.
An individual may score highly for both intrinsic and extrinsic motivation simultaneously, or high on one scale and low on the other, or express moderately equal motivations on both scales.
Our pool comprised: high extrinsic , low extrinsic , high intrinsic , low intrinsic , mixed declared motivations .
The interviews took place via Skype.
Interviews were audiorecorded and varied in length, from 30 minutes to 1 hour.
All participants received a gift voucher for taking part.
The interview transcripts  were analysed using thematic analysis .
This involves coding interesting sections of the transcript in a consistent way, and subsequently grouping those codes into themes.
Themes help to explain what the data means and relate it to the research questions.
Free text comments submitted to the survey in Study 1 were also analysed alongside the interview transcripts using the same technique.
Two strong groupings that developed through the thematic analysis were `dabbling' and `dropping-out'.
The results reported here focus on these two themes.
We noticed that several participants who had contributed a few hundred classifications described a similar low-commitment attitude to participation.
These participants  shared many characteristics with project drop-outs.
Six interviewees had contributed no more than 50 transcriptions, 1 interviewee had not submitted a single page, and 3 others had records in single figures.
3 further participants had transcription records in the 200s, but described an occasional pattern of contributing to the project in short bursts; this brings the total number of interview participants we deem `dabblers' to 9.
We identified four main themes in relation to dabbling: 1.
The experience of dabbling 2.
Is dabbling a cause for concern?
Catalysts to dropping out 4.
Long-term dabblers To illustrate each theme, we provide quotes from the interview transcripts  and from survey comments .
To provide further context, we also include the person's total number of transcriptions .
This is a different initial mindset to that of the volunteer who is motivated by a preexisting commitment to the project's objectives - although super-contributors on one project might also be tempted to dabble elsewhere: I did dabble in a number of other Zooniverse projects - it's a question of finding what you have an aptitude for.
To my surprise I liked it very much and I stayed on.
And really it was a couple of things, it was a lot of typing, whereas a lot of other Zooniverse projects are kind of point and click, which is a little easier to do... 
Since involvement begins with an initial contribution, it is important to consider what prompts  initial participation, particularly since many more people will sign up than actually contribute .
Most interviewees described an initial process of exploration, of seeking a project which suited their interests and the time they had available.
Like , we found that egoism, or personal interests, guided this initial contribution decision: What I do is, I just, like - when a new project comes up and it interests me - I'll go on it and I'll read, you know, how to do it, how to go, work through it...  This is the first manifestation of the activity we dub `dabbling': I think you just try it out, do some classifications and then you stay or you move on.
I picked the ship that I picked, the Magnolia, just because that's one of my favourite trees.
So it wasn't that I set out that `oh, I'm going to be the Captain of the Magnolia', it was more `It's an interesting topic, it's something I can do easily, it doesn't require a huge amount of brain power although it does require attention'.
Then I enjoyed it and depending on my other schedules I would try to do it regularly.
In contrast to the collective  experience of citizen science that has been the focus of most research to date , we found that dabblers mostly described a solitary experience.
As one supercontributor explained, many participants are `...just happy clicking on their own' .
This was often true irrespective of contribution level, but lone working was something which had a positive value for participants whose contributions were intermittent: I have only occasional opportunities to enjoy time on Old Weather, but it can be a delightful escape.
I choose not to use its interactive features because this is one of the places I go for me time.
One interviewee associated this directly to the prescribed nature of the transcription task: It wasn't like  we would talk about it at work the next morning.
So in terms of onsite participation with other people doing it, not a motivator, never factored in.
Partially because it's not...it's very mechanical.
Although the asymmetric, directed nature of citizen science sets it apart from the `information commons' collaborations which are the focus of Crowston and Fagnot's discussion , a similar justification can be found for dabbling as for free riders: that dabblers can provide both an audience and evidence of current activity on the project.
Both of these help raise the visibility of the project, as a citizen science initiative  and of the scientific research itself .
Although it is likely that self-selection bias in our sample over-represents dabblers with a continuing interest in Old Weather, it was striking that several interviewees spoke eloquently about the importance of the climate research outcomes of the project, even though they had themselves stopped contributing: I mean, I get all the emails, you know, so I'll read them and see, you know, what has Old Weather's community discovered thus far  the community, as it is, is contributing to science.
An ongoing connection with the project was clearly valued by certain dabblers, who saw themselves more as passive or resting members of the Old Weather community than detached or uninvolved: I wait for emails.
It's a little more passive, because I have so many things grabbing my attention, and I assume I'm not alone in that.
I hope, and I would like to contribute something in the near future.
Our analysis revealed a concern about the usefulness of contributions which was associated with dropping-out of the project at an early stage: I lost motivation to continue contributing information because I was not sure how useful my input was.
I did not want to take challenging pages if I would not be producing useful results and I had no way to see how useful my previous contributions were.
What is striking here was the concern shown in reverse by dabblers towards providing accurate information for scientific research, even before they had established a personal commitment to the citizen science project: I really like the concept but I had trouble deciphering the handwriting.
So I was afraid I was getting things wrong and if there were ones that I could be sure I was doing right then I would love to keep doing it, but I was afraid of screwing it up.
Given the form-filling quality of the basic transcription task, it is inevitable that many participants - those who find no intrinsic interest in the subject content, or who contribute too spasmodically to get enthused - begin to find `It just felt like tedious work.'
I guess I kind of lost interest.
Again the reason I quit wasn't that you weren't maintaining my interest enough.
It was just that I...
I was doing too many other things in life, I just didn't find time for it.
Online citizen science is in any case not particularly about completing the tasks with the fewest  participants, as might be the case where contributors were receiving financial compensation.
Rather the focus is upon achieving the work quickly, but also with the greatest possible accuracy.
Seen in this light, there are certain advantages to accepting - even promoting - a high turnover of participants: firstly, on `the many eyes' principle that mistakes are easier to spot when multiple people review the work : And that was one of the things in Old Weather too that was nice, going `this looks like a 7 to me, but it might be a 1', but there's going to be a lot of eyes on this.
So the anxiety level wasn't very high about getting things wrong.
Obviously I was trying to be accurate, but it was nice knowing there was back-up.
A second definition of `dabbling' relates to small-scale, but intermittent, participation over an extended period of time: And I liked the fact that, you know, it was just, at my leisure and I could do it when I wanted to, and it was like not structured, I can just go in, do it and then, you know, stop when I wanted to, and then go back and pick up whenever I needed to.
So I did some work on Ancient Lives.
I tried out the Whale project.
Yeah, so it depends a bit.
But for example, Planet Hunters works fine.
And not every day, only on days when I had time.
It was a pretty informal thing, yeah.
Many survey respondents mentioned that their participation increased in the winter when they were more likely to be spending time indoors: Old Weather is/was a great activity for me during snowy days, so my participation is sporadic.
When I saw that I had the time, I actually was on holiday.
Therefore, instead of trying to encourage a regular commitment from volunteers, an alternative approach is to encourage long-term dabbling - a kind of `irregular' commitment, where it is made easy for volunteers to participate on and off at irregular intervals.
We highlight five design considerations which facilitate these dabbling behaviours in Old Weather.
Other citizen science projects should consider adopting similar design features in order to capitalize fully on a wide-reaching but generalized intrinsic goodwill towards science, but without forcing individuals into a sustained commitment: Facilitate independent working and participant choice most dabbling contributions are made by participants working alone, by volunteers who are not motivated by interacting with their peers, either collaboratively on a project forum, or through competition.
Citizen science projects can still facilitate this independent working by enabling contributors to make their own choices about what they wish to work on and their level of participation, and track their personal progress.
For instance, on Old Weather this might entail offering transcription choices according to the ship's location, or time period, or enabling participants to read or catch up on other volunteers' transcripts relevant to their personal affiliation to a particular ship.
Projects might also introduce clearly graduated task difficulty levels, and tools to enable personal target-setting and progress monitoring.
This might encourage an extended, if not indefinite, commitment towards a personally-set goal.
Optimize tasks to fit within busy lives - breaking tasks down into smaller-scale assignments enables occasional participation, taking account of short attention spans and busy schedules: the attention span on the Internet is I think more limited than in other areas of daily life, so I think if it takes you more than 5, 10, 15 minutes to complete a certain task, then it's just not interesting to a lot of people.
And if you have no possibility to come back and to complete it later .
Where tasks cannot be atomized further , they can still be optimized for dabblers in other ways.
Publicise scientific outcomes - do not assume that non-
As a result of our research, we have come to define dabbling as a curiosity-driven behaviour, occurring intermittently, fitting around other activities in participants' daily lives.
Whilst some contributors dabble in just one project, more commonly dabbling involves dipping in and out of several different citizen science initiatives, with participants seeking variety, diversion, and amusement.
Some micro contributors will make a brisk decision not to continue participation, becoming project drop-outs.
Long-term dabblers in contrast retain a passive interest in the project and may re-kindle their active involvement at a later date.
Motivation is generally studied in citizen science with a view to encouraging and sustaining contributions towards the specified project task .
One challenge then is to consider how to entice dabblers to make further contributions.
Crowston and Fagnot  observe, few of the personal rewards of sustained contribution `seem likely to apply to an initial contributor who is not familiar with the project or with other contributors', and the same is true of occasional dabbling participants.
On the other hand, our results also suggest that there are some latent benefits to dabbling, which the focus on sustained contribution has overlooked.
Supporting dabbling behaviour in citizen science can help to widen the impact of the underlying research, by raising awareness of scientific research problems and promoting scientific working methods and values.
Many dabblers express an ongoing but passive interest in a project's progress, particularly in the scientific outcomes based on citizen participation.
Dabblers are unlikely to seek out news proactively, but maintain their registration with a project deliberately in order to receive updates.
For some dabblers, receiving the latest project email bulletin might be the catalyst which re-kindles their interest and spurs them back into active participation.
Others will remain a passive but engaged audience for science, and a potential source of advocacy for the citizen science project.
Sell citizen science snacks, not gourmet meals!
Alongside encouraging prolonged, committed engagement through community forums or competitive games, projects can tempt more casual participants to increase their contributions gradually by smaller degrees.
For instance, automatically bringing up a new task as soon as a completed one is submitted could encourage volunteers to think oh, I can get one more done before I go to bed, alright, I'll do one more .
Other suggestions from dabblers for retaining or reinvigorating their interest included: special prize draws or scheduled challenges, and pushing periodic updates on project progress and scientific outcomes.
Enable personalized feedback to affirm quality - droppingout of participation is strongly associated with an anxiety about the quality of contribution.
Our research suggests that volunteers are more likely to continue in participation if they believe their accuracy to be high - even if the task itself is not that interesting: I have tried most of the Zooniverse projects.
On others, I felt that I was doing something useful, so I continued to work on them even if it wasn't that interesting.
Citizen science projects could help to deter drop-outs by providing the means for volunteers to gain confidence in their own quality of contribution and learn how to improve.
Possible mechanisms include: a flagging mechanism where participants are not confident of their input; sample task self-assessment tests ; or opening up the data checking process to the participants themselves.
For example, an interface displaying any non-matching input from three or more participants transcribing independently, and offering a fourth participant the opportunity to judge the correct answer, possibly awarding points to fellow contributors based upon their accuracy level.
Although the response rate was low, the absolute sample size is comparable to other studies .
There is a likelihood of self-selection bias in Study 2, in that non-active participants with an ongoing interest in the project may have featured more strongly in our data pool than those who had lost all interest.
But this does not make their perspective invalid.
We suggest that our targeted approach of inviting participants to interview based upon their contributions and motivation scores enabled us to highlight the perspective of a category of volunteers who are overlooked by the usual snowball recruitment strategies.
Also, this research focuses upon a single citizen science project.
In future work it will be important to validate our findings by checking how they generalise to other virtual citizen science projects that involve different tasks and a different population of users.
Citizen science projects benefit from work by volunteers with varying levels of commitment: A typical project will have a few committed and productive super-volunteers, a much larger numbers of `dabblers' , and even more `drop-outs' .
Previous research has concentrated on the super-volunteers, but a successful project must pay attention to the needs of all three groups.
A survey of participants in the Old Weather project allowed us to investigate the relationship between various measures of contribution and motivating factors.
Both intrinsic  and extrinsic motivations  were related to contribution behaviour in Old Weather, with highly motivated participants contributing more.
But only intrinsic motivation was linked to broader contributions to the project, such as making more forum contributions and transcribing the optional non-weather information.
A series of interviews with selected project participants gave us further insight into the experiences of low contributors .
Some dabblers will inevitably drop out of a project, losing interest completely.
However there are others who consider themselves to be `non-active' members of the project, still interested in reading about the project and serving as advocates.
A further kind of dabbler chooses to dabble in and out long-term, participating during less busy times of the year.
Dabblers represent a major part of citizen science projects, yet their perspective is often overlooked.
The inclination of most prior research has been to encourage participants to behave like scientists in terms of building a sustained commitment to a specific project .
Contrary to this view, we argue that projects should be designed to encourage dabbling as well as commitment.
Our studies reveal that dabblers might be less motivated compared to super contributors, but they are still motivated.
As the majority of participants exhibit this small-scale contribution pattern, there is great potential value in designing interfaces to tempt lone workers to complete `just another page', or to lure early drop-outs back into participation.
We propose several design recommendations, such as breaking the work into components which can be tackled without a major commitment of time and effort, and providing feedback on the quality and value of these contributions.
Thanks to Kathleen Mathieu, Paul Cairns, Zooniverse and the Old Weather science team, and the Old Weather volunteers.
This research was partly funded by the EU project Citizen Cyberlab .
Alexandra Eveleigh is supported by a UCL Graduate Research Scholarship for Cross Disciplinary Training.
The Work Preference Inventory: Assessing intrinsic and extrinsic motivational orientations.
Understanding Crowdsourcing: Effects of motivation and rewards on participation and performance in voluntary online activities .
Bowser, A., Hansen, D., and Preece, J. Gamifying Citizen Science: Lessons and Future Directions.
Workshop on Designing Gamification: Creating Gameful and Playful Experiences .
Braun, V. and Clarke, V. Using thematic analysis in psychology.
Causer, T. and Wallace, V. Building A Volunteer Community: Results and Findings from Transcribe Bentham.
Crowston, K. and Fagnot, I.
The motivational arc of massive virtual collaboration.
Proc IFIP WG 9.5 Working Conference on Virtuality and Society: Massive Virtual Communities .
Crowston, K. and Prestopnik, N.R.
Motivation and data quality in a citizen science game: A design science evaluation.
Haythornthwaite, C. Crowds and Communities: Light and Heavyweight Models of Peer Production.
