We present Themail, a visualization that portrays relationships using the interaction histories preserved in email archives.
Using the content of exchanged messages, it shows the words that characterize one's correspondence with an individual and how they change over the period of the relationship.
This paper describes the interface and content-parsing algorithms in Themail.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Email users tend to save the overwhelming majority of messages they receive .
In fact, email storage and retrieval have, early on, been identified by researchers as two of the main uses of this communication technology .
It is not clear, however, why users save such large amounts of messages.
Users save "important" messages, ones that announce a new policy at work or the arrival of a friend's baby.
They also save seemingly insignificant messages, ones that suggest we have lunch at 12:30 instead of at noon, ones that involve the logistics of trips long since taken, of meetings long since held .
Most tools for handling email archives have focused on the task of finding either specific messages--commercial email clients have search functionalities that let users look for messages by subject or sender--or the "important" emails.
Less attention has been paid to the overall patterns of communication that can be gleaned from the daily accumulation of messages over time.
PostHistory , our first email visualization project, explored temporal patterns of email exchanges.
The project revealed that users were quite fascinated by the ability to look back at overall patterns of exchange in their archived messages.
This positive feedback prompted us to explore email visualization possibilities even further.
Our hypothesis is that the patterns of communication we build up over time are themselves significant.
As email archives grow, they become valuable records of people's relationships.
An increasing amount of our interaction with colleagues, friends, family members, etc.
Whereas face-to-face interactions are rich in sensory detail, online conversations, by contrast, are abstractly sterile.
As archives of online interactions "pile up" on a daily basis, users are left with amorphous, homogeneous records of online interactions, little more than white noise.
In the same way that we rely on pictures, videos, scrapbooks, and photo albums to remember people and events in real life, we need better ways to capture and depict the email-mediated relationships in which we engage.
In this paper, we describe Themail, a visualization of the contents of an email archive.
We also discuss the results from a user study where participants visualized their own email archives.
The primary contribution of this paper is the discussion of two main themes that emerged from users' reactions to Themail: appreciation of the overall picture  and seeking specific pieces of information .
We describe how Themail's design supported these two themes, and what implications these findings have for the future of email studies in general.
Roughly speaking, most of the work done on email archive visualizations falls into four main categories: - thread-based visualizations  - social-network visualizations  - temporal visualizations  - contact-based visualizations  As a communication medium, email is inherently suitable for social network analysis .
Moreover, given SNA's long history of visual exploration , it is only natural that researchers came to create email-based social network visualizations with increasing efficiency.
Most of this work has been done so that experts can better understand communication patterns in third-party email archives.
A good example of this approach is the work being done by team of researchers in Berkeley, which built an entire suite of visualizations for revealing social network patterns in the now public Enron archives .
There have also been a few projects that visualize social networks with the end user in mind, an approach that is more in line with the work presented in this paper.
Both Social Network Fragments  and the work done by Fisher and Dourish  are ego-centric visualizations of the social network in an individual's email archive.
Both projects were aimed at end users and were tested in a similar manner to Themail.
In addition to visualizing the structure of email networks, researchers have also started to look at different aspects of email chronemics1 in the hope of finding meaningful patterns of behavior.
In , researchers uncovered the temporal rhythms of email archives to create context for further email analysis.
PostHistory , an ego-centric visualization of email archives based on frequency of exchanges, revealed that users could effectively map bursts of email exchange to events in their lives without having to rely on the content of the messages.
Finally, some systems have been developed for contact management - to allow users to keep track of the various people with whom they communicate over email .
Themail differs from most email visualizations described here because it relies on the content of messages, instead of on header information, to build a visual display of interactions over time.
The growth of email archives presents challenges not only to the end user but also to librarians, scholars, historians, forensics experts, and intelligence analysts.
It is no surprise then, that research on these collections spans a wide variety of fields: from information management, retrieval and security, to spam detection, social network analysis, and user interface design.
Figure 2: Expanded view of Themail showing the sporadic nature of a relationship.
By visualizing the content of messages, Themail creates a more nuanced portrait of the mediated relationship.
Interestingly, outside of the email research area, projects like Conversation Map  have explored the validity of using content visualization to make online communities and large-scale conversations more legible.
We developed Themail with the working hypothesis that a visualization of email content constituted meaningful portraits of people's relationships.
To test this claim, we needed to let users visualize the relationships encoded in their own email archives.
Users' familiarity with the materials being visualized turned out to be critical in revealing both the successful and the problematic aspects of our content parsing mechanism.
We believe that these are valuable insights for researchers working with email content and we discuss the broader implications of our findings to some of the related work happening in email visualization.
Yearly words: reveal the most used terms over an entire year of email exchange.
Monthly words: are the most distinctive and frequently used words in email conversations over a month.
The selection and font size of words is based not only on frequency but also on how distinctive the word is to a specific relationship against the rest of the archive.
For instance, if the owner of the email archive uses the word "environment" a lot with a friend but not with anyone else, the word will appear fairly large when one visualizes this relationship.
If, on the other hand, the word "environment" is used a lot with other people in the archive, the word will not be nearly as large in the visualization.
The more frequent and distinctive a word is, the bigger it appears in the monthly columns.
Themail is a typographic visualization of an individual's email content over time.
The interface shows a series of columns of keywords arranged along a timeline.
Keywords are shown in different colors and sizes depending on their frequency and distinctiveness.
The application was designed to help the owners of email archives answer two main questions: * * What sorts of things do I  talk about with each of my email contacts?
How do my email conversations with one person differ from those with other people?
By displaying multiple layers of topical words in different colors and sizes, Themail creates a richly textured portrait of conversations over time.
The yearly words in the background, being the most common words used over one year, function as broad brushstrokes in revealing the overall tone of the relationship.
For instance, when users in our study visualized their conversational history with family members, several of the yearly words would be terms such as "love," "hug," "Thanksgiving," "family," etc.
Other times, yearly words with a friend would reflect the social nature of the relationship: "dinner," "tomorrow," "lunch," "movie."
Visualizing conversations with a colleague would, many times, generate fairly representative yearly words such as "meeting," "project," "deadline."
Monthly words, on the other hand, revealed a much more detailed portrait of a person's past email exchanges.
Being bound by much shorter periods of time, monthly words successfully depicted the time-based, episodic nature of email conversations.
These words clearly depicted the occurrence of events in a relationship.
For instance, major events such as an individual's wedding or preparation for thesis defense were clearly represented in monthly keywords.
As Themail is designed for the exploration of dyadic relationships, it visualizes one relationship at a time, between the owner of the mailbox, and one of her email contacts.
Themail displays multiple layers of information, each encoding a different content-parsing technique and aesthetic treatment.
In many cases, keywords would change sharply from a month column to the next, exposing the ever-changing nature of people's conversations.
Unlike the background yearly words, which are static, monthly words are interactive.
Selecting a monthly keyword meant users could retrieve the email messages that caused that term to appear in the visualization.
Figure 1 shows a comprehensive screen shot of Themail.
All email contacts are listed on the right of the interface and the user has selected one of these contacts to visualize.
The visualization panel shows the conversational history between the owner of the email and the highlighted contact.
Yearly words--faint, gray words in the background--and monthly words--yellow words in the foreground--are arranged in columns.
The month and year information is displayed at the bottom of each column.
Each colored circle represents an email message exchanged during a given month.
The size of the circles stands for the length of the message and the color of the circles stands for the direction of the message: incoming or outgoing.
In figure 1, the monthly word "performance" has been selected, which causes the email messages that contain this word to appear in an information box .
Users can scroll through all monthly columns by using the scrolling bar at the bottom of the visualization.
Users may also search for words in the visualization by typing in the term they are looking for .
In addition to exploring topical keywords, users can bring up the original context of topical words, namely, the email messages from which the keywords were selected.
Whenever a user mouses over a word in a month column, that word is shown highlighted in white and in a larger font size; this allows even words set in undersized fonts to be easily read.
When a user clicks on a month word, the email messages that have the selected word appear in an information box , allowing users to recall the context in which the word was used in the past.
The box that shows emails packs a lot of functionality.
It displays the headers of the displayed message and it highlights all instances of the word that has been highlighted in the visualization.
The email box also tells how many emails contain the selected word during the chosen month .
At the same time, in some situations users may only wish to see only months where email exchanges occurred.
To that end, Themail has two ways of displaying content over time: the expanded view and the collapsed view.
In the expanded view, monthly columns are placed in their real position in time and months without exchange emails show up as blank spaces in the visualization.
The "collapsed" view displays only the months with email correspondence.
In this view there are no blank spaces, meaning that screen real-state is used to its fullest.
The data that Themail visualizes consist of processed email mailbox files.
Themail begins with an email archive in the form of one or more mbox files, which are processed by applying a keyword-scoring algorithm.
This application outputs a datafile that can be read by the visualization.
Several problems must be overcome in order to make email mailboxes more easily navigable.
First, many people have multiple email addresses, and so can end up being represented repeatedly and fragmentally in the dataset.
For example, "John Smith" may have email addresses john@smith.com, smith@monkey.com and johnsmith@ somethingelse.com.
In the case above, all of "John Smith's" email would appear as being from  john@smith.com.
Secondly, spam plagues email users.
Though many users attempt to filter their mail with spam filters, some spam may remain in their mail archive.
Additionally, users who subscribe to many mailing lists will certainly have many mailing list-related messages from people they do not actually know.
Because we wanted Themail to focus on interactive relationships--meaning, relationships in which the owner of the archive not only receives but also sends out messages--the processing application disregards any email addresses to whom the mailbox owner has not sent at least one email.
Because we wanted to test Themail "in the wild," we decided against bringing users into our laboratory.
Instead, we distributed the tool via email to participants in the study.
Announcements were posted to several mailing lists within universities and research laboratories.
No financial compensation was offered for taking the study.
Participants were given both the processing and the visualization tools.
This approach meant users were able to visualize their own email archives without having to be concerned about the privacy of their data.
After having interacted with Themail, users were interviewed about their experience with the tool.
These semi-structured interviews lasted 90 minutes each and were recorded for content coding .
To generate the words that are at the heart of Themail's visualization, we use a measure of relative frequency.
Salton's TFIDF algorithm , which scores words based on their relative frequency in one document out of a collection, served as a foundation for our process.
However, some important differences apply.
Namely, in processing monthly and yearly subsets of email, we compared subsets of documents against supersets, rather than one document against a collection.
For each person p, we compute scores for each word w in each month m and year y that the person exchanged email with the mailbox owner.
We compute two scores: Sm = F * IF score for word w in all messages to and from person p in timeslice t, where t represents one calendar month.
Sy = F3 * IF score for word w in all messages to and from person p in timeslice t, where t represents one calendar year.
These two scoring functions are based on the following measure of frequency: F = frequency of word w in all messages to and from person p in timeslice t A word's inverse frequency is based on its raw count, where C is the frequency of word w in all emails in the email archive: IF = log  Notice that Sm and Sy are the same, except that in Sy, F  is cubed in order to increase its weight in the overall result.
The keywords shown in each month column in the main Themail visualization are selected, sorted, and sized according to Sm.
The gray words in the background of the visualization are chosen according to Sy.
Sixteen participants took part in an evaluation of Themail.
The subjects ranged in age from 18 to 53; four were female and 12 were male.
Participants came from two American universities as well as several technology and telecommunications companies; seven were graduate students and nine were professional researchers.
Participants' email archives ranged in size from 90 MB to more than one GB, with the average size being 456 MB.
The time span of these archives ranged from less than one year to over nine years of email activity.2 Participants were encouraged to upload multiple mailboxes to Themail - both incoming and outgoing mail.
The number of mailboxes uploaded by each participant varied from two to over 55, with the average number being 19.
Overall, participants were quite excited to use Themail to look back at their email archives.
When asked, on a scale from 1 to 5 , how much they enjoyed looking at their email archives on Themail, participants responded, on average 3.9.
When asked whether they would like to use the tool again if it were integrated in their email reader, 87% of participants responded yes.
Even though participants were, for the most part, impressed by the quality of the keywords shown in the visualization, they were also quick to point out critical shortcomings in our content parsing mechanism that merit note.
We discuss these limitations in the section entitled Limitations of content parsing in Themail.
Two main interaction modes emerged from the way participants related to Themail.
In order to better explain the complimentary nature of these two forms of interaction, we have borrowed terms from the popular expression "looking for a needle in a haystack," and have called these modes "the haystack" and "the needle.
In a sense, this distinction is reminiscent of the division in computer vision between trying to identify specific objects versus understanding scenes .
About 80% of participants used Themail in the haystack mode whereas 20% utilized the visualization in the needle mode.
In the following sections we describe both the haystack and the needle interaction approaches and discuss some of the common usage patterns that emerged in each mode.
Ann is a graduate student in an American university.
She is 26 years old and has recently gotten married.
Her extended family lives in the south of the United States and she lives with her husband in New England.
For Ann, one of the most exciting aspects of Themail was seeing all the correspondence that preceded her wedding: It was funny going back both with  and my parents, there were these few months before our wedding... it's all about the wedding!
There are all these words like "invitations," "tables," "drinks," guests' names.
It's got all these words that are totally related to the wedding plans.
It was all in October and November  and then the words completely changed after that.
And the same happened with my friends that were bridesmaids.
There are these few months where you can see that the words were related to our wedding theme but then, the month after the conversation it all switched back to normal.
Yeah, it was like the before and after.
You could definitely see the event.
Ann thought it was important that Themail allowed her to look back at her relationships with loved ones, friends, and family.
Even though she exchanges more emails with her coworkers on a daily basis, it was the personal facet of her email archive that she felt was the most exciting to explore.
Especially for my family, it was really exciting to see all the words and the things that we talk about for no reason other than to just reminisce; it was like looking through a photo album or something.
For instance, I would never go back and search for the wedding planning emails, but it was fun to look at that!
It's almost like this serves a different kind of purpose from regular email readers...
It's more at a personal level...
It's emotional, it's about reflecting and remembering.
After looking at her correspondence with family members, Ann remarked that some "portraits" read very differently from others.
With her brother, for instance, the themes ranged from talking about his kids to him asking Ann for help with his computer.
With her grandmother, however, the words that came up on Themail referred to religious holidays and themes.
I don't even remember, if you asked me, what kinds of emails I've exchanged with my grandmother; we don't write email all the time, and a lot of times the news flow through my Mom.
But I felt like her Themail visualization really characterized her.
Users who interacted with Themail in the haystack mode, enjoyed using the visualization for the overall picture it presented of their relationships.
They usually regarded the visualization as a portrait of their past conversations and frequently drew analogies between Themail and photo albums, in a manner that is reminiscent of our previous email visualization studies .
These users often put a premium on being able to see relationships with family members and friends.
The more Themail confirmed their expectations--that is, their mental model of what their relationships were like--the more they enjoyed using the tool.
This group of participants seemed more interested in overall patterns rather than in picking apart individual words that appeared in the visualization.
In the next subsections, we introduce the main usage patterns to have emerged from this group of users along with case studies of participants whose comments clearly illustrate the usage patterns being discussed.
Most haystack users appreciated having expectations of their relationships confirmed by the visualization while still being able to drill deeper and discover patterns they were not aware of.
Several people enjoyed most looking at their families and friends in the visualization and comparing what they saw on screen with their impressions of these relationships.
The best "portrait" was for the mail with my mother...
There have been all sorts of emotional things happening in the past few months 
It definitely brought out the things that were different about her than everyone else I talk to.
Evolution of Relationships The sequence of keywords in Themail often reminded participants of how particular relationships had evolved over the years.
Looking at this visualization I can see that it actually takes a while for the words to be dominated by social topics like bar names, beer and cinema!
There are a couple of things that come out in the visualization, like a holiday when we all went to Sri Lanka and when Ray went to work in another town for a few months.
This person was on my master's thesis committee so we emailed a lot during my masters about research topics and then we lost touch.
She had a baby and we had a short interchange then.
We exchanged some email this past March because I was defending and here she was  having another baby.
To see different phases of a relationship is the best thing about this visualization.
Figure 4: Screen shot showing a user's email exchange with a friend over six months.
There is a striking change between the first four months  and the last two: the former are tall and contain several words set in big font whereas the latter are much shorter.
The reason for this difference lies in the fact that, during the first four months, this user's friend was on a trip around the world.
Therefore, the columns are full of unique words that are specific to the trip and not customary in their exchanges.
By the time the friend returns to work--last two columns on the right--the conversation switches to programming and other usual themes in their conversation.
Jeff is a researcher in his twenties, working for a European telecommunications company.
He has recently spent some time in the US, working with researchers at a major university.
He is single and his entire extended family lives in Europe.
To Jeff, some of the most interesting information in Themail was related to his recent stay in the US and the realization of how much this change of environment was reflected in the history of his recent emails conversations: During the time I've been , my friend Simon and I seem to have exchanged a lot of large emails - I suppose we were compensating for not just chatting ideas through face to face.
It's also interesting to see how the content of the emails has changed and how long it took to go from very day-to-day issues, to more conceptual ideas.
The contrast between daily routine and extraordinary events in one's life was nicely illustrated for Jeff in his visualization of emails with a friend: This is a nice view of my friend Chris.
He went on a round-the-world trip and you can see in the first four month columns all the places he went and the order too.
We were sending lots of long emails then - when he gets back in July the conversation switches to configuring Palm Pilots!
One of these showed a colleague of his who went from being a peer to becoming his boss over the years.
The other showed his interactions with a student who became his intern for one summer:
I'm not sure where the word `femur' came from; why would I be talking with my dad about `femur'?
This is her name here .
I saw the word "horse" in the collection of correspondence with a family member and assumed that the email would be about the horses my brother has on his small farm in Minnesota.
As it turns out, the email was one from my daughter  describing the horse riding lessons she had just begun.
Nice turn of events, as her email was written in the voice of a small child .
I clicked on the work "decision" in an email from a friend of mine who worked with me on a local school technology planning committee.
I was curious about what we might have had to "decide" about, and sure enough, it was an email about the MAC vs. Windows platform "decision" for the school.
This brought back memories of many long, and quite heated discussions on the topic among parents, teachers and members of the committee.
Such discovery episodes demonstrate that, even though Themail was not designed for querying data, its abundance of easy-to-get-to information let users find interesting bits of data quite effortlessly.
Whenever users saw words that seemed out of place given the context of their relationships, they would invariably click on them to find out whether the system had made a mistake.
Almost always, like in the above quote about the word "femur," users would be reminded of events they had forgotten.
In fact, the ability to select keywords and see the email messages that caused those words to appear in the visualization was, more than any other aspect of Themail, the single feature that succeeded in strengthening users' trust in the visualization.
The sheer collection of words exchanged with a person made the texture of different relationships quickly obvious to users.
By looking at these compilations of words, users were able to gain a new perspective on their relationships: This is the one I got a little chuckle out of... this is the  mailing list; this is a group of us who help manage a dance club at .
And the thing that sort of stood out to me here was the fact that, just about every one of these columns has the word `please' which is a reflection of everyone begging each other to do something!
It's like, `you guys, please do this, please do that..." and so, I thought it was really funny that this was sort of a predominant word that we're all just begging each other to do stuff!
That's really what this is about.
Well, because the name of our baseball team appears here!
I'm talking more about baseball with  than I am about work.
I should probably have been working a little harder back then.
About 20% of participants in the study were more interested in finding specific bits of information rather than focusing on the overall patterns of the visualization .
Participants in this category displayed little interest in looking at the visualization of their family members, being more concerned with visualizing workrelated relationships: Instead of seeing my daily conversations with my wife I would rather be able to see that in 2002 I wrote a paper with Bob and this is what we talked about at that point and we haven't talked about any of that anymore, so on and so forth.
That is why I don't think there are any big surprises  because this is what I know without even having to look at a visualization.
The last sentence in the quote above illustrates the main difference between haystack and needle users: the former take pleasure in seeing a tangible depiction of what they already know whereas the latter are more interested in discovering what they did not know or remember.
At first, needle users seemed a bit underwhelmed by Themail, however, when prompted to talk in detail about what the visualization showed of their relationship with top email contacts, most of these users became surprised by the richness of detail in the Themail keywords:
Other than the messages disregarded by the processing tool5, the content analysis algorithm in Themail treats every message in the same way.
This means that there are no messages with special weights or attributes in the keyword scoring mechanism.
As it became clear from the user study, not all messages are created equal, and our egalitarian approach presents some serious limitations in terms of keyword output.
One of the main problems that participants identified on their Themail visualizations was the inadvertently high weight given to topical words in forwarded messages.
Whenever this was the case, participants remarked that Themail did a poor job of representing their email conversations.
This phenomenon was not limited to forwarded messages, having also happened with sent-out announcements and pieces of code inserted in the body of email messages.
In one extreme case, Themail displayed the relationship between an administrative assistant and the owner of the email as being studded with some of the most academic and highbrow words in that person's email archive.
In fact, the administrative assistant had the task of sending out announcements for every thesis defense in that university department.
The focal words in the visualization came straight from students' dissertation abstracts rather than having been produced by email exchanges between the owner of the email and the administrative assistant.
Unrepresentative keywords also came out of people's email signatures.
Methods for removing signatures from emails include identifying email addresses and other contact information, as well as a large amount of non-alphanumeric characters, such as punctuation .
Themail accomplished some of this by ignoring URLs, email addresses and numeric strings.
Signature content persisted in Themail most often when the signature  contained quotations, e.g.
In such cases, Themail would treat the words in the signature as content.
The second major limitation in our content parsing mechanism is granularity.
Themail has no notion of expressions; it only knows individual words.
This approach imposes clear limits to the output depicted in Themail as the --tone and texture of messages is more fully expressed by phrases rather than by separate words.
A desirable next step for the work presented here would be to have it analyze phrases.
By testing Themail with users who were familiar with the datasets being visualized, we were able to learn about important limitations of our content parsing algorithm.
Because users knew their email archives well, they were able to quickly point out some key problems that would have taken us much longer to discern.
By distributing Themail to users, we made sure that it was tested in a natural setting--as opposed to having been tested at a laboratory--and that users did not have to worry about the privacy of their data.
We believe that this approach can be of value to other work being done in this area as well.
For example, email visualizations that are built for the discovery of patterns by third-party experts, can also take advantage of insights from users who are familiar with the email archives being visualized.
If, for instance, a visualization designer tests her expert system with owners of email archives--not her target audience but, rather, a "testing unit"--she might quickly learn about the kinds of patterns her tool displays and any potentially problematic artifacts the system generates.
Most current studies of email visualization would be greatly complemented by this kind of approach.
Text analysis is a vast and complex area of research.
Our contribution is not a particular algorithm but rather a preliminary understanding of what is distinctive in the analysis of email content.
Results from the Themail user study made it clear that content parsing of email exchanges is inherently different from other kinds of text analysis.
Email messages are not created equal and their differences need to be taken into account when exploring content.
For instance, we may want to consider the content of forwarded messages and announcements differently from the content of messages exchanged between friends.
Our user study revealed that participants were highly aware of and sensitive to these differences.
Some of these dimensions can be extracted from traffic patterns, chronemics, and the symmetry of exchanges.
If such patterns were to be integrated with email content analysis, we could likely generate much more representative portrayals of email relationships.
For instance, it would be useful to utilize traffic patterns to decide when an email exchange should be considered a conversation as opposed to a broadcast.
If we can generate conversational models that take these structural elements into account, we will be in a better position to meaningfully analyze the content of email exchanges.
Information visualization is generally used for understanding unfamiliar, complex data spaces.
In effectively displaying overviews of large datasets, visualizations quickly reveal unknown patterns in the data.
In our study of Themail, however, we distributed the tool to users who were already familiar with the datasets being visualized.
Participants had some idea of what to expect in the visualization: they anticipated they would see the names of the people with whom they emailed the most, different kinds of words reflecting different kinds of relationships, etc.
Even though building a tool to visualize familiar data is not the conventional course of action in information visualization, we feel that it is a valuable approach in email research and one that can lead to important advances in the field.
Our user study revealed two main interaction modes with the visualization, exploration of "big picture" trends and themes  and more detail-oriented exploration .
The overwhelming majority of participants utilized the system in the "haystack" mode and were especially fond of looking at their relationships with family members and loved ones.
These users often remarked on the photo-album quality of Themail and said that they would like to share the visualization with others.
Users in the "needle" mode were more interested in finding specific bits of information in the visualization; they were especially interested in being able to identify information that was work related.
By displaying large collections of keywords that reflected the evolution of relationships over time, Themail placed users' past email exchanges within a meaningful context.
Given that email is a habitat  and that an increasing amount of our daily interactions with others occur via email, the supplementary contextual cues presented in Themail can greatly improve users' utilization of email archives.
We do not, however, expect users to utilize applications such as Themail on a daily basis.
Given the analogy with photographs, it seems more likely that users might engage in sporadic explorations of the display to reminisce.
We relied on participants' familiarity with the data for effectively learning about some of the shortcomings of our content analysis algorithm.
We propose that recognizing the importance of personal identification with the data is a key contribution to email content studies in particular and email research in general.
Dabbish, L., Kraut, R., Fussell, S. & Kiesler, S.  Understanding email use: predicting action on a message.
Email as habitat: an exploration of embedded personal information management.
Social and Temporal Structures in Everyday Collaboration.
Journal of Social Structure, 1 .
Exploring Enron: Visual Data Mining of Email.
ContactMap: Integrating Communication and Information Through Visualizing Personal Social Networks.
Perer, A., Shneiderman, B., & Oard, D.  Using Rhythms of Relationships to Understand Email Archives.
Sack, W.  Conversation Map: An Interface for Very-Large-Scale Conversations.
Journal of Management Information Systems, Vol 17, No.
Salton, G.  Automatic Text Processing - The Transformation, Analysis, and Retrieval of Information by Computer.
In International Conference on Information Visualization.
Venolia, G. & Neustaedter, C.  Understanding sequence and reply relationships within email conversations: a mixed-model visualization.
Whittaker, S. & Hirschberg, J.
Whittaker, S. & C. Sidner Year  Email overload: Exploring personal information management of email.
Taking Email to Task: The Design and Evaluation of a Task Management Centered Email Tool.
Carvalho, V. & Cohen, W.  Learning to Extract Signature and Reply Lines from Email.
Conference on Email and Anti-Spam.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
