AutoGami is a toolkit for designing automated movable paper craft using the technology of selective inductive power transmission.
AutoGami has hardware and software components that allow users to design and implement automated movable paper craft without any prerequisite knowledge of electronics; it also supports rapid prototyping.
Apart from developing the toolkit, we have analyzed the design space of movable paper craft and developed a taxonomy to facilitate the design of automated paper craft.
AutoGami made consistently strong showings in design workshops, confirming its viability in supporting engagement and creativity as well as its usability in storytelling through paper craft.
Additional highlights include rapid prototyping of product design as well as interaction design such as human-robot interactions.
This lightweight, flexible metal alloy can be directly integrated with paper, which makes it a preferred material in movable paper craft .
Using SMA, it is possible to incorporate mechanisms such as flaps, pull tabs, and volvelles  that cause movement on the 2D paper surface or above the surface in 3D space .
In the past few years, a number of studies have focused on generating and enhancing paper movements using digital technology .
This body of research ranges from simple movement to relatively complex shapechanging using microelectromechanical systems , which significantly advanced the technology for movable paper craft.
Current research development for movable paper craft can benefit from the systematization of existing research results and the creation of a unified body of engineering and design knowledge.
We analyzed the design of movable paper craft and developed a taxonomy that focuses on the movements of single and multiple pieces of paper; subsequently, we generated a pattern language for automated movable paper craft.
More importantly, we developed AutoGami, a toolkit that allows users with no prior knowledge of electronics to design automated paper craft by using the taxonomy as a guide.
AutoGami's software interface allows users to plan a variety of paper craft movements: its use of selective inductive power transmission  allows users to control aspects of movement such as duration, amplitude, and sequence without concerning themselves with technical implementation.
Compared with previous work on automated paper craft , AutoGami provides additional controllability and customizability.
This paper provides the following contributions.
A systematic analysis of the design space for automated movable paper craft.
A low-cost rapid prototyping toolkit for automated movable paper craft using the technology of selective inductive power transmission.
In 1998, Wrensch and Eisenberg embedded computation in arrays of low-cost material substrates available to crafters to enable enhancement of our daily lives through the easy and economic design of intelligent everyday objects .
Among low-cost materials, paper stands out because of its unique advantages: it is easy to use, flexible, lightweight, and readily available.
As a traditional medium for art and communication, it has long been popular for creating 2D and 3D models as well as paper craft.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Today, paper craft is used in many other areas, such as storytelling, education, and medical treatment.
Making paper craft has shown to improve children's creativity, spatial reasoning skills, and performing ability .
Paper craft can also be used to enhance in-class communication among teachers and children, and to help develop cognitive and language abilities necessary for reading and writing .
However, while traditional paper craft have played an essential role in enriching art and culture, they are generally static; at most, they allow only manual or mechanical interaction, limiting their potential in the digital age.
Our work was inspired by various efforts toward the integration of the physical and virtual worlds, including tangible and physical computing , augmented reality environments , ubiquitous computing , and the emerging digital art-related research in the CHI community .
It is a contribution to the research on automated movable paper craft using SMA and to toolkits for creating movable craft.
Automated paper craft using SMA has drawn interest from researchers since the late 1990s and early 2000s.
The first project that used SMA in paper craft we aware of was the Programmable Hinge , wherein SMA was attached to a paper-made hinge structure and controlled by an external microcontroller.
The Programmable Hinge set an early example of implementing automated movable paper craft for the following projects.
In the Interactive Paper Devices project , Greg Saul et al.
They also presented paper prototypes of a robot, speakers, and LED lamps.
Animated Paper  is a hardware platform created from paper and shape memory alloy , which is easy to control using different energy sources ranging from sunlight to lasers.
Paper craft is actuated by SMA and its movements controlled with a high-power laser pointer.
A few projects on automated paper craft used motors  and MEMS  instead of SMAs.
However, SMA has the advantage of being low-cost, lightweight, and easily integrated with paper.
It needs circuit planning for creating paper books that produce light and sound.
Designing the output circuit also requires users to have prerequisite knowledge and experience in electronics.
In addition, the complex circuitry and massive wiring increases the bulkiness of paper.
We developed our toolkit based on the technology of selective inductive power transmission .
Compared with the movable craft toolkits we described previously, ours doesn't require users to consider the design of the circuit and wire connection.
They only need to attach the power receiver with actuator to the paper to implement their design.
In addition, AutoGami has a software interface that allows users to plan and preview the movements before implementing them on paper.
We conducted a detailed analysis of prior work in movable paper craft, including the literature on traditional movable paper craft  and nine papers on automated movable paper craft that have been published in the past ten years .
Taking our cue from the motion-centric taxonomy for classifying human manipulation behavior created by Bullock et al.
Fold - creates a crease; a combination of creases creates origami.
Fold refers to folding in one direction and multiple directions .
Bend - changes the paper's shape without creating creases; because of its texture, the paper usually reverts to its original shape after the bend is released.
Bend includes bending forward and backward .
Rotation refers to the orientation of the paper craft.
Movement along the axis can occur in 2D and 3D space .
Multiple Papers also has two subcategories: Dependent - The movement of one paper could trigger the movement of another paper.
This type of movement is common in movable paper craft , which uses traditional mechanical structures such as gears and pulling bars.
In movable paper craft, we can equate dependent movement in terms of input-output relationship.
Independent - The movements of multiple papers have no cause and effect relationship.
Each paper's movement is triggered by different sources.
We then used this pattern language to analyze four existing automated paper crafts as examples.
The Programmable Hinge  can control the rotation angle of the hinge through a microcontroller.
Using the pattern language, we can describe it as: ProgrammableHinge =  In Animated Paper , SMA animates paper craft by bending, which causes it to move on a flat surface: AnimatedPaper =  Linear, Binary,
In Animating Paper with SMA , there is multiple bending and folding.
Since they cannot be performed at the same time, the movements have an |  relationship: AnimatingPaperWithSMA =  In Interactive Paper Devices , the movement of the paper robot was triggered by bending the SMA.
InteractivePaperDevices =  Table 1 shows the analysis of these examples and other related work in automated movable paper craft, including the use of SMAs, motors, and MEMS as movement actuators.
The dashed line indicates the |  relationship between two movements.
We followed the work by Card et al.
An automated movable paper craft can thus be abstracted into a four-dimension vector:  Where: Movement is the possible movements generated in the paper craft.
It includes all the movement primitives mentioned above in the subcategories of Within Paper and Not Within Paper.
MovementStyle is either continuous  or binary .
R is the dependency between different movements.
W is a set of general rules that describes the properties of the paper craft, how the system works, and its constraints.
The taxonomy and pattern language helped us see the difference in the capabilities of the prior work.
First, the number of movement types they support cover different and often limited number of cells in Table 1.
Most of them only support binary movement  In Animating Paper with SMA, for instance, movement is still relatively unsophisticated: it is controlled by switching the power supply on and off.
A power on/off pattern is used, for example, to flap the wings of a paper crane.
Second, the support for designing movement is limited.
Third, existing toolkits either support rapid prototyping without sufficient controllability and customizability  or require electronic knowledge on the part of users in order to create circuits for programming and controlling the movement of paper craft .
Fourth, some use expensive and proprietary technologies , making them less accessible.
To make automated movable paper craft accessible to more users, we developed AutoGami.
It is a low-cost and easy to use toolkit that runs on selective inductive power transmission , which allows paper craft to make more types of movements, and fully explores the taxonomy of automated paper craft.
Its graphical interface makes designing and programming easier as it requires little or no engineering knowledge, supports rapid trial-and-error testing via simulation.
Compared with existing systems and toolkits, AutoGami can support more movement types, as specified using the pattern language below.
Jean is a housewife and mother of a five-year-old boy, Tom, and a three-year-old girl, Kate.
Just like most kids, both Tom and Kate love to hear stories from their mother.
But because they are very young, some of the concepts in the story are difficult for them to grasp.
Jean wants to enrich the stories with visual animation.
Inspired by the traditional Chinese shadow puppet, she decides to create an animated paper puppet theater and invests in the AutoGami toolkit.
She animates the story of The Hare and The Tortoise by first making the characters on paper  then using AutoGami's software and hardware to design simple movements.
After developing the AutoGami prototype, we demonstrated it on many occasions, including five workshops , a two-day local Maker Faire, a three-day interior design exhibition, a one-day open house exhibition, and two peer laboratory visits.
Based on the comments and feedback of more than 400 people who either observed or tried AutoGami, we have created three compelling scenarios to illustrate the capabilities and potential of our toolkit.
They are: interactive storytelling, rapid prototyping for social robotics and smart homes, and interactive artwork.
While she tells the story, she makes the paper characters move accordingly: Hare moves fast in the beginning but slows down after a while.
Tortoise, on the other hand, moves slowly but consistently.
As time passes, Tortoise surpasses Hare and wins the race.
Both Tom and Kate are engaged in the story, cheering for the Tortoise as it moves, and clapped when it wins.
Because of AutoGami, Jean can tell stories in a much more vivid way.
And since it is simple and easy to use, telling animated stories can be a daily activity that is enjoyed by all members of the family.
John is a researcher specializing in social robotics and intelligent environments.
In his next project, he will be creating social robots that have different personalities and look and feel.
The movements he needs to design range from saying greetings, nodding and shaking the heads, and facial expressions.
John needs to test different types of movement so that he can assign the appropriate one for each robot.
After making the paper models for each robot, as shown in Figure 5 , he uses AutoGami to design movements, test their various types, and study each one's different patterns by adjusting parameters such as the duration and the range of movement.
AutoGami's rapid prototyping system made it possible for John to identify specific types of movement appropriate for each robot, which in turn allowed him to determine the most suitable hardware to support each type of movement.
He was able to save both time and money because the toolkit was easy to use, he was able to create prototypes using accessible material, and he was able to conduct tests before purchasing the necessary hardware.
John also uses AutoGami to simulate smart home behaviors.
He builds a 3D paper model of a house .
Using AutoGami software, he designs the movement of the door and the window.
John found the automated paper craft prototypes a very useful and effective means for both previewing the intelligent behavior and to communicating the idea with his colleagues.
Figure 6 shows an overview of AutoGami toolkit.
The AutoGami hardware is developed based on the technology of selective inductive power transmission, which consists of controllable power transmitter and power receivers.
In addition, the hardware part is connected to the controlling software through Arduino interface.
The transmitter has a push/pull MOSFET oscillator with high output power.
The LC tank in the system generates the oscillation, and two power MOSFETs amplify it to enable the system to transfer more energy wirelessly.
As shown in Figure 6, a one-turn antenna with a diameter of 100 mm is made of a 6-mm diameter copper loop.
The power transmitter in AutoGami contains customizable slots that enable users to design their own wireless power transmitter by connecting different capacitors.
In terms of controllability, the transmitter circuit could be connected to Arduino output through connection slots, or directly through the on-board switches, to turn the relays on or off and generate different output frequencies.
For the structure of the power receiver and movement actuator, we used LC tank to harvest energy at its resonance frequency.
The inductor L in the system refers to coil made of 0.5mm enameled copper wire; it is circular with diameter of 5cm and has only 2 turns to match the small resistance of the SMA wire.
The capacitor and the SMA are attached to 2 nodes of the copper coil.
Each coil will have a different value capacitor attached, thus each will have different resonance frequency.
For the movement actuator, we used spring-shaped SMA with the model of BMX100500 from TOKI Cooperation .
Mary, a paper craft artist, was invited to exhibit her work in the city museum.
To make her artwork more engaging, the museum suggested using digital technology.
Mary, who has limited knowledge in technology, uses AutoGami to automate her paper craft.
After trying out the toolkit for the first time, she finds that it can trigger movements in different origami without the need to connect them to complex circuits.
She creates different origami, such as a crane with flapping wings and a dog with a moving mouth.
She also creates an array of origami flowers that she will arrange to depict pixels in a matrix display.
She designs movements so that groups of flowers bloom at different intervals, creating different patterns that display in a sequence.
AutoGami made the design process efficient because Mary could arrange and rearrange the position of the flowers and test the different parameters for blooming.
Automating paper craft was easy and fast because Mary only needed to attach actuators to the origami and plan the sequence of blooming in the GUI.
Its GUI enables users without programming experience to draw the shape, and design the movements of the paper craft, assign actuators to the different movements, and set the sequence of those movements.
The software allows the user to simulate movement using SMA before the automated paper craft is implemented in paper and SMA.
To automate paper craft with AutoGami, the user first creates the physical prototype of the movable paper craft, and then draws a model of it using the software, and designs movements by setting the amplitude and duration of different motions in the GUI.
AutoGami allows the user to set the amplitude, or range, of the movement, as well as how long the movement is performed.
For example, the angle of a waving arm can be set to a certain degree, or a car can be set to move a certain distance.
In Figure 6, slide bars are adjusted to set the amplitude and duration of a movement so that the paper bear waves hello by moving the arm at a small angle  for about 60 seconds, or waves goodbye by moving the arm at a wider angle.
Selective inductive power transmission can activate different power receiving coils in different output frequencies.
This allows users to assign a frequency to a movement that will be implemented in a particular part of the paper craft.
Movements of one paper craft can be implemented in another through a physical copy-and-paste method.
When two paper crafts have the same structure and are supposed to execute the same movements, the SMAs are simply attached to the same joints in the new paper craft.
AutoGami's use of inductive power has the advantage of eliminating massive wire connections to the external power source.
Although Animated Paper also uses SMAs, it heats and powers up the SMA actuator with a high-power laser, an item that is not as readily procured and thus reduces the toolkit's accessibility.
We compared AutoGami with other toolkits in terms of expressiveness , cost, hardware interface, software interface, and prerequisite knowledge from users .
With AutoGami, designing paper craft can be done at a lower cost, and knowledge in electronics is not required.
There is higher controllability in designing movements, and the complexity of the hardware embedded in the paper craft is lesser.
The expressiveness of a toolkit refers to the extent it allows users to customize different movements, i.e., speed, time, sequence, and direction.
Our experiment-based data shows that the speed of SMA contracting increases linearly with the current , as illustrated by the following mathematical equation: Speed  = 0.3218*Current  + 0.0725 Animated Paper only allows binary control of the movement, which is triggered by switching the power on or off.
Interactive Paper Devices and Animating Paper with SMA are more expressive than this, but AutoGami has higher controllability and programmability than these three toolkits because it can activate different actuators at different times.
Interactive Paper Devices integrates an electronic circuit with a PIC controller into the paper material, which increases the complexity of the paper craft.
Animating Paper with SMA also requires a copper-tape-based circuit to be embedded in the paper.
On the other hand, AutoGami--like Animated Paper--uses attach-and-play, which merely requires the SMA to be attached to the paper to generate the movement.
Eighty percent of the participants considered their experience of electronics to be of intermediate level or lower, while 20% of them considered their background of paper craft to be of expert level but their experience in it to be at a lower level.
As shown in Figure 10, each participant worked with an AutoGami toolkit, which consisted of hardware  and a software interface installed in a Lenovo ThinkPad X220.
They were supplied with tools for making paper craft, such as paper, colored pens, scissors, needle, and wire.
They were also provided with some premade paper crafts that they could examine and get inspiration from.
The workshop process was video recorded with the participants' consent.
After the workshop, the participants answered a questionnaire on their impressions of the toolkit.
We initially hoped to perform a comparison study with one of the three existing toolkits  listed in Table 1.
However, Animated Paper  is a more costly, higher-end toolkit while Animating Paper with SMA  is simpler and less expressive than AutoGami.
Thus, both are less than ideal for the purposes of comparison.
Interactive Paper Device  is comparable to AutoGami in terms of cost and supported functionalities, but its software is not available for download and we don't have enough details to replicate the system.
Therefore, we have adopted the evaluation strategy followed by other creative systems, such as SandCanvas , and procedures used by Buechley et al.
The workshop was conducted in four sessions: 1.
The objective was to give the participants a brief understanding of the toolkit and the technology.
The participants were asked to recreate this example to familiarize themselves with the AutoGami toolkit.
The activity involved creating paper craft from scratch and planning the movements of two independent parts using the software interface.
This session aimed to provide us insights on how AutoGami allows users to explore their creativity.
Participants found AutoGami's hardware and software interfaces intuitive and easy to learn.
One participant reported that it was "easy to get used to the system" and to working with the toolkit.
Other participants commented: "It is amazing to  with a new technology and create an automated movable paper craft in less than one hour," that AutoGami can be easily and quickly understood, and that "it is like the LEGO ."
The results of the questionnaire showed that intuitiveness earned a score of 4.5/5 while learnability scored 4.7/5.
All the participants were able to finish the guided task within the allotted time of 20 minutes.
In the 40-minute free task, the participants were able to come up with different ideas for automated paper craft and implement them using AutoGami.
They were allowed to ask questions when they faced difficulties, but very few did.
There were, at most, two questions asked during each of the five workshops, which suggested that the toolkit was self-explanatory.
Nonetheless, the questions posed did help us to identify minor usability problems of the interface.
Examples were "Do I need to draw the exact shape of my paper craft?
It seems I can only draw some simple shapes here," and "What are the exact positions to attach the two ends of SMA?"
Workshop participants unanimously agreed that the toolkit is useful and that it can be employed in the following: teaching electronics, software, and interaction design to children; interactive storytelling; rapid prototyping for robot movements; designing smart furniture; and pure entertainment.
It was observed that enjoyment increased when the participants were allowed to be creative.
They were excited by the opportunity to create movable paper craft.
This is reflected in the higher rating of enjoyment for the free task  as compared to the guided task .
Participants liked the toolkit, and most of them strongly agreed  that they wanted to recommend it to their friends.
According to feedback, the toolkit is fun for introducing children to electronics, software, and movable paper craft; as one participant said, "I had a great time playing with movable paper craft."
Six pieces of automated paper craft were created during the five workshops, ranging from a natural scene to animals and from cartoon characters to architecture .
A pair of girls used the copy-and-paste method to apply the same movements to a different paper craft.
They used the same pulling movement on their cat's mouth and their elephant's nose.
Another pair--an animation designer and an electronic engineer--adjusted the amplitude and duration of a movement to create a boat that moved in the waves.
The boat's big movement depicted a bigger wave while a small movement depicted a smaller wave.
The post-workshop questionnaire also showed positive results in the area of facilitating creativity.
The participants said that the toolkit allowed them to easily explore different possibilities of automatic movable paper craft, as evidenced by the score of 4/5 for this statement.
Similarly, the statement "I became creative in automated movable paper craft using this toolkit" earned a score of 4.4/5.
In summary, the distributions of the scores for important questions in the post-workshop questionnaire are illustrated in Figure 12.
Every group in the workshop used a similar process for designing automated paper craft.
During the free task, most groups first decided on what real-world example to use for the automated paper craft.
They then decided on the color of each part of the paper craft, as they identified color as an important characteristic.
Finally, they decided on the movement the paper craft should make.
This process motivated us to look at the properties of traditional paper craft--such as real-world examples, color, texture, and shape--in more detail as we improve the analysis of the design space on automated paper craft and further develop our toolkit.
The current AutoGami hardware has limitations that prevent it from performing very complex, fast, and precise movements.
AutoGami's software interface only supports drawing with simple shapes .
Thus, when using the GUI to draw a paper craft, the user can only draw its general shape.
In addition, the size of the power-receiving coil needs to be optimized.
It is relatively big compared to the size of the transmitter; as a result, it limits the number of receivers that can be placed on the inductive surface.
In this paper, we have analyzed the research on movable paper craft by presenting a taxonomy and pattern language for this field.
Our taxonomy can help researchers and designers to better understand previous work and to identify promising opportunities for new design.
Motivated by our analysis, we developed AutoGami, a low-cost rapid prototyping toolkit for automated paper craft.
The results of workshops have proven the usefulness of AutoGami, as users can create diverse, meaningful automated paper craft using the toolkit.
Additionally, participants felt highly engaged in using AutoGami to create automated paper craft.
AutoGami provides a unique platform with rich capabilities, controllability, and expressiveness; it can also support various applications of automated paper craft such as storytelling, artwork design, and product prototyping.
With further development of the toolkit, we aim to bring the joy of exploring and using automated paper craft to more users.
We would like to thank Hideaki Nii for his guidance in designing and building the hardware prototype.
We also thank members of the CUTE center and NUS-HCI lab for their generous help and support.
This research is supported by the Singapore National Research Foundation under its International Research Centre @ Singapore Funding Initiative and administered by the IDM Programme Office.
