Twelve-step fellowships are the most common long-term maintenance program for recovery from alcoholism and addiction.
Informed by six months of participatory observation of twelve-step fellowship meetings and service structure, I conducted in-depth interviews with twelve members of Alcoholics Anonymous  and Narcotics Anonymous  about the role of technology in recovery.
I found that there are a number of tensions in how technology is perceived and adopted.
As technology and twelve-step fellowships interact, issues of anonymity, identity, consensus, access, unity, autonomy, and physical presence are foregrounded.
I relate these findings to the broader research landscape and provide implications for future design in this space.
The most common type of a maintenance program is the twelve-step approach, such as Alcoholics Anonymous  and Narcotics Anonymous .
Various investigations have shown twelve-step interventions to be as or more effective than alternative approaches and they are frequently the intervention recommended by the medical community .
Twelve-step programs are characterized as a social movement that "has become the prototype of a burgeoning category of mutual-help organizations" .
Independent studies have hypothesized that these numbers may be understated since only about 50% of groups participate in the general service structure .
Some estimates show that as much as 3.1% of the U.S. population may be involved in AA .
In this paper, I report on a series of in-depth interviews, informed by six months of participant observations of AA and NA, conducted with twelve members of twelve-step programs.
Three goals drove this investigation:  characterizing the perceptions and use of technology by members of twelvestep communities,  identifying the unique needs of this community when considering appropriate technological interventions, and  describing the opportunities and challenges of working with twelve-step communities to design appropriate interventions to support recovery from addiction and alcoholism.
I found that although members of twelve-step fellowships do use technology to support their recovery, there are a number of tensions between the use of technology and the traditions of twelve-step programs.
I begin by providing some background on twelve-step recovery and related work.
Next, I provide a detailed description of the methods and present the thematic results of my qualitative investigation.
Finally, I discuss the implications of this investigation and how it may provide a unique lens for thinking about technology in other contexts.
Substance use disorders are characterized by needing increasing amounts of a chemical substance to achieve desired effect, consistent use of larger amounts than intended, and persistent unsuccessful attempts to cut down or stop use despite increasingly severe consequences to the user.
These disorders are a medical condition , which are estimated to cost the United States $374 billion per year .
2004 estimates show that 67% of Americans drink alcohol, with 11.9% developing dependence to the substance; 45.8% of Americans try illicit substances during their lifetime, with rates of dependence between 10.3% and 67.8%, depending on the substance .
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
There are over 200 different types of twelve-step programs  focusing on specific issues of substance dependence  and behavioral compulsion .
Though my focus in this paper is on the two most established twelve-step groups , all twelve-step fellowships advocate a similar process for recovery, which includes the following elements: * Abstaining from the Problematic Behavior: twelve-step programs are based on the idea that recovery requires complete abstinence from the problem behavior.
Substance-based programs advocate abstinence from all mind-altering substances .
Milestones in recovery  are celebrated with a public gifting of a small token such as a poker chip or a keychain.
Abstaining is seen as a byproduct of addressing underlying addiction issues  by following the three classes of suggestions below.
Meeting Attendance: regularly  attending meetings where time is devoted to reading the fellowship-approved literature, listening to a member speaker share, and sharing experiences in recovery.
Each group meeting is autonomous and nonprofessional .
The groups' relationship to individuals and other groups is governed by the Twelve Traditions1.
Sponsorship and Service: working with a member of the program who has had a longer time in recovery  to get an outside perspective one's recovery process and providing the same service to newer members in the program .
Additionally, service involves participating in outreach meetings at hospitals and institutions, helping with the logistics of running a meeting, and participating at the regional and national levels of the fellowship.
Stepwork: working with guidance of a sponsor and the fellowship literature to continually progress through the Twelve Steps1 of the program .
The steps include suggestions for admitting the problem, establishing a relationship with a "higher power" , understanding personal character defects through a written inventory, making amends to others, establishing spiritual maintenance practices, and reaching out to newcomers.
Twelve-step programs are considered to be programs of suggestions  and the only requirement for membership is "a desire to stop" the behavior being addressed.
Thus, each individual member's program may include some or all of these elements to varying degrees.
Though the research community has not examined the role of technology in twelve-step recovery, there are a number of currently available technological interventions aimed at this audience.
These include specialized social networking sites, repositories of speaker tapes and program literature, mobile apps for locating nearby meetings, services for the delivery of daily meditation or reflection readings, and apps for tracking specific behaviors in recovery .
Neither AA nor NA officially endorses any of these tools, as all of these are for-profit endeavors.
Though there have been no previous studies on the role of technology in twelve-step fellowships, this work is relevant to a number of existing lines of investigation including designing for behavior change, technology for recovery from addiction, examinations of AA as a culture and as a clinical intervention, and the role of technology in spirituality.
It is reasonable to think about substance use disorders as a chronic medical condition.
There is evidence of the success of peer-lead self-management programs on the outcomes of other chronic conditions  and twelve-step fellowships may simply be an early, non-professional example of a similar intervention.
Recovery from addiction or alcoholism is also an example of radical behavior change.
Behavior change is of interest to HCI, with many studies focusing on supporting personal health informatics  and persuading individuals to adopt healthy behaviors .
However in this study, I focus on established members of twelve-step fellowships who are familiar with the traditions and practices of these groups.
In the context of the Transtheoretical Model of behavior change , all of the participants could be said to have reached the maintenance stage of behavior change.
In the context of the Health Belief Model, these participants can be said to have sufficiently resolved the three classes of factors to understand that their addiction/alcoholism is a relevant health concern, a threat to their wellbeing, and that a twelve-step fellowship reduces this perceived threat for a subjectively acceptable cost .
This work discusses the role of technology in maintaining recovery, rather than persuading addicts/alcoholics to seek recovery or the early process of physical detoxification.
Most of these systems involve information being delivered to the patient via an on-site computer in a treatment center.
Despite the potential to offer such interventions outside of a treatment center, only one study in the review attempted to do so.
While the two interventions had comparable 30-day quit rates, those who received the automated email interventions attempted quitting earlier and more frequently .
Computerized interventions are seen as a promising new direction for "less severely dependent" clients .
In this study, I focus not on the delivery of initial information to a client who wants to limit their use of a particular substance, but rather on a maintenance program for addicts and alcoholics who have already stopped using and participate in the maintenance program to keep from using again.
As with other maintenance programs for chronic or lifethreatening conditions , there is a thriving ecosystem of online mutual-support forums and websites for helping the recovering addict or alcoholic.
One example is MedHelp alcoholism forum investigated by Chuang and Yang, which was found to help participating individuals receive various forms of support and form a recovery community .
Though it seems that most members of the forum were also practicing members of AA, the relationship between these widespread online forums and the practices and policies of 12-step memberships have not been explicitly investigated.
Twelve-step fellowships are of interest to both clinical studies of recovery and ethnographic investigations of these fellowships as social structures.
Project MATCH, a clinical investigation of recovery from alcoholism, found that AA was no less effective than other interventions on any measures and significantly more effective on the measure of the percentage of participants maintaining abstinence over three years .
Other clinical investigations have focused on the effectiveness of twelve-step fellowships for specific subsets of the population  and how twelve-step fellowships can be combined with professional interventions for best patient outcomes .
Ethnographic investigations of twelve-step fellowships have focused on issues of language and meaning , social agency , and identity .
All of these emphasize that twelve-step fellowships develop a distinct culture, language, and practices that are adopted by new members through participation in these communities.
To my knowledge, there have been no formal investigations of how technology fits  into the culture of twelve-step fellowships.
While the use of technology for spiritual or religious purposes is not out of the purview of HCI research , taking a stance on the religious aspects twelve-step fellowships is not the purpose of this work.
Despite the controversy regarding the twelve-step approach, these are  the most common treatment option for many addicts and alcoholics because AA/NA is free, non-professional, and widespread, making daily meeting attendance practical for most who need it.
As in previous work that uses religion as a lens for reconsidering the home , this investigation uses twelve-step recovery fellowships as a lens for reconsidering some assumptions of social computing.
Twelve-step fellowships have a distinct culture and language .
In order to inform my in-depth interviews, I conducted a six-month participatory observation study of AA and NA.
During the course of this time period, I attended 132 meetings  in the states of Georgia and California.
I also participated in 18 organizational service structure meetings at the group and regional level, conducted a review of currently available technologies for recovery, and reviewed and documented the artifacts of the program such as bulletin boards, information pamphlets, and meeting scripts.
Discussing the details of this formative phase is outside the scope of this paper; however, this immersion period helped to contextualize and inform the investigation described in this paper, familiarize me with the language and philosophies of twelve-step recovery, and gain access to members of these fellowships for in-depth interviewing.
ServiceNet: an online system for connecting fellowship members who are willing to help with those who need help , for example rides to meetings, babysitting during a meeting, etc.
Meeting Spot: a searchable list of meetings that is annotated by actual attendees to include information such as meeting size, detailed directions , and updated time/location.
Remote Attend: a self-contained tablet-like device that can be used to provide remote presence at a meeting through videochat to a member who is currently housebound, hospitalized, or institutionalized.
Recovery Trading Cards: website for making and printing cards that can be given to a newcomer, containing one member's contact information, meeting details, and recovery conversation starters.
Includes a QR code for quickly adding new cards to a smart phone or computer contact list.
Recovery Tube: a website that allows members to upload anonymized video , audio, or text shares tagging them with topic tags.
Members looking for a share on a specific topic can search this list and mark contributions as "extra helpful" to allow for recommendations and filtering.
GroupAdmin: an online tool for storing a group's documents, information for trusted servants, and financial information.
It can also be used to conduct a "straw poll" of members through email and facilitate communication with regional and national levels .
Table 1 provides a description of the participants, including their time in recovery, the fellowships they attend, and their geographic location.
Six participants were recruited through an announcement before the start of three meetings: a co-ed NA meeting, a co-ed AA meeting, and a women's NA meeting.
Three participants were directly contacted because they expressed the desire to be in the study during the participatory observation investigation.
The remaining three participants contacted me on the recommendations of previous study participants.
All participants who volunteered had more than one year of continuous recovery.
I acknowledge that there is an unfortunate inherent sampling bias in this approach as the people who volunteered for the interviews were more likely to want to share their opinions on technology and thus perhaps hold stronger opinions  than the larger body of either fellowship.
Because of the sensitive nature of the topic approached, informed consent for participation in this study was obtained verbally and the requirement for documentation of consent was waved.
Participants were not compensated for their participation.
All interviews with Georgia members of AA and NA were conducted in-person, in the location of the participants' choosing .
The two California interviews were conducted over Skype and the interview with the Canadian participant was conducted by phone .
Each interview lasted between 50 and 130 minutes.
In the first phase, we discussed the participant's background, fellowship participation, and elements of his or her recovery program.
In the second phase, we discussed technology used by the participant to aid in his or her recovery process and general opinions about the role of technology in recovery.
In the last phase, I elicited more contextualized feedback by presenting six storyboard sketches for potential technology for recovery.
These were meant to provoke feedback and generate discussion :
These ideas were chosen from a larger body of 50 brainstormed ideas because they focused most directly on addressing the major challenges observed in the preceding ethnographic investigation: finding and getting to meetings, forming a social support network, sharing recovery ideas with the larger community of recovering addicts and alcoholics, and organizing the logistics of the meeting.
After explaining each sketch, I asked the participant a number of questions, though the ones that led to most wellarticulated responses were: "How can a system like this go wrong?"
Perhaps this was because many participants knew me from the participatory observation as a technologist, so the negatively phrased questions made it clear that I was interested and open to divergent interpretations of technology.
Through this process, we identified seven major themes presented below.
Once this set of codes was developed, I conducted two additional passes through the transcript data assigning codes to statements where appropriate.
The themes reported below were those that appeared consistently across multiple interview participants, though points of contention are also noted to highlight divergent responses and opinions.
Anonymity is a primary principle of all twelve-step fellowships, which both protects members from external judgment and protects the fellowship from questionable actions and statements of its members.
Both types of anonymity are put at risk through the use of technology.
Participants relayed several examples where individual anonymity was broken through Social Networking Sites or where individuals were concerned about this potentially happening:
Through Facebook, a friend of mine got linked to an NA page, and she didn't do it.
Somebody else tagged her, and it was not okay, because not everybody in her life needs to know that she was in NA.
Interview participants used current technologies to support a number of recovery tasks in their lives.
They used technology to find new meetings to attend, to do stepwork with their sponsors or sponsees, to attend online meetings, to find community in social networking site groups, to look for information about recovery and addiction, to keep track of a daily inventory, to read program literature, to coordinate and organize service work, and to listen to archived recovery speakers .
Additionally, a number of the participants actually took part in the creation of new technological resources for recovery including creating new mobile apps , creating group webpages  and digital resources , and creating/running online meetings .
It was clear that there is some optimism and hope about the potential role that technology could serve in recovery, but participants also acknowledged that there are a number of tensions and challenges related to the topic:
I think as a community, recovering addicts tend to be largely technophobic.
We dealt with the shifting dynamics of including women, the shifting dynamics of including gay people, the shifting dynamics of crack cocaine--you will find old timers that refer to themselves as joining NA BC, Before Crack--and you can make the argument that the introduction of technology is nothing more than that same shifting dynamic ... Or, you can choose to take the other side of the argument that technology is breaking traditions and the traditions of NA are sacred and you will have nothing to do with it.
The issue with videochat attendance is that you need to trust about other people not being in the room ... if one member of the group is uncomfortable, the group is just not going to use it.
There are Facebook pages devoted to recovery, and people have put themselves out there and I really think that's a violation of traditions ... the danger is in someone becoming identified as a member of a certain fellowship, then perhaps, they relapse.
Now, a newcomer might think, "Maybe that AA or NA business is not very effective, so why should I bother trying it?"
And recovery is the core of our existence.
What am I going to talk about, except the thing that's most important to me?
They talked for two hours and did not come to a consensus.
But, NA had a Facebook page before and after that two-hour discussion, without saying that Facebook is wrong or you shouldn't be on Facebook with NA, they took down that page.
I think for me the biggest issue would be about the spirit of anonymity, in that we are all the same.
If you sit there and make a list of what you're good at or what you know about, that totally busts that.
People may start thinking that this person knows better than somebody else ... this kind of separates us.
The truth is, especially new members of NA, they may not even have computers because they have lost everything they ever had.
They're going to be disconnected, disenfranchised...  My only concern is not to forget about someone that doesn't have technology ... that they're not alienated from a particular resource, really.
Someone might say something with speech that they didn't necessarily feel comfortable writing down or having a record of at all.
If you did have discussion on a particular issue, I think it would be more likely to get hostile over the Internet, because you don't have to worry about offending anyone to their face.
In that medium , and I'm still convinced of this, group conscience is very difficult to formulate.
You're not seeing how people are talking, you're not hearing the timbre of their voice ... You know how contentious service can be anyway?
Now take away all the human quality of it and it can become very contentious.
However, it is not always possible to make decisions in person, leading to an approach that combines grassroots input with final decisions made by elected trusted servants.
One powerful example is the creation of new literature which is written and approved by the fellowship through a largely consensus driven process.
NA has recently approved a new book, titled Living Clean, and P12 discussed the process of its creation:
I'm sure as with any online forum, there's going to be risks ... You might get someone that has a resentment and tries to sabotage a meeting.
So, the problem is that the unity of the program could be broken.
Twelve-step recovery programs specify standards of behavior using the Twelve Traditions.
All interview participants emphasized the importance of "going back and reviewing and keeping the traditions in mind"  while designing for this audience.
However, in addition to the Twelve Traditions, each fellowship has a specific culture and message that is supposed to stay consistent to create unity among members: for example, "the Al-Anon message is spoken here, leave all other affiliations outside" .
In the rooms, this culture is enforced organically:
Controlling this kind of behavior is inherently subjective and interview participants questioned whether it would ever be possible in an online setting without completely reconsidering how twelve-step fellowships work.
That's when you get people talking about religion and politics in the rooms and that contentious nature is not good for unity ... the traditions have a very loose hold on social media.
The difficulty of maintaining unity and a single message of recovery is amplified by the tension between the tradition that calls for unity and the tradition that states that each group should be autonomous.
Groups interpret the traditions differently due to geographic and demographic differences between groups.
For example, in Georgia NA meetings, naming specific drugs is discouraged as it is considered to go against group unity, but:
When most contact between members of the fellowship occurred in person, it was less likely that a participant would run across inconsistent readings of the traditions or conflicting policies.
However, as technology connects addicts and alcoholics who would otherwise have never met, unity and autonomy are affected by the response to these inconsistencies.
Just getting a list of numbers is too easy.
People early in recovery need to make a conscious decision to go through the effort of asking for a phone number.
They might be terrified to do that, but need to do it ...
If it's too easy and you're just spoon-feeding it to people, they're not going to value it.
The main concerns centered around preserving the traditions of each fellowship: keeping participation as open as possible, encouraging in-person contact, supporting group autonomy and unity, and preventing violations of anonymity.
Remote Attend was seen as the most potentially problematic idea .
It is clear that designing for twelve-step fellowships would require close collaboration with the service bodies of each organization to reach a consensus on what would or would not be appropriate as a technological intervention.
However, there are also some considerations that might increase the acceptability of suggested designs.
In the next section, I consider five suggestions that may be incorporated into the design of technologies for 12-step fellowships and may also be helpful to other social computing applications.
In this section, I present considerations for design that emerged out of my investigation of twelve-step fellowships.
Rather than focusing just on specific solutions in designing for recovery, I also draw out themes and design directions that have been foregrounded by this investigation and demonstrate how these ideas may apply to other contexts and existing threads of conversation in the HCI community.
All of the participants in this study already used technology for one or more aspects of their recovery.
Each person cited one or more of the offered designs as something they would like to see and use in the future, with the most popular designs being Recovery Trading Cards  and GroupAdmin .
Though there are a number of ways to make meeting selection, recovery information gathering, and participation in service more efficient in terms of time, this may not be helpful to the recovering individual.
The interview participants were suspicious of any technology that replaces face-to-face contact with interacting with a system.
Getting a list of numbers to call in a twelve-step meeting is not just about gathering contacts, rather it is about making a face-toface connection and beginning to build a network.
While most contact managers try to make it easier to add a contact, one can imagine a technology that makes it more difficult, perhaps by requiring you to both meet and to write down a few things about the person you are adding.
In recovery, the journey of getting information about new meetings, new people, and new recovery suggestions is just as important as the information gained because it helps build a recovery support network.
However, this is not only true of recovery.
For example in the workplace, a network of relationships is key to success in an organization .
One can imagine that a similar approach to making it harder to contact somebody until making a personal connection might be more difficult in the short-term but more beneficial in the long-term.
Identity plays an important role in online peer-support communities, but could also interfere with the ability to get emotional support or accountability in times of trouble .
The twelve-step spiritual ideas of anonymity and "principles before personalities" challenge the idea that persistent identity is necessary for the health of the community.
Twelve-step programs encourage the understanding that all addicts/alcoholics are equal, that there is no such thing as an AA/NA superstar, and that any member can be of service regardless of previous reputation.
Anonymity has been serving an equalizing purpose in twelve-step fellowships since their inception; perhaps, it can have a similar effect in online communities that are struggling to democratize participation.
As the differences between those with advanced infrastructure and those without it grow, it may be important to find better ways for high-, low-, and no-tech systems to coordinate.
It may be impossible to achieve the same experience when using different levels of technology, but it should be possible to achieve the same goals.
This contributes to the ongoing conversation within HCI that maintains that it is important to design technology not only with considerations for those who use it but also for those who might be excluded from its use .
Videochat has been billed as the next best thing to being there in person, as "almost being there" .
However, participants in this investigation pointed out that in the hurry to get "the next best thing" to physical presence, one may miss out on the opportunity to feel a sense of loss that might actually drive the search for "the real thing."
For example: seeking to stay connected to an old sponsor after a move may prevent looking for a new sponsor who can be physically present; connecting with a hospitalized group member using videochat may actually remove the sense of urgency that might have driven one to visit in person.
This is consistent with recent criticisms that communication technology may actually create an illusion of contact while making us feel more disconnected and isolated .
This is also consistent with work that shows that children who are separated from their parents focus on the next reunion or substitute in-person contact with another adult, rather than relying on mediated communication that occurs during the separation .
Maybe remote contact is at times inevitable and videochat is the next best thing, but it also may be important to work under the assumption that it's still nowhere close the real thing and support achieving inperson contact as the first priority.
There was a great deal of geographic and demographic variety in approaches to recovery and interpretation of traditions within the same fellowship.
Groups like AA and NA demonstrate that it is possible to maintain a long-term discussion about the balance between unity and autonomy.
This autonomy has always been encouraged in twelve-step fellowships, but may be lost as portions of the fellowship move online.
Contact with other perspectives is important, but perhaps the virtual spaces provided by an online community smooth over differences in striving for neutrality in a way that reduces polyvocality in this diverse space.
Recent work on post-colonial computing, emphasizes the importance of embracing rather than erasing this diversity of perspectives .
The physical metaphor of an autonomous group of a larger fellowship might be an interesting way of considering polyvocality.
While an inperson visit to a different physical location holds an implicit understanding of entering a different culture with all of the inherent qualities of being a guest in another's home, online it may be unclear whose perspectives and interpretations are primary for the moment.
Introducing the "home" vs. "visiting" metaphor to online communities with diverse subgroups may be a promising direction in design.
When access to technology becomes a requirement to full participation, some groups and individuals may become disenfranchised.
Communities like AA and NA are particularly sensitive to this possibility and try to provide equivalent no-tech, low-tech, and high-tech ways of participating in important community processes.
For example, in the process of writing the Living Clean book, an addict could have contributed to the content by participating in a physical book workshop in their area , calling in their opinions to the book committee , or responding to an online survey .
This work is the first to examine the role of technology in twelve-step fellowships.
Through in-depth interviews informed by participant observation, I identified seven major tensions between technology and the fellowships, including challenges in achieving anonymity, equality, universal access, consensus, unity, and autonomy.
These findings may serve to inform the design of future technologies for twelve-step recovery, but may additionally highlight alternative ideas and perspectives to help address existing challenges in social computing.
Moore, B., Fazzino, T., Garnet, B., Cutter, C., and Barry, D. Computer-based interventions for drug use disorders: A systematic review.
The transtheoretical model of health behavior change.
Room, R. Alcoholics Anonymous as a Social Movement.
In Research on Alcoholics Anonymous: Opportunities and Alternatives.
Rosenstock, I., Strecher, V., and Becker, M. Social Learning Theory and the Health Belief Model.
Sadock, B. and Sadock, V. Substance-Related Disorders.
In Kaplan and Sadock's Synopsis of Psychiatry: Behavioral Science/Clinical Psychiatry.
Interviewing as Qualitative Research: A Guide for Researchers in Education And the Social Sciences.
Almost being there: video communication with young children.
Alcoholics Anonymous Outcomes and Benefits.
In M. Galanter and L.A. Kaskutas, eds., Research on Alcoholics Anonymous and Spirituality in Addiction.
Turkle, S. Aspects of the Self.
In Life On the Screen: Identity in the Age of the Internet.
The Relationship of Emotional and Informational Support to Commitment in Online Health Support Groups.
Sponsor, Recovery Coach, Addiction Counselor: The Importance of Role Clarity and Role Integrity.
Perspectives on Peer-Based Recovery Support Services, .
Extraordinary Computing: Religion as a Lens for Reconsidering the Home.
Yarosh, S. and Abowd, G.D. Mediated Parent-Child Contact in Work-Separated Families.
National Institute on Drug Abuse.
