Constant connectivity and total availability to clients is the rule rather than the exception in many contemporary workplaces.
Enabled by developments in information and communication technologies , total availability of employees is possible and presumed.
Scholars have explored how new technological affordances, cultural shifts, individual personality traits, and/or the development of social expectations that reinforce norms of constant connectivity have led to this state of affairs.
We argue that a key factor has been overlooked in current scholarship about stress, intensive work, and constant connectivity.
That is, current economic conditions are creating a marketplace in which firms increasing sell the availability of their employees as part of the services offered by the firm.
In this paper we use qualitative data to illustrate how total availability is an integral aspect of the `product' offered by professional service firms and is becoming increasingly prevalent in other service industries.
We conclude with a discussion of how the HCI community might address this situation as a design challenge.
Drawing on the work of Goffman and Perlow, we suggest that designers attend to the ways in which organizations might maintain front stage impressions of total availability while collectively managing individual time to restrict total availability behind the scenes.
In the United States, and increasingly across the globe, we have come to take it as a given that many contemporary workplaces are characterized by constant connectivity, long hours, regular stress, and a frenzied pace .
Researchers from the HCI community, as well as scholars from fields such as management, sociology and science and technology studies have a long history of contributing to the discourse surrounding the pressures of contemporary work .
Collectively, their findings affirm the conditions of technostress  and suggest that unsustainable work patterns are damaging to individual health , social institutions such as family and marriage , and even productivity and organizational effectiveness .
Research on constant connectivity and contemporary work, primarily in a Western context, tends to rely on four key lenses to explore shifts toward increasingly intense work environments and unsustainable temporal relations:  technological innovations;  cultural imperatives;  social dynamics; and  psychological drivers.
All of these perspectives contribute to our understanding of the complex sociotechnical dynamics at play in current workplaces.
However, we contend that this conversation is missing a key component: economic exchange.
To date, scholars have failed to acknowledge that `availability'--the term we use herein to denote the sociotechnical state of being constantly connected and accessible to others--has become an integral aspect of the `product' being bought and sold in a number of knowledge and service industries.
Our data suggests that service firms in industries as diverse as corporate law to hotel management have begun to compete for business largely, if not primarily, on the basis of their employees' willingness to be available to clients and customers 24/7.
As Phillip, a corporate attorney whom we interviewed, neatly summarizes, I think it's a fact of 21st Century law that you get business by being responsive and the more responsive you are, the more business you get.
Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Publication rights licensed to ACM.
It's ridiculous, but if someone down the street is offering that service, you need to compete with it.
We build our argument about the economic underpinnings of professional availability on a set of qualitative interviews with individuals from a variety of jobs .
These data suggest the need to unpack the ways that economic exchange figures into temporal work relations, which is our objective in the first half of this paper.
Specifically, we look at how employee availability has become part of the economic exchange between organizations and their clients/customers, how the transactional relationship between availability and client service as a source of competitive advantage is moving into new industries, and how individuals understand their behavior as part of current work imperatives.
We follow our initial examination with a discussion of how the CHI community might address this economic reality as a design challenge.
Rather than focus largely on interventions that address individual or intra-organizational practices, our analysis suggests there is room for an alternate approach.
We begin by imagining what this might look like, first, by examining the collective approach that management scholar Leslie Perlow articulates in her work .
Next, we build on Perlow's insights using Goffman's dramaturgical metaphor  of front stages and back stages.
This extension, admittedly nascent, is meant to incite designers to further develop solutions that might enable an organization to maintain its `front stage' of economically-driven constant availability while allowing temporal flexibility for its employees `back stage'.
In sum, managing time, disruptions, and availability has been a fruitful area for research and intervention in the CHI/CSCW community for decades .
We contribute to this line of research by suggesting how scholars might take into account the structural economic factors that underlie current temporal relations in their attempts to facilitate more sustainable working environments.
This perspective challenges assumptions embedded in traditional visions of ubiquitous computing oriented around creating anytime/anywhere access to information  and provides a fruitful avenue for reflective design .
We conclude by imagining how researchers and developers might rally to design interventions that take this disregarded, but substantive, factor into account when addressing the individual, group and organizational work practices.
We review four of the most common analytical lenses that have been used to understand issues regarding availability.
Technological capacities perspectives attend to the ways that developments in information and communication technologies  create an intensification of temporal work relations and increased interruptions .
This perspective reflects at least a soft technological determinist position  by its direct linkage of the emergence of networked and wireless computing to specific temporal impacts on individuals, organizations, and social units as well as new forms of labor, ways of thinking, and sources of stress.
Cultural evolutionary perspectives, on the other hand, trace the ways in which contemporary orientations toward progress, speed, and compressed linear time are effects of modernity .
While research here takes into account broad shifts in infrastructural and technological capacities, this lens focuses primarily on the ways in which culture continues to adapt toward increased efficiency, perpetual technological progress, and global connectivity.
These cultural shifts thus form the basis by which we direct our efforts and understand our lives.
Social normative and interpersonal perspectives take as a starting point that current temporal work conditions are socially defined.
Focus here is directed on the ways in which groups and collectives create and legitimize temporal structures  by repeated, contextualized actions, often through the use of information and communication technologies.
This stream of research explores how shared temporal relations emerge, shape individual action, and influence the degree to which any one person can assert autonomy over availability without offending collective norms .
In short, temporal norms, like other professional norms, emerge by virtue of continued social negotiation until they appear so routine as to become invisible.
Finally, psychological or individual traits perspectives on availability highlight how individual orientations like workaholism or competitiveness render some individuals prone to intense and unsustainable work practices.
Research in this area reveals how individuals express intrinsic polychronic or monochronic orientations to time, which in turn affects their experience of work-related stress .
Findings also showcase the degree to which individuals are vulnerable to workplace pressures and amenable to developing obsessive and `addictive' relationships with colleagues .
Scholars have a longstanding interest in understanding the various factors that have led to current norms of intensive work, stress, and constant connectivity.
While, to some degree or another, existing research takes into account the variety of cultural, technological, social and individual aspects that affect current temporal work conditions,
While the work of Barley and colleagues on the commodification of work  and technical contractor labor markets , as well as Edwards and Wajcman's work on the politics of working life  attend to the role of labor markets in current work environments, even these scholars do not directly link practices of constant connectivity with economic markets of worker availability.
In actuality, economic and labor conditions are key factors in each of the perspectives outlined above.
Such factors play a key role in: the ways in which cultural orientations toward progress and speed figure in to everyday experience of work; how technologies that enable connectivity are understood and enacted in practice; how communication norms evolve among colleagues; and whether or not individuals see themselves as having their `own' time.
The economic value of time has long been a taken-forgranted aspect of elite professional service occupations such as law firms, but our research suggests that it is becoming increasingly prevalent in other industries as well.
There is a new market for total  availability that has come to play a defining role in how organizations understand and advertise the `product' they are offering to customers and clients.
This, as a result, impacts the agency organizations and individuals have over time, both in traditionally professional and personal contexts.
In the following sections we offer empirical details to corroborate this claim.
We leverage this combined data set to interrogate how ideas about `product,' labor, and service figure into norms, actions, and experiences surrounding technology-enabled availability in a variety of professions and organizational contexts.
Our initial theorizing leads us to the insight that, for some service providers, employee availability has become an integral aspect of the `product' sold to clients.
In order to unpack this insight further, we compare the experiences of elite professional service providers  with those in less lucrative and less prestigious occupations such as sales representatives  and hotel management.
This comparison highlights salient commonalities and differences among the emergent phenomenon of total availability.
This paper is the product of almost a decade of inductive research on the use and experience of communication technologies by professionals in the United States.
In addition to interviewing, other qualitative ethnographic methods  were used in each research project.
The focus of each study was to understand daily work practices, use of communication technologies, and organizational norms.
While the data that that inform our thesis are not derivative of a single study, collectively they provide a broad picture of a normative professional shift toward constant connectivity within different occupations over the last decade.
All data reported herein were analyzed through methods aligned with grounded theory, including multiple rounds of inductive coding and iterative cycles between coding and theorizing .
Our data suggest that organizations in a variety of servicerelated industries are promising  24/7 access to employees as part of the services offered to customers and clients.
Rather than providing a static `product'  firms are selling availability as an integral part of the product.
The ability to reach an employee at all hours of the day has become an assumed right of clients working with elite service professionals.
Individuals in these occupations are aware of this norm and take for granted that being available is part of doing business in a competitive marketplace.
For these professionals, accessibility to clients has become normalized over time, creeping in intensity as infrastructure and technologies enable ubiquitous communication and easier transfer of information across distance.
For others, total availability is actively being introduced in new contexts as a way to gain strategic competitive advantage.
Once total availability is integrated into the product sold by a particular company, or across an industry, individuals who strive to be successful have little choice but to put themselves in the position of being available, rationalizing their behavior as part of operating in a 21st century capitalist marketplace.
Elite service professionals, such as management consultants and corporate attorneys, equate 24/7 availability to "client service".
Lawyers are particularly articulate about the ways in which availability is sold as part of the legal product.
Mike, a partner in a corporate law firm, is straightforward about the link between access and product: Well you try to be as responsive as possible.
It's always been that way.
And as technology has made response times shorter, it has empowered people in a quicker fashion.
Asked about the relationship between productivity and accessibility, Matt, a senior partner in the same firm, ties these two concepts under the same umbrella: if productivity is measured by keeping clients, and keeping clients requires responsiveness, availability becomes the marker for productivity.
According to Matt, Well, in a service business like ours, responsiveness equates to productivity, in that if you have a happy client you're going to be successful, that's the business.
This relationship is clearly one sided.
Client service is exactly that - serving the client.
Hillary, a partner in the same law firm, reflects on the structurally unequal relationship between lawyers and their clients, I have a client in Omaha who doesn't have a cell phone, doesn't check email.
But he is very aware of the current norms on this end.
He is completely comfortable with the dichotomy that he can reach me anytime any day and I can't reach him.
That's his right as the client.
Actually, I have several clients who have no problem being the benefactor of current social norms.
That is one of the things I have to tell Associates.
They think, "Well my client won't mind if I don't check my email after 6 because they don't check theirs."
The client has entirely different standards for you then they do for themselves.
Unlike lawyers, venture capitalists, investment bankers and management consultants seem to take this aspect of the economic exchange for granted.
These professionals slip assumptions about accessibility and service into conversation, not as a topic worth mentioning, but rather as a framing context for whatever point they are trying to make.
For instance, Adam, a consultant, wonders whether partners could turn down the "spigot of requests" from clients, noting, "Clients are trained to think that we are at their disposal."
Similarly, Viet, a partner in the same firm, describes his entire relationship to availability with the simple phrase, "At the end of the day, our job is to please clients."
When I started working fax machines were just starting.
And before long it was like, "oh my gosh, how could you not be able to get something back automatically," and then FedEx changed, and started shipping documents overnight.
I guess what happens is that once it gets assimilated, it gets to be the expectation of how we work and communicate.
Mark, a partner in a corporate law firm, remembers a similar evolution in accessibility and the attendant shift in his relationship with clients.
When I started FedEx wasn't even around.
There was carbon paper and White-Out and we had Telex.
And FedEx was just starting out.
But when FedEx went to late pickup on a Friday night at 8:00 it was like, "Oh, this is the end of the world, this is going to ruin our weekends."
And then when they went to Saturday pickup and it got even worse, you know, we thought it couldn't get any worse but it did.
Really I think the biggest change was widespread adoption of email.
I mean that was the big change.
Mark goes on to relate the shifts in sending and receiving documents to his relationship with clients and his ability to handle the workload.
In this, he illuminates the ways in which accessibility, as tied to technology, has slowly but surely become integral to what is bought and sold in the economic exchange of legal service.
The advent of email was a big deal, but it was constrained by what you could accomplish with it.
It wasn't until you had the ability to attach documents of any given size - that fundamentally changed everything.
With FedEx you at least had 24-hour notice that you had this wagonload of documents coming in and you could kind of plan for it.
With email, now, they send them  immediately, and they expect immediate attention.
And so, the mindset is that somehow you are going to be able to put down whatever you're doing and bring the resources to bear to do the proper analysis of those documents in a fairly rapid period of time.
David, a junior partner in the same law firm tells a similar story.
Describing how Sunday FedEx delivery "bums me out" David recalls, No I remember exactly when that happened, like '97 or '98, when FedEx started delivering on Saturday, and now Sunday.
And people recognized, ok, this is as big of a thing as faxes.
Like ten or 15 years before that, when faxes came, and all of a sudden, you could get something immediately.
And then FedEx on weekends and now you have these , there's absolutely no dead time.
Knowledge professionals often refer to infrastructural and technological shifts related to information transfer when reflecting on the current relationship between client service and availability.
When asked about the role of smartphones in temporal work practices, the number of professionals who answered the question in terms of the development of the fax machine or introduction of FedEx delivery on weekends was striking.
Roger, a partner in a private equity firm, recalls,
The ways in which these service professionals recall FedEx's temporal creep to weekend delivery and the advent of mobile and ubiquitous email suggests that expectations of total availability are constrained only by infrastructural/technical capacity.
You know we have that whole focus on work life balance?
And, while we do mean it, we're the biggest violators.
We say it, but if there was anything in our culture that's a little, difficult, well, that's the toughie.
If accessibility is our competitive edge, well, that's it, that's what we have to do.
Later in the interview he reveals some regret about, or at least awareness of, the world he has helped create.
Asked the biggest drawback of carrying a smartphone he admits, The biggest drawback is, we've spoiled the people that we work with, as well as we work for.
Integral to the strategy of availability that Chad describes is an assumption that hotel owners "appreciate"  employees to be available 24/7.
Our conversations with sales representatives from a major footwear manufacturer provide additional insight into how the communication practices of customers affect individual experience of availability.
Each sales representative in this firm services a particular type of customer -- some are in charge of independent mom and pop shoe stores, others major department stores.
Thus, the structure of the buying system of one's customers affects the degree to which any one sales representative feels compelled to be available to clients.
Sales representatives themselves are conscious of the discrepancies between accounts.
For example, in 2007 Tabitha is adamant that carrying a smartphone does not affect her relationship to the small stores she services, No, no.
See, the nature of my accounts, being independent based, a lot of them don't even have, say, computerized systems in their stores.
So, for them to be on email?
Its just not gonna happen.
While, on the other hand, Fred, a senior account executive, sees the communication practices of his larger department store accounts shifting in a manner that will require more electronically-mediated accessibility on his part, They're becoming much, much more tied to email.
You know, I think, one of the things about email that people like myself, and customers, and people who have been raised using the phone, have discovered, is that email gives you a much better time flexibility.
A lot of my customers have realized that the phone ties up a lot of time, which they don't want to spend.
So, they prefer an email that they can respond to at their leisure, perhaps after hours, even late at night.
And so my customers definitely prefer email.
And if they prefer email than I prefer email.
That's just the way it is.
Fred's reflections suggest that he sees himself as responding to, rather than initiating, shifts in expectations of availability.
Across the board, investment bankers, management consultants, and corporate attorneys not only associated availability with client service, but they took this association for granted.
A conversation with a vice president in a hotel management company, Chad, suggests, however, that this association is neither fixed nor inevitable.
Chad's company has recently begun to expand their business.
They are hoping to attract new hotel owners and are actively bidding against other firms in the area to manage privately owned hotels.
Asked about his smartphone, Chad relates how accessibility figures into his relationship with a new client, the owner of the hotel.
Chad first states that the best thing about his smartphone is, "really the accessibility, and just being available at any given time."
Probed as to why this is good, Chad describes, I would say it's good because you're in a serviceoriented industry.
So, you're providing a service ... and owners, well they're appreciative of that.
Chad goes on to suggest that selling availability can be an active decision, a strategic move in a competitive market where such expectations are not currently the norm.
Asked if owners expect constant accessibility he acknowledges, Now they do.
It is interesting, because that third party owner on the East Coast, the first thing they said when they started working with us was, "Man, you guys are available 24/7."
That's unlike Jacobson, which is another big management company, or National, or whomever.
And it's just - that's become - that's us.
I'd call it a competitive edge or advantage, and I think its good.
Asked if accessibility is something that their business development team is actively selling, he declares, Absolutely.
We've talked about it in terms of what we can provide, a niche, an edge.
According to Chad, the introduction of accessibility as part of the service they are offering hotel owners is not the consequence of a creep in technological capacity or an expansion of FedEx services.
Rather, it is the result of a strategic decision made by him and his colleagues--a decision that is not without some costs.
Chad admits that the firm's focus on work/life balance has suffered since this focus onto cultivating new business.
That is the trick of it.
Bob's insights provoke the question: given the economic necessity of maintaining the appearance of total availability, how can any one individual employee wrestle back control of their time and connectivity?
Our research suggests that individuals, even those at the highest level of the firm, are severely constrained in their ability to limit availability.
We thus suggest that a more fruitful way to address Bob's "trick of it" involves providing support to teams and organizations.
Once accessibility has become concomitant with the service offered to clients, we see how service professionals begin to associate doing their job as reflective of a temporal mode of constant availability.
In such an environment, individuals are put in the position of incorporating availability into their understanding of what it is to `be' a certain kind of professional and conduct business "in the 21st century."
For example, after describing a working day that begins at 6am and ends after 10pm, Gary, a private equity professional, gives the following reply to the question, "Do you mind having your day be so much longer?"
Because I signed up for that.
That's part of the world we're in.
We don't have beginnings and ends to things that we do unfortunately, but that's been true for me for a long, long time.
It is the nature of this job.
Mike, the corporate lawyer has a similar response, No, I actually, I'm one of those, you know, I'm a total advocate of being tied in all the time just because that's the business we're in.
Hillary, another corporate lawyer, goes beyond Mike to assert that not only is availability part of the business, it is her way to distinguish herself to her clients .
To me, I actually think it  increases my productivity for a couple of different reasons.
The first would be that now I don't have any dead time when I'm in a cab or in a car service going to the airport, any of what normally would be, you know, sleeping opportunities when I'm traveling.
I feel like I can use that time in a convenient way for me because that otherwise would be totally dead time, to make some connections with people and show them I'm still engaged, even though I'm in Europe, I'm still concerned with what's happening with my tiny little company in California.
I'm still checking in so that they can then get that, you know, from a client service perspective they can have it in their mind.
Oh my God, Hillary's so responsive.
She's even thinking about me when she's in Europe.
That makes all the difference.
Bob, another partner in the law firm expresses a more ambivalent relationship with the economic underpinnings of availability as related to communication technologies, You know, there are downsides, yeah.
I mean the notion of technology, in my view, is that it should make my life more effective and efficient, not to let other people control my life more.
And in the service business that's the balancing act.
These data make it clear that one of the major factors contributing to temporal work conditions is today's prevailing economic value on total availability -- a condition that people in many professional service occupations already appear to take for granted.
In this competitive marketplace, client service has become synonymous with availability.. Our data also suggest that this orientation toward customer service is moving beyond elite industries such as law and management consulting and finding its way into domains such as hotel management and shoe sales, where is it actively being normatively rationalized.
This emergence of a `total availability best practice' suggests a future where more and more employees have diminishing structural power over their temporal work conditions.
In the United States at least, where organized labor efforts have decreased steadily over the last decades, this leaves the modern day knowledge worker, his or her teammates and fellow employees--even their bosses--in a professional pressure cooker with little ammunition to turn the prevailing tide toward constant connectivity to the workplace.
Firms are increasingly, if not compulsorily, offering total availability of their employees to clients and customers.
Employees must accept the terms of this bargain and learn to live with the burdens of constant connectivity in order to achieve professional success.
As this last comment reflects, the burden of total availability generally falls on the individual.
Current design interventions that attempt to alleviate experiences of disruption, overwork, and negative temporal work patterns tend to align with this perspective.
Design efforts in the CHI/CSCW community have largely focused on how individuals manage, and occasionally restrict, their own accessibility.
This has led to the development of innovative applications and technologies that aid in the ongoing "wars" against our email inboxes, our blurred home and work boundaries, and our daily experience of professional interruption and dislocation .
Aside from changing the structure of the market or exiting the workplace, we suggest that individuals are generally not in a position to substantively affect the degree to which they are enrolled in markets of availability.
Recent scholarship in management studies provides insight into an alternative logic for managing availability, one that looks to the collective, not the individual, level of practice within an organization to address the problem of total availability.
Studying an organizational change effort aimed at providing elite consultants predictable time disconnected from work, Leslie Perlow and colleagues  outline how a collective strategy of managing temporal work conditions can enable teams to maintain the client expectation of 24/7 availability while carving out individual time off for each individual.
Conducting Predictable Time Off  experiments, Perlow shows how collective strategies that enabled each team member to take one night "off" a week inspired teams to reorient to their work and each other in productive and positive ways.
Perlow's research shows that intervention strategies aimed at the collective level have simultaneous outward and inward effects: they enable the organization to maintain an outward relationship of total availability and develop structural internal strategies to manage employees' time.
Notably, one of the cornerstones of the collective strategy outlined in Perlow's study is the fact that the client was not told that consultants were taking time off.
In other words, the change effort was based on the assumption that the organization could successfully manage the impression that they were a fully available service provider while operating behind the scenes in a different, less-than-totally-available manner.
In fact, early on in the experiment it was agreed that the organization would end the experiment if it appeared that work was suffering or the client was displeased in any way with the service provided.
The fact that they never had to revert back to traditional temporal practices speaks to the organization's ability to manage their impression of availability successfully.
In addition to being a collective solution, Perlow's case is a interesting example Goffman's impression management tactics , albeit at the organizational level.
Originally conceived to explain individual behavior, Goffman's ideas about impression management contend that people work to maintain their social identity and establish certain expectations about their actions.
Goffman suggested that managing impressions is akin to putting on a play: the audience is privy to the activities on the front stage, a feat that is often accomplished through collaboration with `stagehands' back stage.
The success of the front stage is dependent on that of the back; yet, if the backstage workings are revealed, the performance is also ruined.
Front stage and back stage, though occurring in interdependent simultaneity, must be kept separate from one another to achieve the proper effect of either.
Perlow's consultants, for example, were successful in their front stage performance because they separated the need to please the client from the necessity of coordinating back stage work.
This was a collective achievement.
Successfully managing the impression of total availability at the organizational level requires a coordinated effort among employees: it is impossible to pull off a successful performance with actors acting according to different scripts.
The management strategy deployed by Perlow's subjects involved a backstage set of activities that revolved around rotating days off among employees.
Successful as this method was, we believe that alternative or augmentative sociotechnical solutions could be designed to support collective organizational performances of total availability.
We bring this challenge to the CHI/CSCW community.
Addressing the phenomenon of total availability is a design challenge related to a lineage of CHI-related research aimed at addressing modern work conditions such as interruptions, email overload, and other forms of technostress .
We hope our work herein will inspire designers to take into account previously overlooked economic aspects of this issue and look anew at issues of availability, constant connectivity and temporal work practices.
By revealing the way that total accessibility can subvert individual agency our perspective directly challenges assumptions central to the classic vision of ubiquitous computing - that providing anytime/anywhere access to digital information is normatively positive.. Recognizing how industry is capitalizing on technologically-facilitated availably, and rendering this capacity part of economic exchange, provides direction and theoretical traction to recent calls in the HCI community to look beyond these anytime/anywhere assumptions in designing mobile and ubiquitous tools and services .
The contribution of using Goffman's dramaturgical metaphor for design thinking, for example, is that it suggests ways to assess an organization from multiple angles  simultaneously.
What knowledge do we have from past team studies, for instance, that could help us develop a way for colleagues to selfmanage their collective temporal access back stage?
What middleware is needed to tie these two sociotechnical components together seamlessly?
Unfortunately, no pithy solution can be provided herein - nor should one be so easy to conceive - but we trust that this topic like recent forays into complex topics such as crowd forms of work and environmental informatics will generate creative thinking in years to come.
This paper introduced the overlooked factor of economic exchange to explain the current phenomenon of constant connectivity and intense work practices that are prevalent in knowledge and service work.
Using interview data from four research studies of communication practices in the workplace, we illustrate how 24/7 availability has become an integral aspect of the service provided to clients and customers in a variety of service professions.
This factor is unexplored in current explanations of technostress drawn from cultural, technical, social and psychological theories.
Thus, while the array of perspectives on information technology, stress, and work relations each help elucidate why contemporary workplaces have become sites of unsustainable temporal relations, they fail to fully explain the origins of worker's experiences.
As such, prior work is unable to inspire actionable design interventions that into account the economic and collective underpinnings of constant connectivity.
In hopes of inspiring the HCI design community to move in new directions, we provide avenues for reflective design  around the economic underpinnings of constant connectivity.
Embracing economic perspectives into visions of mobile computing suggests new criteria, assumptions, and trajectories for design.
One conceivable direction is toward design that facilitates collective management around expectations of availability and access to individual time.
As such, we encourage this community to begin experimenting with designs that conceptually cleave organizations in new ways, looking both outward to how an organization must contend with external clients and customers as much as inward to understand its role in facilitating the work of individuals, teams and departments.
Along these lines, we welcome increased dialogue that strives to situate design interventions within their macrosocial contexts, such as we have done by highlighting the emergency of industry level norms valuing total employee availability.
Agger, B. iTime: Labor and life in a smartphone era.
Ames, M.G., Managing mobile multitasking: the culture of iPhones on stanford campus.
Tightening the Iron Cage: Concertive Control in Self-Managing Teams.
Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 2004.
Barley, S.R., Meyerson, D. and Grodal, S. Email as a Symbol: A Sociomaterial Account of How Communication Technologies Produce Stress.
Do Job Demands Undermine Parenting?
A Daily Analysis of Spillover and Crossover Effects.
Castells, M. The Rise of the Network Society.
Charmaz, K. Constructing Grounded Theory: A Practical Guide Through Qualitative Analysis.
Linking Technology Use, Spillover, Individual Distress, and Family Satisfaction.
Journal of Marriage and Family, 67.
The Working Life: The promise and betrayal of modern work.
Coser, L.A. Greedy institutions; patterns of undivided commitment.
Cotte, J. and Ratneshwar, S. Juggling and hopping: what does it mean to work polychronically?
Ethical Issues Relating to the Health Effects of Long Working Hours.
Dourish, P., Anderson, K. and Nafus, D., Cultural Mobilities: Diversity and Agency in Urban Computing.
Dourish, P. and Bell, G. Divining A Digital Future: Mess and Mythology in Ubiquitous Computing.
The politics of working life, Oxford, 2005.
How passive `face time' affects perceptions of employees: Evidence of spontaneous trait inference.
Beach Time, Bridge Time, and Billable Hours: The Temporal Structure of Technical Contracting.
Fassel, D. Working Ourselves to Death: The high cost of workaholicism and the rewards of recovery.
White Collar Sweat-Shop: The Deterioration of Work and its Rewards in Corporate America.
A Lengthy Look at the Daily Grind: Time Series Analysis of Events, Mood, Stress and Satisfaction.
Goffman, E. The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life.
Golden, L. A Brief History of Long Work Time and the Contemporary Sources of Overwork.
Golden, L. and Altman, M. Why do people overwork?
Oversupply of Hours and Labor, Labor Market Forces and Adaptive Preferences.
The Long Work Hours Culture: Causes, Consequences and Choices, Emerald Group Publishing Ltd., Bingley, UK, 2008, 61-84.
Health Consequences of Work-Family Conflict: The Dark Side of the Work-Family Interface.
Research in Occupational Stress and Well-being, Emerald Group Publishing Limited, 2006.
Harr, R. and Kaptelinin, V., Unpacking the social dimension of external interruptions.
Hassan, R. Network Time and the New Knowledge Epoch.
Hincapie-Ramos, J.D., Voida, S. and Mark, G., A design space analysis of availability-sharing systems.
Hincapie-Ramos, J.D., Voida, S. and Mark, G., Sharing availability information with InterruptMe.
New practices of time and the transformation of communication technologies.
Exploring More than 24 Hours a Day: A Preliminary Investigation of Polychronic Time Use.
The Journal of Consumer Research, 18 .
Kraft, J.C. Students at Stanford Work on Apps that Alleviate Stress The New York Times, 2012.
Kunda, G. Engineering Culture: Control and Commitment in a High-Tech Corporation.
Time and Information Technology: Temporal Impacts on Individuals, Organizations, and Society.
Ljungberg, F. Exploring CSCW mechanisms to realize constant accessibility without inappropriate interaction.
Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems, 11 .
Examining the nature of fragmented work.
The Cost of Interrupted Work: More Speed and Stress SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, Florence, Italy, 2008, 107-110.
Mazmanian, M. Avoiding the trap of constant connectivity: When congruent frames allow for heterogeneous practices.
Mazmanian, M. Predictable Time off?
Davis Qualitative Research Conference, Best Paper, Davis, CA, 2012.
The Autonomy Paradox: The Implications of Mobile Email Devices for Knowledge Professionals.
The Wellsprings of Workaholism: A Comparative Analysis of the Explanatory Theories.
The Long Work Hours Culture: Causes, Consequences and Choices, Emerald Group Publishing Ltd., Bingley, UK, 2008, 85-114.
Michel, A. Transcending Socialization: A Nine-Year Ethnography of the Body's Role in Organizational Control and Knowledge Workers' Transformation.
Administrative Science Quarterly, 56 .
A theoretical exploration of work stress and burnout of technologically tethered workers.
Nardi, B.A., Whittaker, S. and Bradner, E., Interaction and Outeraction: Instant Messaging in Action.
Commodification and the Construction of an Occupational Mandate.
Administrative Science Quarterly, 42 .
It's About Time: Temporal Structuring in Organizations.
Unpackiaging the multiple aspects of time in polychronicity.
Pammer, V., Edler, S. and Stern, H., Visualising the fragmentation of knowledge work.
Perlow, L.A. Sleeping with Your Smartphone: How to Break the 24/7 Habit and Change the Way You Work.
Harvard Business School Publishing, Boston, Massachussetts, 2012.
Making Time Off Predictable--and Required.
Porter, G. and Kakabadse, N.K.
HRM Perspectives on addiction to technology and work.
Journal of Management Development, 25 .
Prasopoulou, E., Pouloud, A. and Panteli, N. Enacting new temporal boundaries: the role of mobile phones European Journal of Information Systems 15.
It Takes Two to Tango: Workaholism is Working Excessively and Working Compulsively.
The Long Work Hours Culture: Causes, Consequences and Choices, Emerald Group Publishing Ltd., Bingley, UK, 2008, 203-226.
The Overworked American: The unexpected decline of leisure, 1992.
Semaan, B. and Mark, G. Technology-mediated social arrangements to resolve breakdowns in infrastructure during ongoing disruption.
ACM Transactions on Computer Human Interaction, 18 .
Sengers, P. What I Learned on Change Islands: Reflections on IT and pace of life.
Sennett, R. The Corrosion of Character: The Personal Consequences of Work in the New Capitalism.
Starwarz, K., Cox, A.L., Bird, J. and Benedyk, R. "I'd sit at home and do work emails": how tablets affect the work-life balance of office workers CHI '13 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 2013, 1383-1388.
Basics of Qualitative Reserach: Techniques and Procedures for Developing Grounded Theory.
Crossing to the dark side: examining creators, outcomes, and inhibitors of technostress.
The Media and Modernity: A social theory of the media.
The Stanford University Press, Stanford, California, 1995.
The Culture of Speed: The Coming of Immediacy.
Time thieves and space invaders: technology, work and the organization.
Journal of Organizational Change Management, 19 .
Turel, O., Serenko, A. and Bontis, N., Blackberry Addiction: Symptoms and Outcomes in Proceedings of the Fourteenth Americas Conference on Information Systems, .
Life in the fast lane?
Towards a sociology of technology and time The British Journal of Sociology, 59 .
Wajcman, J. and Rose, E. Constant Connectivity: Rethinking Interruptions at Work.
Wiberg, M. and Whitaker, S. Managing Availability: Supporting Lightweight Negotiations to Handle Interruptions.
ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, 12 .
The role of employee psychological wellbeing in cardiovascular health: when the twain shall meet.
Journal of Organizational Behavior, 30.
Zerubavel, E. The Standardization of Time: A Sociohistorical Perspective.
The American Journal of Sociology, 88 .
