Three methods of implementing the select operation on touchpadswere compared.
Two conventionalmethods using a physical button and using "lift-and-tap" - were comparedwith a new method using finger pressurewith tactile feedback.
The latter employs a pressure-sensing touchpadwith a built-in relay.
The relay is energizedby a signal Corn the device driver when the finger pressureon the pad surface exceedsa programmablethreshold, and this createsboth aural and tactile feedback.
The pressure data are also usedto signal the action of a button pressto the application.
In an empirical test with 12 participants, the tactile condition was 20% faster than l&and-tap and 46% faster than using a button for selection.
The result was similar on the ISO-recomm endedmeasureknown as throughput.
Error rates were higher with the tactile condition, however.
These we attriiute to limitations in the prototype, such as the use of a capacitive-sensing touchpadand poor mechanicaldesign.
In a questionnaire, participants indicated a preferencefor the tactile condition over the button and lift-and-tap conditions.
Since notebook computers are usually operated in constrained spaces,mice are generally not used as the systems'pointing device.
Until recently, most notebooks included either a trackball or an isometric joystick as a pointing device.
Apple was the first company to incorporate a touchpadin a notebookcomputer,and many other companies have since chosen touchpads over joysticks or trackballs.
Pmission to make digital/hard copies of all or part of this material for personal or classroom use is granted witbout fee provided that the copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage, the copyr@t notice, the title oftbe publication and its date appear, and notice is given that copyright is by permission of the AChl, Inc. TO Copy othe.
Although touchpads are also available for desktop computers,most peopleprefer to use a mouse.
So, why is a mouse a better pointing devicethan a touchpad when space is not an issue?
The answer may lie in the separationof selection from positioning.
Using a mouse, the pointer is positioned by moving the mouse on a mousepad.
The deviceis gripped betweenthe fingers and thumb and movement occurs via the wrist and forearm.
With a touchpad, pointer movement is accomplishedby sliding a finger along the touchpad's surface.
Both are generally usedas "relative positioning" devices,where the pointer moves relative to its previous position when the deviceor finger moves.
For a mouse,selecting is the act of pressing and releasing a button while the pointer is over an icon or other screen object Double clicking and dragging are related operationsthat also require pressing a button.
There are two common implementations for selecting with touchpads: using physical buttons, or  using lift-andtap.
Both inherit problemswe are attempting to correct in our tactile touchpad.
Most touchpadsinclude physical buttons that are typically operatedwith the index finger or thumb.
If an index finger is used, the finger must move frequently between the touchpad and the buttons and this impedes performancecomparedwith the same procedure using a mouse.
If the thumb is used, then positioning and selecting proceed in concert, as with a mouse; however, the result may be suboptimal because of interference betweenthe muscle and limb groups engaged.
With a mouse,on the other hand, positioning occursprimarily via the wrist and foreanq while selecting occurs primarily through the fingers.
Thus, the limbs and muscle groups are separatefor eachtask and tend not to interfere.
Becauseof the problem noted above, most touchpadsalso support `"lift-and-tap" as an alternative to pressing buttons.
However, this is perhaps replacing one problem with auother.
We'll illustrate this by considaing the basic transactionswith computerpointing devices.
According to Buxton's three-statemodel of graphical input , thesecan be modeledby three states: Sitate 0 State 1 State2 out-of-range tracldng  draggkg 
In view of the precedmg discussion, it is worth exploring alternate, perhaps better, implementations for state transitions.
One possibility is to implement them by pressing harder witb the pointing/positioning finger.
A mousebutton provides aural and tactile feedbackwhen it is pressed, and this is an important component of the interaction.
Similar feedback may be elicited from a touchpad by means of a mechanical solenoid or relay positioned under the pad and activated with an electrical signal to createa "click" sensationin the fingertip.
Since a mouse button clicks both when pressed and when released, the same response is desirable for a tactile touchpadto achievea more natural feel.
To prevent spurious clicks, the transitions should include hysteresis.
That is, the state l-2 pressurelevel that maps to the button-down action should be higher than the state 2-l pressurelevel that maps to the button-up action.
This is illustrated in Figure 3.
The correct thresholds must be determinedin user tests.
Buxtons three state model of graphical input with labels appropriatefor mouseinteraction For touchpadsand mice, pointer motion occurs in state 1, the trackiug state.
The comparison becomesmteresting when we consider the state transitions required for clicking, double clicking, dragging, and clutching.
Figure 2 identities the state transitions for the most common operationsfor a mouseand a lift-and-tap touchpad A few ~observations follow.
In genera&operations require more state transitions with a lift-and-tap touchpad than with a mouse.
A simple click on a mouse begins and ends in `state1, whereason a touchpadit begins in state 1 and ends in state 0.
To return to pointer positioning , the finger must resumecontactwith the pad, and ifthis occurs too quickly a dragging operation occurs.
Note as well that chttching on a lift-and-tap touchpad is confounded with clicking and dragging.
This is not the casewith a mouse.
Akamatsuand MacKenzie  found significant reductions in movement times for target selection tasks using a modified mouse incorporating tactile feedback as compared to an unmodified mouse.
Using a Fitts' law analysis of the data, it was found that the tactile condition producedthe highest throughput of all tested conditions.
It was surmised that similar results would be achievable with the tactile touchpad One can provide aural feedback through the computer'sexisting sound system.
However, we feel the combination of spatially-placed aural and tactile feedbackat the finger tip is preferableto spatiallydisplaced audio-only feedback using the system's loudspeaker, although the latter is worthy of investigation.
Our tactile touchpad is illustrated in Figure 4.
For our prototype, we cut a hole in the bottom of a Synaptics T1002D capacitive touchpad and installed a Potter & Brumfield T90NlD12-5 relay.
A wooden platform attachedto baseprovides spacefor the relay.
The relay is controlled by signals sent from the host'sparallel port.
The Synapticstouchpad includes'an x-y-z mode in which the z-axis information is the applied pressure.
Our software uses z-axis information to determine when to energizeand de-energizethe relay.
In informal testswith pilot subjects we determined that, of the 256 pressure levels detectedby the touchpad, a value of 140 with a hysteresisvalue of 5 produced an acceptableresponseone similar to the feel of a mousebutton.
Although there is an abundanceof published evaluations of pointing devicesin the disciplines of human-computer interaction and human factors, the methodologiestend to be ad hoc, and this greatly diminishes our ability to interpret the results or to undertake between-study comparisons.
Fortunately, there is an emerging IS0 standard that addresses this particular problem .
The 111 standard is IS0 9241, "Ergonomic design for office work with visual display terminals ".
The standard is in seventeen parts, and somehave receivedapproval as a DIS .
Part 9 of the standard is called "Requirementsfor non-keyboard input devices".
As of this writing it is in the CD  stage.
IS0 9241-9 describes,among other things, quantitative tests to evaluate computer pointing devices.
The proceduresare well describedand will allow for consistent and valid performanceevaluationsof one or more pointing devices.
The standard quantitative test is a point-select task.
The user manipulatesthe on-screenpointer using the pointing deviceand movesit from a starting position to a target and selectsthe target by pressing and releasing a button on the device.
There are many variations on this test; however, a simple reciprocal selectiontask is easiest to implement and allows for a large quantity of empirical datato be gathered quickly.
The task is "reciprocal" becausethe user moves the pointer back and forth between targets, alternately selecting the targets.
The selections are "blocked" with multiple selectionsper task condition.
As the point-select task is carried out, the test software gathers low-level data on the speed and accuracy of the user's actions.
The following three dependentmeasures form the basisof the subsequent quantitative evaluation: Movement time , or task Movement Time.
Error rate  is the percentageof targets selected while the pointer is outsidethe target.
The software executes under DOS and interacts with the system's pointing devicethrough the installed mousedriver.
All three selection techniques used the same device, a modified SynapticsT1002D touchpad, as descrii earlier.
Standard features of the touchpad include two physical buttons and a lift-and-tap button emulation in firmware.
For each block of trials the experimental software presenteda new target condition.
Two rectanglesof width W separatedby distance D appeared.
A crosshair pointer appearedin the left rectangle and a red X appearedin the opposite rectangle denoting it as the current target 
The term De is the effectiveindex of difdiculty, and carries the unit `bits"- It is calculated from 0, the distanceto the target, and We,the effectivewidth of the target The term MT is the movementtime to complete the task and carries the unit "seconds"~ Thus, throughput carries the unit "bits per second",orjust "bps"The use of the "effective" width is important Weis the width of the distribution of selection coordinates computedover a block of trials.
SpeciScally,  where SO, is the standard deviation in the selection coordinates measured along the axis of approach to the target.
This implies that Wkreflects the spatial variability or accuracy that occurred iu the block of trials.
As a result, throughput is a measureof both the speedand the accuracy of the u&s performance.
In some sense, throughput reflects the overall efficiency with which the user was able to accomplish the task given the constraints of the deviceor other aspects of the interface.
It is important to test the device on diflicult tasks as well as easytaskq so, multiple blocks of trials are used, each with a diEerent target distanceand/or target size.
Procedure Participants were instructed to move the pointer by moving their index finger on the touchpad surface.
Specifically, they were instructed to move the pointer as quickly and accurately as possrble Corn side to side alternately selecting the target using the current selectiontechnique.
As each target was selectedthe red X disappearedand reappeared in the opposite rectangle.
This helped synchronize participants though a block of trials.
If a selectoperation occurredwhile the pointer was outsidethe target, a beep was heard to signal an error.
Participants were instructed to continue without trying to correct errors.
For each task condition, participants performed 20 selections.
Before gathering data, the task and the selection technique were explained and demonstrated to the participants.
Participants were given a block of warm-up trials prior to data collection.
Twelve participants  were used in the study.
All participants were right handed, and all used computerswith graphical user interfaces on a daily basis.
TWO participants had prior experiencewith touchpads.
Apparatus A 166MHz Pentium-classsystemwith a 17" color monitor was used The Ctmome mouse driver for DOS, version 1.2, was used for all but the tactile touchpad condition.
For the latter, a custom driver was written to implement the special featuresofthe tactile condition.
The independentvariableswere as follows: SelectionTechnique button, l&and-tap, tactile Block 1,233 40,80, 160pixels Target Distance 10,20,40 pixels Target Width 1,2,3 ... 20 Trial The conditions above combmed with 12 participants represent a total of 19,440 trials.
To minimize skill transfer, the presentation of the selection techniques was counterbalanced.
The target distance&e conditions were blocked Each block consisted of nine distance&e combinations presented in random order.
For each condition, participants performed20 trials in succession.
The distance/sizeconditions were chosento createa set of taskscovering a range of task diflicuhies.
The easiesttask combmesthe largest target  with the shortest distance.
These differences were statistically significant .
Exactly the oppositeranking was observedon error rates, however.
Using a button for the selectoperation,the error rate was 4.1%.
Restintervals were permitted betweenblocks of trials.
The duration of rest intervals was based on participants' discretion.
All three selection techniqueswere testedin a single session lasting about an hour.
At the end, participants were given a brief questionnaire on their impressionsof the three selectiontechniques.
Sincethe experiment employeda within-subjects design, a Latin Square was used to balance potential learning effects.
However, there remained the possibility of asymmetrical skill transfer  from one selection technique to the next basedon the order of presentation.
This was testedfor and was found not to have occurred,as the effect for order of presentation was not statistically significant on alI three dependentmeasures.
The grand means on the three primary dependent measures were 1641ms for movementtime, 6.6% for error rate, and 1.17 bps for throughput.
The interaction technique and block effectson thesemeasures are reported in the following sections.
A strong analysis of the effect of selection technique is obtainedby tbe dependentmeasurethroughput, becauseit reflects both the speedand accuracy of performanceand becauseit is the measurerecommendedin the IS0 draft standard,9241-9.
The highest throughput was observedin the tactile condition at 1.43 bps.
These measuresfor throughput are on the low side when comparedto other pointing devices.
We have conducted lsther tmpublished studies using the same experimental conditions, and have obtained measuresin the range of 3.0-4.5 bps for mice and 2.0-3.5 bps for trackballs.
Publiied figures for throughput are also higher, in general.
For each selection technique, participants performed three blocks of trials in succession.
Each block consistedof 20 trials on each of the nine randomly presented target conditions .
It is worthwhile, therefore, to examine the effect of "block" on the three dependent measures, since this reflects the extent to which participants improved with practice.
As well, a block x selection technique interaction effect may be present, indicating diikent learning patterns acrossdevices.
The main efYectof block was statistically siguificant for movementtime and throughput, but not for error rate.
The reversepattern emergedfor the block x selectiontechnique interaction, which was significant for error rate, but not for movement time or throughput.
These patterns are best illustrated through figures .
The pattern in all three parts of Figure 8 looks favorable for the tactile selection condition.
The improvement in per6ormance is clearly seenin each figure, and it is most dramatic fi-om block 2 to block 3 .
With continued practice, the tactile condition is likely to improve.
On error rate - the only measureon which the tactile condition faired poorly - it might even "catch up", although this could only be determined in a prolonged study.
Since the error rates were somewhathigh, we decided to investigate further.
We identified a category of response called "wrong-side outhers".
These are selections that occurred on the wrong side of the display.
For example,if the goal was to selectthe target on one side of the display and the selection occurred before the pointer was halfway to the target, the selection was on the wrong side of the display.
This is a gross error.
We call these "outhers" becausethey are outside the normal range of variations expectedin participants' behavior.
A wrong-side outlier can occur for severalreasons,such as double-clicking on a target or inadvertent lifting or pressing with the finger during pointer motion.
Comparing the percentages with the overall error rates given earlier, we see that wrong-side outliers, formed a significant portion of the overall errors.
Wrong-side outliers by block and selectiontechnique The good showing of the button technique is likely due to the clear separation of pointer movement from target selection.
At the end of the experiment, participants were given a questionnaire.
For each selection technique, they were askedto provide a rating on their speedperception, their accuracy perception, and their overall preference.
They entered a score f&n 1  to 4 .
The rem& are shown in Figure 10.
Each cell is the total score for twelve participants, with higher scorespreferred.
Tactile selection ranked 1st for speed perception, 1st  for accuracy perception,and 1st for overall preference.
It is noteworthy that on accuracy participants rated the tactile condition equalto, or better than, the other conditions eventhough it had the highest error rate.
This could be due to the higher measuresfor throughput, which reflect the overall abiity of participants to completetheir tasks.
The Synapticstouchpad'smethodof deriving pressuredata is indirect since it sensesthe capacitancebetween the finger and the pad.
Pressureis derived from the area of the user's finger contacting the surfaceof the pad.
Since one's finger flattens on the pad with increasedpressure, the device takes advantage of this correlation.
As a consequence, users with small fingers must press harder than users with large fingers.
Participants with particularly large fingers required a more delicate touch than they preferred.
This may account for the increased error rate of the tactile touchpadcondition.
A better version of our touchpad would use true pressuresensing technology, and such products are now available .
A future replication of this experiment utilizing a calibration procedureat the onsetwould also be interesting, although this is generally not consideredacceptableas a required procedurein commercialpointing devices.
Another noticeable artifact of the tactile touchpad condition was a tendencyfor the on-screenpointer to move down slightly as the subject pressed down to select a target This was most pronouncedwith participants who held their pointing finger relatively perpendicular to the touchpad's surface.
When they presseddown, the center of the finger's surfaceareamovedtowards the bottom and the onscreenpointer "dipped" with each press.
As the targets were long and vertical, this most likely did not have an effect in the experiment; however, it is that the pointer tIeeze noteworthy.
One subjectsuggested at a certain pressure level prior to a button press registering so that the results would be more predictable.
Another possible solution would be to correct for the downward dips as the user pressed on the pad through software.
That is, as the "pressure" increased, the pointer's vertical value might be slightly increased to compensatefor the user's tendency to move the pointer downwards.
Cur prototype'smechanical design was not of the highest quality.
The relay was bulky and it was wedged-in against the bottom surfaceof the pad'sPC board.
A better design may assistin reducing error rates.
For all three selection techniques, the measures for throughput were low - lower than those typically found with trackballs or mice, for example.
This begs the question, why would one choose a touchpad over a trackball or mouse?
Besidespersonalpreferences, we have no definitive answer to offer.
A follow-up study with experiencedtouchpadusers,or conductedover a prolonged period of time, might shed light on this; it would help answerthe question, can a touchpadbe as good as a other pointing devices?
Although touchpadsare not likely to supplant mice on the ,desktop, our results have implications for portable computer usage, and fhrther refinements may make the tactile touchpad closerto a mousein performance.
The tactile touchpad was found superior to both the liftand-tap mode touchpad and button mode touchpad in terms of movement time and throughput.
Although the error rate was higher than with the other touchpad wnditions, it was not generally noticed by the participants and the overall flow of information  was higher even with the increased error rate.
W&h design improvements,the use of embeddedtactile f&a& in a touchpad can iZ&itate simple interactions such as pointing and selecting.
We thank Joe Decker of Synaptics for providing the touchpads and technical documentationfor our prototype.
Helpful conunents and suggestions were provided by membersof the Input ResearchGroup at the University of Toronto and the University of Guelph.
Akamatsu, A., and MacKenzie, L S. Movement characteristics usiug a mouse with tactile and force feedback,&rt~VoiraI Jormu71of Ihmn-Computer sties 45 , 483-493.
Balakrishnan, IL, and MacKenzie, I. S. Performance diflkences in the fingers, wrist, and forearm in computerinput control, In Proceedingsof the CHT `97 Conjkrenceon Hm Factors in Computing Systems.
Boritz, J., Booth, K S., and Cowan, W- B. Fitts's law studies of direotional mouse movement, In Procee&zgs of Graphics Interjzce `91.
Toronto: Canadian Information Processing Society, 1991, pp.
Buxton, W. A. S. A three-state model of graphical input, In Proceedingsof Ih'TERACT `90.
Fitts, P, M. The information capacity of the human motor system in controlling the amplitude of movement, Journal of Experimental P~chologv 47 , 381-391.
Gillan, D. J., Holden, K., Adam, S., Rudisill, M., and Magee, L. How does F&s' law fit pointing and dragging?
In Proceedings of the CHI `90 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems.
How should Fitts' law be-appliedto humancomputer interaction?
Ergonomic requirements for oflce work with visual display terminals  - Part 9 Requirements for non-keyboards input devices, International Organ&&ion for Standardisation,1997.
MacKenzie, I. S. Fitts' law as a research and design tool in human-computer interaction, HumanComputerInteraction 7 , 91-139.
MacKenzie, I. S. Movement time prediction in human-computer interfaces, In Proceedings of Graphics Interface `92.
MacKenzie, I. S., and Gniszczak, A.
The tactile touchpad, In &tended Abstracts of the CHI `97 Conferenceon Human Factors in Computing Systems.
MacKenzie, I. S., Sellen, A., and Buxton, W. A comparisonof input devicesin elementalpointing and dragging tasks, In Proceedings of the CHI `91 Conferenceon Human Factors in Computing Systems.
MacKenzie, I. S., and Ware, C. Lag as a determinant of human performance in interactive systems, In Proceedings of the RVTERCHI `93 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems.New York ACM, 1993,pp.
Martin, D. W. Doing psychology experiments,4th ed.
Sot&ore& W., and MacKenzie, I. S. GeneralizedF&s' law model builder, In CompanionProceedings of the CM `95 Conferenceon Human Factors in Computing Systems.
