The results support the basic tindings by Kurosu and Kashimura.
Very high correlations were found between perceived aesthetics of the interface and a priori perceived ease of use of the system.
Differences of magnitude between correlations obtained in Japan and in Israel suggest the existence of cross-cultural differences.
The quest for usable computer technology is one of the major goals in the field of Human-Computer Interaction .
Shackel  and Nielsen  place the concept of usability within the framework of system acceptability: Together with other system attributes.
With issues of cost determined by technological and economic factors.
Nielsen  defines the usability of a computer ~stem in terms of five attributes: Learnability.
In general, the evaluation of system usability requires that these attributes be measured during or after people have actually used the system.
Whether these attributes are not considered to be an integral part of the HCI field.
This study calls attention to these relationships and to their potential contribution to our evaluation of system acceptability and to our understanding of its antecedents.
Conventional wisdom relates it to our appreciation of, and attitudes towards computer systems as well.
The contribution of aesthetics to HCI, they argue.
Perhaps, because aesthetics mainly reflect on the latter.
The correlations between the apparent usability and inherent usability factors were mostly negligible.
It can be argued that KK found close relationships between aesthetics and perceived usability before the actual use.
While this argument is valid.
There is no reason to assume that this process of attitude formation does not pertain to the HCI domain.
Aesthetics affect people's perceptions of apparent usability-which, in turn.
The main motivation for this study is twofold.
Kurosu and Kashimura's findings arc somewhat unexpected, If these results are robust.
KK's study was not void of a potential method bias that might have shifted the results in favor of stronger relations between apparent usability and aesthetics.
Some modifications to their design are needed to assess the robustness of their tindings.
Clearly, aesthetic perceptions are culturally dependent .
Thus, one can reasonably expect the relationships between aesthetics and apparent usability to vary across cultures.
For example, whereas Japanese culture is known for its aesthetic tradition , Israeli culture is probably better known for its action orientation .
Unfortunately, there is no scient~lc literature that assesses Israeli aestheticism.
Three experiments were designed and conducted in Israel to test the robustness of Kurosu and Kashimura's findings to cultural and methodological bias.
Experiment 1 tested of KK's findings.
The original study materials  were provided to the author by Kurosu and Kashimura.
The ATM layouts were solicited by KK from a group of 26 people: 9 GUI designers, 6 industrial engineers, 8 engineers and 3 secretaries.
All layouts included the same components and were diflered only by how these components were arranged .
A few problems of user interface translatability were encountered at this stage.
Trade-offs had sometimes to be made between ensuring the natural look of the interface to Israeli eyes on one hand.
To use the original Japanese software one had to use a Kanji-aware Mac operating system.
These are such rare birds in Israel, that different software was eventually used on a different platform .
The results of the translation process can be seen in Figures 1 and 2. which show two examples of original Japanese layouts and their Israeli counterparts.
Figure 1 presents a layout that was rated high on apparent usability and aesthetics both in Japan and in Israel.
Figure 2 presents a low rating layout.
This concept was totally foreign to Ismelis and potentially would have looked odd.
These variables reflect design strategies that were actually used by designers of the ATM interfaces to tiect the cognitive and the operational efficiency of user interaction with the ATM, These variables included:  location of the main display .
A more detailed description of the variables can be found in .
Two dependent apparent usability and aesthetics, were variables.
This suggests that, even more than their Japanese counterparts, Israelis perceived ease of use and design aesthetics to be closely related.
These results are quite surprising.
The procedure used was identical to the one used by : The twenty-six design layouts were displayed in a large classroom, using an overhead screen projector.
Each layout was displayed for about 20 seeonds, During that time.
Participant ratings were averaged to form an apparent usability and an aesthetics score for each of the 26 designs.
Aesthetics scores ranged between 3.5 and 8.5 in Israel, compared to a range between 5.2 and 6.8 in Japan.
Similarly, apparent usability scores for the 26 designs in Israel ranged between 2.7 and 8.5, compared to 4.4 to 6.5 in Japan.
Relationships with apparent usability using the coefficient of correlation for the interval scales and the coefficient of contingency for the categorical variables are presented in Table 1, alongside the corresponding correlations from KK.
In general, the relationships resemble those obtained by ICK.
However, the magnitude of correlation between aesthetics and apparent usability  was notably higher in this experiment.
Among determinants of inherent usability, only keypad type and the number of grouped elements were correlated with apparent usability.
Table 2 presents a contingency table in which 4 equal interval categories are used to rank the 26 designs according to their apparent usability rating.
Despite the similarity in magnitude of the coefilcient of contingency between Israeli and Japanese participants, a closer look at the contingency table reveals that, while the Japanese associated better usability with the horizontal keypad layout, Israelis related it to the telephone keypad.
In addition, significant correlations were found in this experiment between apparent usability and the number of grouping elements in the ATM design.
Higher apparent usability was associated with less groups, de~ing conventional advice in the usability literature, which calls for the separation of fimetionally umelated controls .
In Experiment 2, the procedure was modified to overcome this potential problem.
The 26 designs were projected in two separated rounds.
The order of presentation of the designs was determined randomly for each round.
A different group of eighty-one first-year engineering students participated in this study.
The students were assigned randomly to one of two conditions.
In one condition, participants evaluated the design aesthetics for all 26 designs in the first round, and the apparent usability for the 26 designs in the second round.
Because only one evaluation per overhead was needed, presentation time was cut to about 15 seconds per overhead.
Working with personal computers had additional advantages from the experimenter's viewpoint.
It increased the uniformity of the viewing conditions, enabled participants to work in their own pace, and allowed for fill randomization of the stimuli presentation .
Participants were 108 3rd year engineering students who participated in the study in part fidfillment of their requirements for an HCI course.
Correlations and contingency coefficients are presented in Table 1.
The results resemble those of Experiment 1, explanation that the weakening the alternative relationships between aesthetics and apparent usability are primarily the result of a response dependency bias caused by the method used in KK and in Experiment 1.
Experiment 1's results, regarding apparent usability relationships with keypad type and number of groupings are also replicated here, Thus, experiment 2 lends further support to the overall strong correlation between apparent usability and aesthetics, and to the differences between Israelis and Japanese concerning these relationships.
Participants were seated in front of a personal computer.
A computer program, written in Visual Basic was used to present the stimuli material, accept user responses.
The program started with a short on-line introduction, after which participants were presented with the 26 ATM designs.
The designs were displayed in a random order.
At the bottom of the screen, one of the two questions regarding aesthetics and apparent usability was presented.
The participants answered the question on the 1-10 scale by selecting one often available response buttons.
To proceed to the next design.
After responding to the first question for all 26 designs.
The results from Experiment 3 are presented in Table 1.
By and large, the results are consistent with those obtained in Experiments 1 and 2, reinforcing the patterns observed thus far.
The use of computers in this experiment allowed for the measurement of the time it took participants to evaluate the designs.
Though not very large, the difference in latencies supports the intuitive expectation that evaluating apparent usability is more complex, and hence more time consuming, than the evaluation of the interface aesthetics.
The two previous experiments-like KK's experiment-- used an overhead projector to display the designs on a large screen.
Participants saw the designs from different distances , and from different angles.
The results of this study replicate the basic findings of Kurosu and Kashimura , However, because of the unexpectedly high correlations between apparent usability and aesthetics found in Israel, it is still premature to rute out the possibility of method variance as a major cause of the obtained results.
When traits are expected to correlate, it is preferable to add to the study traits that are expected to be independent of each other, in order to rule out method effects.
Table 3 presents the correlations obtained in the 3 experiments between these variables in a multitrait-multimethod matrix format .
The resulting matrix indicates that, at the very least.
Support for discriminant validity is more tentative.
This happens in only 5 out of 12 comparisons.
Comparisons involving only Experiments 2 and 3 meet this requirements 3 out of 4 times.
Thus, it appears that some method bias indeed existed in Experiment 1 and was removed in the subsequent experiments.
Another argument for a true correlation of apparent usability and aesthetics stems from the fact that very similar results were obtained under three considerably different experimental contexts and procedures.
The field of HCI has taken an unequivocal stand on this matter, concentrating on usability.
The results of this study, however.
The potential effect of aesthetic experience has not escaped software vendors as well, nor is it ignored by the trade literature in its evaluation of computer products.
In their attempts to shift the balance back towards a more user-oriented -- rather than cuslomeraiented -- design, it seems that HCI researchers have thus far ignored the possible interplay between aesthetics and usability.
The results obtained in this study, together with the potential effect of apparent usability on post-use satisfaction , strongly suggest that we pay more attention to people's perceptions of the interface aesthetics then we have done thus far, In a sense.
The other major finding of this study suggests that the degree to which aesthetics relate to apparent usability is culturally dependent.
We hypothesized that Japanese are more sensitive to aesthetics than Israelis, and would therefore emphasize more the role of aesthetics in interface design.
Possibly, with greater aesthetic sensitivity come also greater sophistication and critical skills which perhaps allow the Japanese in KK's study to not completely associate aesthetics with apparent usability as did their Israeli counterparts.
An alternative explanation can be based on the larger variability in scores exhibited by Israeli students.
The tendency by Israelis to provide more extreme evaluations could be attributed to their tendency to freely express opinions and preferences .
Another possible explanation, suggested by an anonymous reviewer, relates the larger variance among Israeli participants to their more diverse cultural background.
The HCI literature on cross-cultural issues is scarce and limited .
There is no theo~ of cross-cultural HCI, and recommendations are not based on thorough empirical investigations.
Consequently, its usefidness is quite limited, For example.
And attempts to apply rules of thumb for GUIS aimed at culturally diverse users have failed when tested empirically.
Thus, while cultural aesthetics might serve as a good starting point for a cross-cultural research agenda in HCI, developing a cross-cultural theory of HCI requires us to apply more rigorous research methods and to empirically test our hunches and conventioml wisdom.
This study was designed with the prospect of demonstrating that high correlations between aesthetics and apparent usability are culture specific.
It was expected that the correlations in Israel would be lower than those obtained in Japan.
Surprisingly, the results indicated the opposite.
This leads to three major conclusions: First, aesthetic perception and its relations to HCI relevant constructs are culturally dependent.
Second, our current knowledge limits our ability to accurately predict how culture influences HCI related issues.
Third, the results provide further support for the contention that perceptions of interface aesthetic are closely related to apparent usability and thus increase the likelihood that aesthetics may considerably affect ~stem acceptability.
The first two conclusions call for future efforts in defining the areas in which culture interacts with the domain of HCI and in systematically studying these areas.
The third conclusion postulates that objective measures of system behavior and use may not sut%ce in predicting system acceptability.
Perhaps a more holistic approach towards understanding how people experience and judge information systems is needed .
Shackel, B. Usability-Context, framework, definition.
Human Factors for Informatics Usability.
Shneiderman, B, Designing the User Interface .
Stewart, J.E,  Defendant's attractiveness as a factor in the outcome of triats.
Stolterman, E, The aesthetics of information systems.
Unpublished manuscript, Institute of Information Processing, University of Umea, Sweden.
Cultural diversity in user interface design: Are intuitions enough?
