I. Scott MacKenzie3 Ravin Balakrishnanl~ 2AliaslWavefront 3Dept.
Recent work in computer input control has sought to maximize the use of the fingers in the operation of computer pointing devices.
The main rationale is the hypothesis that the muscle groups conmolling the fingers have a higher bandwidth than those controlling other segments of the human upper limb.
Evidence which supports this, however, is inconclusive.
We conducted an experiment to determine the relative bandwidths of the fingers, wrist, and forearm and found that the fingers do not necessarily outperform the other limb segments.
Our results indicate that the bandwidth of the unsupported index finger is approximately 3.0 bits/s while the wrist and forearm have bandwidths of about 4.1 bits/s.
We also show that the thumb and index finger working together in a pinch grip have an information processing rate of about 4.5 bits/s.
Other factors which influence the relative performance of the different limbs in manipulation tasks are considered.
However, other work comparing input devices operated by different parts of the upper limb  was not as conclusive.
In this paper, we present a study which investigates the relative performance of the fingers, wrist, and forearm in a typical serial pointing task.
Empirical data available on this topic  are limited and often inconclusive.
A better understanding of the differences in performance and function between these limb segments can aid in improving the design of pointing devices.
For several decades, researchers in neurophysiology  and motor control  have studied and speculated on the differences in performance between the muscle groups controlling the various segments of the human upper limb.
Recently, HCI researchers have attempted to use this knowledge to formulate theories and designs for high performance computer pointing devices .
In particular, evidence that the fingers may have much higher bandwidths than the wrist or forearm  has led to hypotheses that utilizing the fingers in the control of computer pointing devices will result in more effective input control.
The log term is called the index of difficulty  and is measured in "bits".
The reciprocal of b is the human rate of information processing for the task at hand.
This is often referred to as the index of performance  or bandwidth.
If MT is measured in seconds, 1P canies the units "bits/s".
Several alternatives exist for computing ID.
Fitts in his 1954 paper suggested that the "capacity of the motor system probably varies considerably for different movements, limbs, and muscle groups" .
This notion, as well as general efforts in improving human-machine interfaces, has motivated subsequent inquiries into the performance differences of the fingers, wrist, and forearm.
Published figures for bandwidth range from under 1 bitk to over 60 bits/s; however, most figures are under 10 bits/s .
The figure of 10.4 bits/s reported by Card, English, and Burr  is among the highest of the dozen or so published for the mouse, Figures for the mouse and other com-
Since questioning Langolf et al.
Their experiment, which used only three subjects, consisted of two parts:  a "small amplitude" peg transfer task which was conducted under a stereoscopic microscope with a magnification factor of seven, and  a Fitts' reciprocal tapping task conducted using direct vision.
For each A, they observed subjects using different strategies.
With A = 0.25 cm, subjects anchored their wrist and moved primarily by flexing and extending* their fingers.
It was not explicitly stated which fingers were involved in the task, although from their description of the apparatus we infer a thumb and index finger pinch grip was used to grasp the manipulandum.
Because of this observed behaviour, Langolf et al.
Each regression model was based on only three points..It is important to note that limb segments were not controlled as an experimental factor.
We too, are skeptical of their results.
The bandwidths for the fingers and wrist are among the highest ever reported in Fitts' law studies .
Since they were obtained based on data from only three subjects and from regression models based only on three points each, there are good grounds to question their results.
Apart from the Langolf et al.
One of the earliest of these was by Bryan , who found that the wrist was faster than the fingers and arm in a Morse code tapping task.
Gibbs' work  on the relative effectiveness of the thumb, hand, and forearm in both positional and velocity control systems showed no systematic differences between the limbs when velocity control was used2.
However, he found that in controlling positional systems, the thumb was inferior to the forearm which in turn was worse than the hand.
Harnmerton and Tlckner's  experiments with velocity control systems showed that in conditions with high gains and long lags the hand outperformed both the thumb and forearm.
Also noteworthy is that the tasks used in  and  differed.
In  errors could not occur  whereas in  errors could and did occur.
Based on models  built with this data, they concluded that the bandwidths for the fingers, wrist, and arm were as follows:
Work in neurophysiology also points to the possibility that differences exist in the information processing capacity of the various parts of the motor system.
It has been shown  that the relative size of the areas in the cerebral motor cortex devoted to controlling the different muscle groups in the human body is often unrelated to the physical dimensions and mass of the limb segments activated by those muscle groups.
As the homunculus model of the motor cortex illustrates , the muscles controlling the hand and its appendages are heavily represented compared to the muscles responsible for the wrist, elbow, and shoulders.
Based partially on this information, Card, MacKinlay, and Robertson  hypothesized that "those groups of muscles having a large area devoted to them are heuristically promising places to connect with input device transducers if we desire high performance", although they rightly caution that "the determinants of muscle performance are more complex than just simple cortical area".
In summary, differences exist in the motor system's ability to control the different segments of the human upper limb.
What is not clear is the absolute and relative magnitudes of these differences, in particular the performance capacity of the fingers - issues which the current experiment attempts to address.
Note that for the wrist condition both the fingers and wrist were involved in the manipulation while the arm condition involved both the forearm and upper arm.
We have attempted to rninirnize the use of physiological terminology.
However, for the sake of precision, it is unavoidable in some cases.
See.Moore and Agur  for a description of the human upper limb's anatomy.
During cursor positioning the tip could slide freely on the tablet surface.
A distinct tactile click was felt when the switch was activated, reducing the possibility of inadvertent button presses.
The travel of the tip was less than 0.5 mm.
This modified sensor was then attached to one of three devices as follows: Figure 3 shows our input device for the finger.
A plastic clasp at the tip of a felt-covered rubber thimble held the sensor in place vertically, with its tip facing downward.
Subjects wore the thimble on their index finger, placed their hand pahndown on the digitizing tablet and controlled the cursor by moving only their index finger" in a left-right motion.
Our wrist input device  was an aluminium splint strapped to the palm with the middle-finger resting on the elongated portion of the splint.
Extreme workstation with a 17 inch colour display with a resolution of 1280x1024 pixels or approximately 3.7 pixels per millimeter.
Since our gord was to determine the bandwidth of the fingers, wrist, and forearm it was critical that we use high resolution input devices with appropriate form factors which could be controlled by each of these limb segments independently, with minimal interference from adjoining limbs.
As off-the-shelf hardware did not meet our requirements, we built customized devices which operated on a Wacom 12x 12 inch digitizing tablet.
As illustrated in Figure 2, a cordless position sensor, identical to that found in the stylus shipped with Wacom Technology Corporation's UD-series digitizing tablets, was modified to accommodate a dry-lubricated plastic rod which was allowed to slide within the sensor's hollow core.
One end of the rod was attached to a microswitch mounted at the top of the sensor while the other protruded from the bottom.
PAPERS vertically at the end of the splint by a plastic clasp.
This device effectively immobilized the finger, thus the sensor's position was controlled primarily by the wrist.
Subjects placed their hand palm down on the tablet and controlled the cursor by moving only their wrist in a left-right motion.
The base of the splint was covered with felt to minimize friction with the tablet, while a layer of foam on the top made the device comfortable for the user.
A similar device was designed for the forearm .
This device is strapped onto the forearm with the palm and the middle finger resting on the upper portion of the splint, thus immobilizing the wrist and finger.
Subjects controlled the cursor by placing their hand palm down on the tablet and moving only their forearm in a left-right motion.
In addition to the Finger, Wrist, and Forearm conditions, we included two conditions where the input device was a stylus: " Stylus Left/Right condition - a standard Wacom pressure sensitive stylus was held in the usual thumb/index finger pen grip and moved with a left-right motion about the wrist joint.
For both Stylus conditions, as with the Wrist condition, subjects kept their arm immobile on the table.
For all conditions, the position of the device on the tablet was sensed at a resolution of 10 points per millimeter.
The tablet was connected to the workstation via a 19200 bps serial link, with an update rate of 205 position records per second.
A linear relationship was maintained between the movement of the controlling device and the displayed object .
This relationship is called the control-display  gain.
Since even small lags  in display response have been found to degrade performance in target selection tasks , we used single-buffered graphics and ensured that the softwaxe could display the cursor at the same rate that position data were being received from the tablet.
Subjects performed a reciprocal point-select task for each of the limb conditions.
They were instructed to move as quickly and accurately as possible, while maintaining an error rate of around 49o.
The targets were unframed and alternately shaded bright green and grey - the green one being the target to select.
The 13x13 pixel cross-hair cursor turned from white to red when its centre was within the target boundaries.
An audible tone was heard if selection occurred outside the green target.
Timing began when the subject clicked on the first green target displayed.
Performance feedback in the form of percentage errors was provided after completing twenty trials.
Subjects began the next set of trials by pressing the enter key.
In order to accommodate the different ranges of motion of the limb segments, we could either keep the visual stimuli constant across limb conditions and vary the C-D gain for each limb, or maintain a constant C-D gain for all limb conditions and vary the amplitude and width of the targets displayed on screen.
The literature on the effects of C-D gain in selection tasks is inconclusive, with Arnaut and Greenstein  indicating that a gain of approximately 1.0 resulted in the best performance while a study by Buck  showed that varying the C-D gain had no effect on performance time.
We conducted a pilot study which showed no significant difference in subjects' performance between the two techniques, so we decided to maintain the same visual stimuli across rdl limb conditions and vary the C-D gain since this had the advantage of avoiding miniscule targets on the display in the Finger and Stylus conditions which had a small range of motion.
For rdl limb conditions we used three display target ampli-
The C-D gains for the various limb conditions were chosen after several pilot tests, and taking into consideration the values used in previous work .
The aim was to ensure that the angular displacement about the axis of rotation of each limb was the same across all limb segments for each of the three display amplitudes .
C-D gains were as follows:
1.0 for the Forearm condition .
2.0 for the Wrist condition .
6.0 for the Finger and both Stylus conditions .
A repeated measures analysis of variance showed a significant main effect for limb condition .
Mean movement times  for the Finger, Wrist, Forearm, Stylus Forward/Backward, and Stylus Left/Right conditions respectively were 927, 725, 741, 662, and 690 ms. A pairwise multiple comparisons test showed that MT for the Finger condition differed significantly  from all the other conditions.
Of the remaining conditions, only Forearm and Stylus Forward/Backward differed significantly .
The five limb conditions were within-subjects - each subject performed the task for all nine A-W conditions using all five limbs.
Ordering of limb conditions was counterbalanced with a latin-square design.
A repeated measures design was used within each limb condition - subjects were presented with five blocks, each consisting of all nine A- W conditions appearing in random order.
Each A-W condition consisted of twenty trials in a row.
Subjects were allowed to rest between conditions.
The experiment consisted of 45,000 trials in total, computed as follows: 10 subjects x 5 Iimb conditions x 3 target amplitudes x 3 target widths x 5 blocks X 20 trials per A- W condition = 45,000 total trials.
Prior to each new limb condition, subjects were given a practice block consisting of all nine A-W conditions with thirty trials per condition.
The experiment was conducted in one sitting and lasted about two hours per subject.
Error rates for the Wrist, Forearm, Stylus Forward/Backward, and Stylus Left/Right conditions were in the desired 4.070 range, with means of 5.0%, 4.0%, 5.6%, and 5.2% respectively.
However, the Finger condition had a higher rate of 8.8% with a pairwise means comparison test showing it differing significantly from the other conditions , while there were no significant differences between the remaining four conditions.
Closer inspection of the Finger data revealed that the error rate for the W = 3 mm conditions was exceptionally high at 14.
In contrast, the two Stylus conditions which had the same C-D gain as the Finger condition had an error rate of around 8'% for the W = 3 mm targets.
This rules out problems with the sensing technology but points to the possibility that the lack of stability in the unsupported finger was the cause, a hypothesis further supported by observations during the experiment that subjects' index finger exhibited tremor when the target widths were small.
Removing W = 3 mm conditions from the Finger data brought the error rate down to 6.1 ?ZOwhich was more in line with the other limb conditions.
The results for movement time and error rate are summarized in Figure 8.
We then removed outliers from the remaining four blocks of data by eliminating trials with selection coordinates more than three standard deviations from the mean in the direction of movement.
Means and standard deviations were calculated separately for each subject, and for each combination of limb, amplitude , and width .
The literature  indicates that deviate responses in repetitive, serial tasks similar to that used in this experiment me disruptive events and can cause unexpectedly long response times for the next trial.
For each A- W condition within each limb condition, we determined an effective target width  - for a nominal error rate of 4?io - and consequently the effective index of difficulty  for that condition.
This indicates that our customized input devices were not impeding subjects' performance.
The slight advantage of the Stylus Left/Right condition is probably due to the extra stability afforded by the thumb-index finger pinch-grip used to hold the stylus.
We found two key differences between our results and those reported in previous work.
First is the performance of our two finger conditions .
Comparing our absolute bandwidth figures with Langolf and colleagues'  data, we notice a large discrepancy - they report a bandwidth of 38 bits/s while our best estimate is 4.47 bits/s.
Relatively, however, our Stylus Forward/ Backward condition surpasses the other conditions - a finding which is consistent with the trend reported by Lrmgolf et al.
The relatively poor performance of our Finger condition is consistent with Bryan's  results, and indirectly with Gibbs  .
The second key difference is the relative ranking of the forearm and wrist.
These disparities at first glance appear to be a contradiction between the various experimental studies but upon reflection the results reinforce each other and could further our understanding of this complex issue.
We therefore explore several possible explanations:
A psirwise multiple comparisons test showed that the Finger condition differed significantly  from all the other conditions.
The mean bandwidths are shown in Figure 9.
Most prior research  studied flexion-extension of the wrist while our task required left-right movement of the wrist joint.
Although our results when compared to the earlier studies support our intuitive belief that left-right motion of the wrist has a lower bandwidth than flexion-extension, between-study comparisons such as this could be misleading and the issue clearly requires further investigation.
In the case of the finger, our Finger condition involved leftright motion about a single joint while the Stylus Forwardf Backward condition utilized a series of movements about several joints in the thumb and index finger.
PAPERS performing the thumb and elbow in a position control system but could not reliably discern any differences in performance when velocity control was used.
Hammerton and Tickner however found that in a velocity control system with high gain and long lags, the hand was superior to the thumb and forearm but that there was no difference between limbs when gains and lags were low.
Ail the other studies, including ours, used position control.
The type of control and C-D gain are potentially confounding factors and merit further study.
In general, what seems clear is that the type of movement of a particular limb should be taken into consideration when contemplating the performance differences between limb segments.
This is close to the optimal angular displacement of about 12 degrees determined by Rosenbaum et ai.
Thus, our subjects' performance in the Finger and Wrist conditions could well be sub-optimai in comparison to their performance with the forearm.
It is unclear what, if any, is the optimal movement amplitude in situations like our Stylus Forward/Backward condition where the thumb and index finger work in cooperation.
The relative contribution of individual limb segments to the performance of tasks where several limb segements are recruited clearly requires further investigation.
However, the accuracy requirements of the tapping task for the arm differed from that of their peg-transfer task for the fingers and wrist.
This is a critical difference as it has been shown, for example, that when subjects tap as quickly as possible in a seriai task with littie concern for accuracy, higher rates are achieved with the forearm .
Also, the performance of limb segments maybe influenced to varying extents by the speed and accuracy demands of the task.
For example, the spatial precision of forearm movements may be degraded more by increased speed whereas thumb-index finger movements are less affected.
This explanation is consistent with our data and with past work, both in tasks which required a certain level of precision  as well as in studies where accuracy demands were minimal .
While the magnitude of the difference in the speed-accuracy tradeoff for each limb segment is unclear at this point, it is important not to discount possible effects.
Finally, we know from basic physics that the greater the length and mass of an object, the greater its inertia and the greater the force required to move it.
From this perspective and coupled with our everyday knowledge of the relative dexterity of the different limb segments, it is reasonable to ex~t variations in performance depending on the task at hand.
The prevailing view that simply incorporating fingers in the operation of these devices will result in bigher performance systems is naive.
Rather, designers of future devices should consider the differences in form, function, and performance between the limb segments and ensure that their designs make use of the appropriate limb segment in an optimal manner for the task at hand.
For instance, devices like finger controlled joysticks and touchpads are likely to suffer from the limitations in bandwidth of left-right movement of the index finger.
On the other hand, stylus-type input devices that exploit the high bandwidth of the thumb and index finger working in unison are likely to yield high performance.
And, as the work of Zhai and colleagues  has shown, well designed pointing devices which rely on ail parts of the human upper limb working in synergy, each limb segment performing the functions that it does best, can indeed outperform devices which inappropriately depend on a particular limb segment for their entire operation.
Published research in computer pointing devices, human motor control, and neurophysiology is inconclusive on the issue of relative performance of different segments of the human upper limb.
Furthermore, most previous work has not considered differences in function when comparing limb segments.
In other words, the standard approach has been, for example, to consider the finger as a "little arm" rather than a completely different class of limb that is adept at tasks for which other limb segments are less suited.
Despite these discrepancies, researchers  have speculated that computer pointing devices which are controlled by the fingers should outperform devices manipulated by the wrist and/or arm.
Our present study shows that the finger do not necessarily perform better than the other segments of the upper limb.
Indeed, in the context of a serial point-select task, left-right movements by the index finger have a lower performance index when compared to the wrist and arm.
On the other hand, the thumb and index finger working together surpass all the other limb segments.
Similarly, the current school of thought holds that the wrist will outperform the arm.
Our resuits indicate, however, that left-right motion of the wrist has a similar bandwidth to left-right motion of the forearm about the elbow joint.
We also acknowledge the contribution of members of the Input Research Groups at the University of Toronto and the University of Guelph and the support of AliaslWavefront.
Optimizing the touch tablet The effects of control-display gain and method of cursor control.
A morphological analysis of the design space of input devices.
The ergonomics of computer pointing devices.
Comparison of six cursor devices b~ed on Fitts' law models.
