In this paper, we present Presstures, an extension to current multi-touch operations that enriches common multi-finger gestures with pressure information.
By using the initially applied pressure level for implicit mode switching, a gesture can be enhanced with different functionalities to enlarge the interaction space for multi-touch.
To evaluate the feasibility of our concept, we conducted an experiment, which indicates good human sensorimotor skills for performing multi-touch gestures with a few number of pressure levels and without any additional feedback.
Based on the experimental results, we discuss implications for the design of pressure-sensitive multi-touch gestures, and propose application scenarios that make optimal use of our concept.
Besides the use of continuous pressure values or shear forces for interactions like zooming  or scrolling , we believe that discrete pressure levels provide high potential as implicit mode switching technique for multi-touch gestures.
Likewise used for single-touch and stylus interaction , there has not yet been any investigation on pressure-based mode-switching with multiple fingers.
Therefore, we see our concept as alternative to existing modeswitching approaches , which provides particular benefits for learnability and memorability by simply enhancing known gestures with different functionalities.
Previous work has pointed out that feedback is essential for pressure interaction to control a larger amount of pressure levels .
Depending on the context, researchers conclude that users are capable of controlling around eight to ten pressure levels .
In these papers, the researchers mostly evaluated the human's ability to adapt to predefined pressure targets based on additional feedback.
In contrast, we were interested if it is possible to make use of the users' individual pressure perception in order to make an adaption to predefined targets obsolete.
On the one hand, this limits the number of possible pressure levels to a smaller amount of levels compared to related work, but on the other hand it results in a more fluid interaction and a simpler interface design since users no longer need to adapt to additional visual feedback.
Hence, to make participants focus on their pressure perception, the experiments in this paper were deliberately designed to provide neither visual feedback nor further guidance in order to eliminate any effects and explore the limits of pressure interaction without external feedback.
Summarizing, our contribution consists of  the investigation of human sensorimotor skills to control a small number of pressure levels  for multi-touch gestures without external feedback,  the discussion of resulting implications for the design of pressure-sensitive multi-touch, and  the suggestion of associated application examples.
Pressure-sensitive input has been a topic of interest in the HCI community for several years now, with research efforts ranging from explorations of pressure as alternative input metaphor  to the development of pressure-sensitive input devices .
To date, pressure has been used for a variety of applications such as zooming , scrolling , text entry , or widget control .
A comprehensive overview of existing work in the field, and foundations of human pressure control abilities can be found in .
More recently, with touch interaction becoming increasingly present in our daily lives, pressure has also been introduced as additional input dimension for touch-based applications.
Once the contact point exceeds a distance larger than the average size of contact area , the pressure evaluation terminates, and the highest pressure value by then is used for defining the mode.
This has the advantage of producing no perceptible lag like a dwell timeout  and provides a seamless transition between mode switch and gesture.
Beyond, similar approaches used different pressure levels to overload a mobile phone keyboard  or multiple touch strips  with different functionalities.
However, the users' ability to control pressure levels with multiple fingers was not tested systematically.
To study the participants' sensorimotor skills for controlling pressure, we conducted a study to investigate the following questions:  Does the perception of pressure levels differ from user to user?
To answer those questions, we split the study into two experiments.
In the first experiment, we studied the participants' sensorimotor skills to control different pressure levels with one or two fingers and without any feedback.
In the second experiment, we investigated the feasibility of initiating multi-touch gestures with a specific pressure level.
We recruited 8 unpaid participants aged 20-30 years  from a local university .
Participants were highly experienced in performing touch gestures  and moderately experienced with multi-touch gestures on trackpads .
An interpolation algorithm is used to compute pressure for each of the maximum five touch points.
Our findings with an analog scale showed a perfect linear measurement range up to 2000 grams.
The goal of the first experiment was to explore if participants were able to control different levels of pressure without any feedback, based on their own pressure perception.
We used a 2x2x2 within-subjects factorial design, with different amounts of pressure levels , one or two fingers  and different hand conditions  with 160 trials in total .
Participants were free to choose the pressure levels as they felt comfortable with.
For both experiments, trials were counterbalanced and the pressure level targets within every condition were randomized to prevent ordering effects.
To increase comparability of the results, we specified which fingers had to perform the tasks within all conditions.
Furthermore, we included a short training phase to familiarize participants with both the device and the task.
These high differences are a drawback of offering no feedback, because participants had to rely on their individual pressure perception.
Moreover, differences between participants were also dependent on other factors .
This indicates that fixed thresholds are not suitable for mode-switching based on discrete pressure levels without visual feedback.
Therefore, we extracted user-dependent boundaries for the pressure levels from the calibration data by fitting thresholds between the average pressure values for each pressure level condition.
Moreover, we observed that the applied pressure for gestures with movement was around 30% lower than for static fingers.
Thus, to classify the pressure level for a gesture with movement correctly, we adapted the thresholds accordingly.
Although the ability to apply same pressure on both fingers differed between participants, the first experiment revealed that participants were able to control pressure levels without any visual feedback.
A repeated measures ANOVA showed a significant main effect for pressure levels .
For the second experiment, the goal was to explore if participants were able to initiate a multi-touch gesture with a specific pressure level.
It was designed as 3x2x3 withinsubject factorial design with three types of gestures , two different amounts of pressure levels  and three hand conditions  with 360 trials in total .
Stretch is defined as Pinch, where one finger is static and applies pressure, while the other finger is swiping .
Participants were instructed to apply the target pressure before movement.
The results of the study indicate difficulties for users to control more than two pressure levels, especially in combination with multi-touch gestures.
In order to explore human sensorimotor skills in controlling certain pressure levels, the experiments were designed to provide no visual feedback or guidance to make participants focus on their sensorimotor perception.
However, as this is not an every-day task for most of us, we believe that user performance could greatly be improved with functional feedback provided by a system .
Research has shown that pressure interaction in general has a steep learning curve , as also confirmed in many real-world examples that build on human capabilities to improve sensorimotor skills with practice .
Beyond that, we believe that Presstures can perform even better with decent or indirect feedback in the user interface.
While study results show good results for two pressure levels, we found surprisingly high variations in participants' abilities to control three pressure levels.
Although pressure receptors are at high density at finger tips , one possible explanation could be limitations of human sensorimotor skills when it comes to the control of intermediate pressure levels without indicators/borders.
Moreover, we observed an interesting effect during the study, which showed relative dependencies between trials .
In the present study, this finding was not covered by our thresholding approach that fits thresholds between the average pressure values of the calibration phase.
Tailoring the algorithm towards non-linear human pressure perception could lead to increased performance .
Beyond, for two levels it seems feasible that the threshold could be derived from the users' normal interaction force.
As the above mentioned factors might have influenced the experimental results, alternative methodologies and hardware could also lead to different results.
Overall, our findings show that pressure-based interaction concepts such as Presstures, which is based on users controlling discrete pressure levels without additional feedback, shows only good performance for two pressure levels.
For increased numbers of pressure levels, it seems more optimal to provide additional feedback that supports users in adapting to pre-defined pressure targets .
Nevertheless, we believe that there are definitely applications, which can benefit from pressure-based input that is not reliant upon additional visual feedback .
Moreover, we believe that Presstures can be particularly beneficial for expert users, as augmenting different gestures with pressure-sensitivity provides great potential to enlarge interaction space for multi-touch interaction.
Nevertheless, they encountered serious problems with controlling three pressure levels , which is also in line with the participants' comments , stating that it was much harder to perform threelevel gestures compared to two-level gestures.
We assume that the significance for the hand conditions is mainly due to participants not being used to perform gestures with their nondominant hand.
Interestingly, most errors occurred with the Swipe gesture, which was rated as easiest and least demanding.
Given that, participants tended to perform it very quickly, thereby establishing the target pressure level only during motion.
Hierarchical Selectors can be used for mapping the input scope to different GUI-levels.
Likewise, pinching with light pressure could be used for content zooming, whereas strong pinching could minimize/maximize a window respectively.
The research leading to these results has received funding from the European Unions' FP7/2007-2013 under grant agreement n 611104 and the programme "Neue Energien 2020 of the FFG.
The study was also funded by the KEIO/NUS CUTE Center @ Singapore Funding Initiative and administered by the IDM Program Office.
Mode Selectors can be used for fluent alternation between different manipulation modes.
In a text editor for example, pinching with light pressure could zoom the text, whereas strong pinching could be used to adjust font size.
Beyond that, the concept can be easily extended for bimanual interaction scenarios, where different gestures could be performed with both hands simultaneously.
Thus, having specified a text selection with the non-dominant hand, the selected text could then be modified through multi-touch gestures with the dominant hand.
In this paper, we proposed gestures that augment common multi-touch with pressure information.
In a user study, we demonstrated the limits of human skills for such pressurebased multi-touch gestures, and its feasibility for implicit mode switching.
Based on results showing good performance for two pressure levels, we proposed several application examples.
In a subsequent informal user study, participants overall liked the concept, as they perceived multitouch interactions more effortless and fluent.
In our future work, we plan to compare the feasibility of our non-
