There are many health-related risks associated with chronic stress.
One approach for addressing this issue comes from strengthening inside self-regulation abilities rather than eliminating outside sources of stress.
However, technology has not been explored to its full potential for delivering calming interventions.
While many of the persuasive technologies developed for fostering behavior change focus on cognitive processes, little attention has been given to influencing behavior through automatic processes of the brain.
Considering the bidirectional relationship between psychophysiological signals and self-reported emotional states, manipulating the physiological signals that a human being has voluntary control over is promising for achieving a desired emotional state.
In this work, we focus on respiration due to the fact that it is both a voluntary and involuntary response of the body.
It is a good indicator of stress, but can also be manipulated to induce calmness.
This thesis introduces BrightBeat: a set of seamless visual, auditory, and tactile interventions that mimic a calming breathing oscillation with the aim of influencing physiological syncing and consequently bringing a sense of focus and calmness.
These interventions are designed to run easily on commonplace personal electronic devices, respect the user's privacy, and to not require constant focus or attention in order to be effective.
We have designed BrightBeat interventions iteratively and have examined both objective and subjective measures of impact through a series of studies with N=54 users in total.
From an objective perspective, BrightBeat interventions significantly influenced calmer  breathing and had a lasting influence.
From a subjective perspective, considering the individual differences, these interventions have been shown to improve self-reported calmness and focus.
Also, participants reported high preference for using them in the future.
I am honored to call professor Rosalind Picard my mentor and advisor.
She is an inspiration to me.
In the past two years, her enthusiasm and curiosity has astonished me and her endless support, encouragement, and guidance has helped me immensely.
I'm very grateful for her and for being given the chance to learn from her.
Her nice and compassionate attitude has made many of my days in the past two years.
I would like to express my deepest appreciations to professor Pattie Maes and Sepandar Kamvar for sharing their time and insightful comments with me and helping me see every question more thoroughly and thoughtfully.
I would like to thank all my friends and colleagues in the affective computing group whom I've learned a lot from directly and indirectly: Vincent Chen, Karthik Dinakar, Micah Eckardt, Szymon Fedor, Javier Hernandez, Natasha Jaques, Kristy Johnson, Grace Leslie, Daniel Lopez, Ehi Nosakhare, Akane Sano, Sara Taylor, Craig Ferguson, and Rashmi Karki.
I would like to specially thank Asaf Azaria for helping me become a more grateful person.
I'm thankful to the media lab and to MIT for all the chances I've been given to explore my passion without limits.
The abundance of resources and talent has always aspired me.
I am very grateful for being surrounded by the smartest and most driven people in the world from different parts of the world.
I'm forever grateful to my family and I have no words to thank them enough for their unconditional love and support which has helped me grow as a person.
I specially thank my mom for being very close no matter how many miles away we are and for teaching me to work hard for what I care about.
I thank my sisters for instilling curiosity in me as a kid and for being my closest friends as an adult.
I thank my brother for all the fun memories we have together that still make me laugh even when I'm down.
I thank my dad for teaching me to stay calm by example rather than by words.
I would like to express my sincere gratitude to Ardavan for his endless love and support and for helping me develop a growth mindset.
He has taught me to be persistent in taking baby-steps of self-improvement and growing as a person.
Nothing is more comforting than his calmness, optimism, patience, and understanding.
I thank my friends in different states of the US, Iran, and Switzerland for supporting me through all my ups and downs and for being there for me at the face of difficulty.
It's their love and friendship that keeps me sane.
I wish there were no geographical boundaries and I could go give a hug to each one of them and express my deepest gratitude in person!
Last but not least, I would like to thank the participants of the series of studies I've run for all their valuable input that has helped improve this work.
Chronic stress has been shown to negatively impact health and wellbeing in several ways.
It also affects cognitive functions, memory, and learning .
This wide range of health- and wellbeing-related risks calls for minimizing unnecessary stress in daily life situations.
One way to tackle this issue is eliminating external stressors.
However, stress is perceived differently among different individuals and there is no consensus around modeling stress or stressors.
In fact, new directions are being suggested to address the limitations of previous models .
This motivates the idea of developing internal techniques to gain resilience against stress rather than fighting it externally.
Scientific evidence confirms that the relationship between breathing and regulatory effects is bidirectional.
Stress has physiological indicators including changes in core temperature, cardiovascular tone, respiratory patterns, and more .
Among all, respiration has a unique characteristic of being both voluntarily and involuntarily controlled.
Also, voluntary deep and slow breathing can induce physiological, affective, and cognitive calm .
In the current day and age when individuals spend hours in front of screens, wearing headphones, or other wearable devices, technology can be a promising medium for delivering seamless calming interventions throughout everyday life activities.
However, little research has been conducted around conveying a portion of the positive influences of a meditative experience while being involved in daily activities.
In fact, most of the technology designed for health and wellbeing related behavior change relies solely on cognitive processes of the brain rather than delivering an intervention that doesn't require constant attention.
The lack of scalable systems for self-regulating that respect the user's privacy and don't require his/her constant attention and instead mostly rely on the automatic processes of behavior change has motivated this thesis.
Thus, this thesis ironically uses the techniques from mindless computing to promote a respiratory induced mindful state in everyday activities.
The next chapter provides a literature review about stress and its physiological manifestation and why breathing is a good candidate for self-regulation.
It then reviews the existing technologies and systems that facilitate measuring or influencing breathing which directly or indirectly have addressed a meditative experience.
This motivates the third chapter, which provides examples of physiological synchrony and introduces a series of interventions where commonplace technological devices mimic a calming breathing signal in order to ease self-regulation and induce calm.
We call these interventions BrightBeat.
Chapter 4 and 5 explain manual and automated versions of BrightBeat, providing detailed explanation of the system design, user study protocol and deployment, and finally demonstrating results both in terms of self-reported changes and physiological data.
Chapter 6 concludes by summarizing the impacts of BrightBeat interventions and providing future directions.
This thesis contributes to bringing mindfulness to every day activities through iterative design and implementation of a series of interventions, BrightBeat, that respect individual differences and privacy and validates them through structured user studies.
BrightBeat users had slower relative breathing rates and were able to achieve their goal breathing rate a higher percentage of the time.
Also, BrightBeat is shown to improve self-reported focus and calmness.
This thesis also tests the hypothesis of physiological syncing through interaction with means of technology such as screens, headphones, and wristbands by detailed analysis of physiological data.
It also replicates the results related to the relationship between voluntarily slowing breathing rate and achieving an emotional state of calmness and focus.
In this section, we briefly review the physiological responses of stress with a deeper focus on respiratory patterns.
Then, we discuss self-regulation in relation to voluntary modification of breathing, summarizing the scientific evidence for the effectiveness of breathing exercises on patient and healthy populations both for treatment and improvement purposes.
Psychologically, stress is a complex phenomenon.
It is perceived and experienced differently by different individuals, and even by the same person in different situations.
However, new directions are still being suggested to address the limitations of these models .
Under a broader umbrella, stress can refer to a spectrum ranging from negative  to positive   .
As summarized by , the physiological response to stress starts with activating the hypothalamic pituitary adrenal axis  and the sympathetic nervous system .
The consequent release of several chemical mediators prepares the body for a fight-orflight response which results in behavioral adaptations including increased arousal and alertness, improved cognition, focused attention, elevations in core temperature, suppression of digestive function, growth, reproduction, and immunity, adaptive redirection of energy, increases in cardiovascular tone, respiratory rate, and intermediate metabolism.
On the other hand, the parasympathetic nervous system , can either assist or inhibit the SNS by decreasing or increasing its activity respectively .
Thus, increased PNS activity can counteract the SNS response and return the body to a relaxed state.
In general, the stress response is meant to be short during which the suppression of growth, production, and immune system are beneficial or at least have no adverse consequences and improve chances of the individual for survival .
However, chronic stress can damage the body in different ways.
To name a few, chronic stress has been shown to negatively impact immune system , gastrointestinal , cardiovascular , and neuropsychiatric  health.
It also affects cognitive functions, memory, and learning .
As a result, successful stress regulation plays an important role in maintaining health and wellness.
In this context, Porges has developed the "polyvagal theory" which explains the evolution of the vagus nerve and its role in the PNS system and relates the autonomic function to behavior .
This theory articulates three phylogenetic stages of the development of the vertebrate autonomic nervous system .
The most evolved ANS component or "Myelinated vagus" causes advanced behavioral functions like social communication, self-soothing and calming, and inhibiting arousal.
The second component or "Sympathetic-adrenal system" causes mobilization or active avoidance.
The most primitive component, "Unmeyelinated vagus", causes immobilization such as death feigning, behavioral shutdown, or passive avoidance.
These three circuits have a hierarchical structure in which they respond to challenge.
The less advanced circuits come into play only when the more evolved ones have failed.
HRV is the physiological phenomenon of the variation of beat-to-beat intervals between consecutive peaks in an ECG signal .
More specifically, cardiorespiratory parameters like respiratory sinus arrhythmia  were put under the spotlight by Porges through the development of polyvagal theory .
RSA is heart rate variability in synchrony with respiration, where beat-to-beat intervals are shortened during inspiration and prolonged during expiration .
He proposed RSA as a reliable continuous measure of the vagal brake which refers to the unique characteristics of the most evolved autonomic nervous system  component or "Myelinated vagus" .
More researchers witnessed the importance of respiratory functions in understanding autonomic mechanisms of the body .
Though respiration is primarily regulated for metabolic and homeostatic purposes, it can also change in response to emotions .
Many scholars have studied respiratory patterns as indicators of physiological emotional responses.
A review by Boiten and his colleagues have summarized that primary correlates of respiratory patterns including rate, amplitude, and volume reflect general dimensions of emotional response such as calm-excitement, relaxation-tenseness, and active-passive coping .
Several ancient to contemporary practices have used breathing techniques for self-regulation.
For example, Pranayama , Qigong , and Alexander breathing technique  are just a few.
Besides practice, scientific evidence confirms the bidirectional relationship between breathing and regulatory effects.
Not only are respiratory patterns indicators of emotional reactivity, but also voluntary modification of breathing can influence emotional reactions.
In the first study, participants were asked to produce specific emotions and describe the consequent breathing patterns.
In the second study, the same breathing instructions were given to new participants to investigate the impact of manipulating respiration on emotional states.
The purpose of the study was hidden from the participants through a cover story.
Induced respiration manipulation resulted in differentiated emotional feelings without participants' awareness of the process .
Deep and slow breathing has been widely used as part of relaxation techniques in patient populations to treat somatic disorders such as hypertension and pulmonary diseases , psychiatric disorders including anxiety and depression syndromes , posttraumatic and other stress-related disorders , and substance abuse .
Not only in patient populations, but also in healthy individuals the physical and psychological effects of deep breathing and meditation have been shown.
Not only rate, but also the inhalation to exhalation ratio  has been shown to be related to the relaxation response .
Sighs are another respiratory behavior which our body uses as a healing process.
Normal breathing consists of considerable correlated variability and some random variability.
It is known that negative emotions reduce correlated variability and sustained attention reduces total variability.
Both conditions evoke spontaneous sighing which is related to subjective relief and restores respiratory variability influenced by stress or attention .
It has been shown that these healing characteristics are not exclusive to spontaneous sighing.
In fact, when physiologically appropriate, they follow instructed sighs as well .
The scientific evidence showing effectiveness of voluntary respiratory modification on emotional regulation calls for designing technologies that ease the regulatory process.
With the widespread use of smartphones, advent of wearable devices, and culture of spending countless hours with technological devices, meditative practices have found their way into technological devices.
In this section, we review the connection between technology and meditative practices when it is combined with breathing, either by addressing it, measuring it, or influencing it.
We start with less interactive examples such as mobile applications that encourage deep breathing in a guided meditation training session and move to more interactive ones introducing sensors and biofeedback examples, virtual environments, and finally responsive environments and objects.
There have been several attempts at building mindfulness training, meditation, or simply calming interventions in the form of desktop software or mobile applications.
Headspace , Stop, breathe, and think , Calm , Chakra Meditation , Breathe , and Insight timer  are only a few out of many meditation applications that come with training session videos, audio recordings, music, and text.
Some of them have incorporated gamification  mechanisms to engage participants further and help create a habit of meditation practice.
As mindful breathing has been an indispensable part of meditation, these apps, by extension, briefly touch breathing.
A few apps have paid more overt attention to breathing.
MyBreath Lite  is an interactive breathing training app which uses the smartphone's built-in microphone to capture breathing and provide real-time audio and visual feedback.
Stress Doctor  is another app that introduces deep breathing techniques.
In order to score the effectiveness of the exercise session, it also measures heart rate and heart rate variability  via smartphone's built-in camera.
CalmDown  is a desktop application for Mac for reminding a user to take breaks either in the form of going for a walk or deep breathing by fading in/out colors on the screen.
More recently, the Let Me Relax  system has been developed.
This system is a sedentary state recognition platform using accelerometer data from the smartphone and the smartwatch sensors.
Then, it suggests simple relaxation techniques from a pool of interventions which include deep and slow breathing.
A study with 22 participants showed that the system could help the intervention group reduce self-reported stress compared to the control group who didn't receive the relaxation notifications.
Researchers and engineers have long been developing sensors for capturing physiology including respiration.
FlexComp  is one of the early devices with high signal quality.
The sensors include surface electromyography, electrocardiography , electroencephalography , skin conductance , peripheral temperature, blood volume pulse , respiration amplitude, goniometer adapter, and force adapter.
Later, wearable measurement devices came out in different form factors.
For example, LifeShirt  is a garment that measures physiology and also serves as an electronic diary of symptoms and activities.
It continuously monitors respiration, heart activity, inductive cardiography, motility, and posture.
The captured data are displayed and stored on a handheld computer .
After offline analysis, cardiorespiratory parameters like heart rate, RSA, tidal volume, stroke volume, pre-ejection period, apnea-hypopnea index, thoracoabdominal coordination, and sighing can be extracted.
Zephyr BioHarness  is a more recent device which is composed of a BioModule and an adjustable chest strap with conductive fabric sensors as shown in Fig.
The recorded data can be transmitted wirelessly, or downloaded offline.
The strap sensor within the chest belt measures the size differential between the expansion and contraction of the thoracic cavity and sends it to BioModule which produces the breathing waveform, estimates amplitude, and breathing rate.
However, these devices were mostly designed as a tool for researchers and clinicians rather than focusing on the wearer and his/her needs and experiences.
McCraty is among the pioneers of scientifically using biofeedback for improving wellness through training, education, and self-monitoring 1521.
He commercialized his research through emWave, an ear-clip sensor for measuring PPG that comes with a mobile and desktop application.
Through training sessions, it guides users toward larger RSA amplitude by calculating a coherence score based on HRV.
RESPeRATE 1431 is another device for guided breathing.
It is cleared by the Food and Drug Administration  and is available without a prescription.
It has been verified through clinical trials as an effective method for reducing blood pressure and thus has been used for the treatment of hypertension 125,931.
He later introduced social features to PPR and studied how they affected the user.
He identified design principles through an iterative design process 1551 and later implemented Breathaware, a gamified drop-down menu in the system tray for informing users about their breathing by showing rate, estimating calm points, daily milestones, encouraging messages, and a buddy list.
A next iteration was breathTray and then Breathwear in a mobile context.
He created the "Calming Technology" lab at Stanford where they further studied inducing cognitive, affective, and physiological calm through technological interventions.
Moravji later created Spire , a wearable tracker that measures breathing patterns to encourage overall mindfulness and provide a more thorough guided meditation experience.
In recent years, more and more wellbeing trackers are coming to market with an increased focus on breathing.
Leaf 1901 is an example in the form of smart jewelry with motion sensors that can be worn as a necklace, bracelet, or snapped onto clothing.
It has guided meditation sessions during which it captures respiration.
Prana evaluates breath patterns differentiating between diaphragmatic and chest breathing and posture.
Figure 2-5: Leaf fitness tracker , Prana posture and respiration tracker , Apple watch meditation app  that provides active training sessions and gamifies breathing exercises.
Apple has also announced a mindfulness app, called Breathe, for Apple Watch in WWDC 2016 121.
Breathe coaches users through timed breathing sessions in order to help then de-stress.
The app can be launched from the watch face or set up in advance with reminders and it measures heart rate throughout the session.
2-5 shows Leaf, Prana, and Breathe meditation app for Apple Watch.
However, it soon evolved and now several VR headsets are available off-the-shelf including Oculus Rift, HTC Vive, Samsung Gear VR, Google cardboard, Microsoft HoloLens, and many more.
VR has been widely used for entertainment including games, films, media, concerts, museums, and theme parks.
It has also been used in urban and architecture design and for retail purposes.
Another VR usage has been in training, mostly for military applications.
VR provides a low- or no-risk simulated environment for training novice personnel.
Also, medical and therapeutic applications of VR have emerged recently.
As VR is capable of engaging user's senses and recreating environments at low cost, it is also a good candidate for mindfulness meditation training .
Meditation chamber  is an immersive virtual environment primarily designed for meditation training and secondarily for reducing stress, anxiety, and pain.
Meditation Chamber utilizes biofeedback sensors to monitor arousal.
It then visually changes the virtual environment.
Several visualizations have been implemented including setting sun and rising moon and mirroring actions during the progressive muscle relaxation.
Results from a controlled study showed that the virtual environment has been more effective than the biofeedback alone.
Virtual Meditative Walk   is another responsive virtual environment specifically designed to teach mindfulness based stress reduction .
The goal of MBSR is to enable people to reduce stress and improve their health via maintaining and improving psychological states.
It utilizes finger electrodes for measuring EDA and provides real-time visual and sonic feedback.
The fog represents user's EDA levels and fades away when the EDA levels go down.
Results from a study with chronic pain patients comparing the virtual environment to the control group were presented.
The control users only practiced MBSR but did not interact with the VMW environment.
The participants interacting with VMW reported reduced pain levels.
Recently, more immersive experiences have been created with the goal of cultivating mindfulness about body signals.
This ranges from interactive objects to responsive architectures.
Here, we mention the most prominent examples in this area.
BodyVis has dynamically removable organs that communicate with a Zephyr BioHarness 1651 device and visualizes heart rate and breathing rate of the wearer.
It also has a touchscreen stomach and visualizes eating and digestion process.
SonicCradle 1921 is another example in the form of an interactive environment.
Participants' breathing is measured using Thought Technology sensors 1481 attached to their abdomen and thorax.
Software manipulates sound coming from different spatial directions in real-time using breathing data by changing volume, equalization, and reverberation.
The goal of SonicCradle is to provide a stress-relieving experience through which users gain a heightened breath awareness.
ExoBuilding 1761 is another example of an adaptive architecture which takes physiological data into account.
The size of the prototype is mapped to the occupant's respiration.
The embedded LEDs in the fabric blink with the same frequency as heartbeat and the speaker system sonifies the heartbeat.
Graphics are projected on the fabric and their visibility corresponds to the EDA data.
A controlled study comparing three conditions of static, regular movement, and biofeedback with ExoBuilding suggested that the responsive environment condition successfully triggered behavioral and physiological changes such as lower respiration rates and higher respiration amplitudes compared to the other two conditions.
Another recent study applied biofeedback to ambient lighting in a home environment during which users could self-regulate their breathing patterns to improve their HRV 1991.
Users wore a pulse sensor that communicated heart rate features to the environment.
Figure 2-10: Ambient lighting biofeedback.
A controlled study showed the effectiveness of the environment compared to a traditional graphical interface.
2-10 shows the experimental setting.
In the previous sections, we mentioned the psychophysiological influences of voluntary breath modification.
We also mentioned the role that technology has played in creating meditative experiences and measuring and influencing respiratory patterns.
However, most of these technologies are designed to require full attention of the user and are not designed to work while the user is engaged in everyday life activities .
More recent examples have explored peripherally informing users .
However, they are still designed to engage the user cognitively rather than automatically influencing him/her.
Other examples include creating more immersive experiences to convey biofeedback response to the user in an ambient manner .
However, these systems rely on extra resources which make them less scalable.
Also, they don't preserve the privacy of the user as they broadcast and magnify the physiological changes of the user into the physical environment.
Physiological synchrony and emotional contagion are known phenomena .
Levenson and Ruef have written a chapter in which they have provided several examples when ANS systems synchronize such as between patients and therapists, students and teachers, dyads and groups, mother and infant, spouses, and even in viewing oneself on videotape .
These examples show that the synchronization doesn't necessarily require participants to be intimately engaged in a face-to-face interaction, but can also happen across physical  or interpersonal  distance.
This motivates further exploring the role of technology in this mirroring process.
In other contexts such as human circadian rhythm , technology has been shown to affect the body's biological rhythm.
Several scholars have studied the effect of evening exposure to LED-backlit displays on circadian physiology which results in delayed sleep .
Solutions such as the f.lux application  have evolved to adjust screen blue light emission to address such problems.
These examples show technology can be a promising medium to influence biological rhythms for improving wellbeing.
In this regard, we have designed BrightBeat.
BrightBeat recreates a rhythmic oscillation similar to a calming breathing signal in the form of visual, auditory, or haptic feedback which overlays what the user sees, hears, or senses.
Its goal is to rely more on automatic processes of physiological syncing rather than cognitive effort for reaching a desired state.
It comes in the form of a set of unobtrusive interventions to be used on personal electronic devices to facilitate self-regulation while being engaged in other activities.
These interventions are designed to require minimal cognitive attention to help self-regulate effortlessly.
They utilize primary functionalities of personal electronic devices and are thus, scalable.
They respect privacy of the user by providing seamless interventions on a personal level.
The brightness changes are barely observable and may not be noticed if the user is deeply focused on another task.
The audio BrightBeat oscillates the volume with the same frequency while playing white noise through headphones.
We have chosen white noise in order to remove bias from playing specific type of music.
However, the auditory component can also oscillate at ambient sound or music.
Again, the minimum and maximum volume are barely audible.
The thermal BrightBeat oscillates the temperature of a custom built wristband with the same frequency.
The cool and warm temperature limits are minimally perceptible.
3-1 schematically illustrates an exaggerated version of the three mentioned modules.
In summary, we envisioned BrightBeat as a system that: * measures breathing unobtrusively; " on a personal level, subtly notifies the user if he is breathing too fast; * is easy to implement and scale; " doesn't require continues conscious attention.
In order to understand how users respond to BrightBeat and test its efficacy, we developed a prototype with which participants interacted in the context of a lab study.
This chapter explains the iterative process of the design of the initial system and the respective data analysis.
Note that the focus of this study was to explore the idea of BrightBeat through iterations.
As a result, instead of focusing on the functionality and fully automating the process, we rather focused on the design iterations and kept a human in the loop to accelerate the implementation process.
After building a proof-of-concept system and analyzing the initial user data, we found promising results.
Thus, we improved the system and ran further studies which are explained in the next chapter.
Toward this end, we utilized Spire  for measurements.
Spire is a stone-shaped wearable device that clips to clothing and measures physical movement, position, and breathing patterns using a pressure sensor.
Spire has an iOS consumer app and an API.
In terms of raw respiration data, the app interface shows a smoothed plot of breathing waveform.
Also, through the API we have access to breathing rate in a given interval.
The first notification mechanism we came up with was mimicking inhalation and exhalation by brightening and darkening the screen.
Consequently, we developed a software with an interface for receiving raw breathing waveform and rate along with two parameters, minimum  and maximum brightness  values.
The software would mirror the user's breathing by altering screen brightness between the minimum and maximum brightness limit.
The brightness was matched to raw breathing waveform data.
In order to test the usability of the system, we recruited 3 participants  to interact with BrightBeat.
We explained how the system works and that it's there to give users breathing awareness.
We also instructed them to breathe deeply and slowly to selfregulate when stressed.
Participants wore a Spire device and a Zephyr BioHarness and spent approximately 3 minutes listening to a calm piano piece of music.
Due to unavailability of real-time breathing data by Spire's API, we utilized a wizard-of-oz method where the experimenter looked at the breathing waveform provided by the Spire app and changed the system's response manually.
Afterwards, participants read news articles of their choice on a MacBook with BrightBeat installed on it for up to 20 minutes.
All participants mentioned that mirroring exact inhalation and exhalation, which is usually irregular is stressful.
They also mentioned it is hard to know if you are doing the correct thing when you are receiving feedback all the time.
However, they liked the idea of being subtly informed about their breathing and preferred a more rhythmic feedback.
A user mentioned: "I knew breathing can calm you down .
But I haven't tried controlling it actively.
I was surprised how powerful such a simple thing can be."
To capture more detailed physiological data, we utilized Zephyr BioHarness  instead of Spire.
This device is composed of a BioModule and an adjustable chest strap with conductive fabric sensors.
It measures respiration , ECG data , motion , posture, and temperature.
The recorded data can be transmitted wirelessly, or downloaded offline via a docking cradle using the "Log downloader" windows application that comes with the device.
The strap sensor within the chest belt measures the size differential between the expansion and contraction of the thoracic cavity and sends it to BioModule which produces the breathing waveform, estimates amplitude, and breathing rate.
To check the quality of Zephyr data, we also used SenseView  which is an Android application to visualize sensor readouts in real-time.
It supports Zephyr BioHarness, but has access to a limited number of measurements.
For example, it has access to breathing rate but neither amplitude nor waveform.
As per pilot participants' request, we turned constant feedback to a feedback that appears only if the user is breathing too fast.
In this version, the system would monitor the user during a three-minute relaxation period and set a goal breathing rate  for each participant.
Since breathing rate during cognitive tasks is naturally faster than during a relaxed state, and to account for individual differences in breathing habits, we defined GBR as a linear function of the user's mean breathing rate  during the relaxation period: GBR = MBR + 2.
Whenever the user is breathing faster than GBR, BrightBeat would appear.
Figure 4- 1: Pilot I - System design.
Color codes: blue: hardware module, green: software module, orange: data, grey: experimenter.
In this version, BrightBeat was a regular beat starting from minB, going up linearly to maxB, and returning to minB again with the same frequency as GBR.
4-I depicts the schematic system design.
In total, N= 13 participants were recruited.
Participants were graduate students from two different universities in the Boston area.
To compare placebo effect versus BrightBeat effect, participants were randomly assigned to a control or intervention condition.
The control group was told that they would receive an imperceptible version of the intervention where the changes were so subtle that they could not be seen consciously.
The intervention group received the actual BrightBeat.
They were told that BrightBeat is there to give them breathing awareness and it oscillates the screen brightness when they are breathing too fast.
The experiment was conducted in a lab setting and lasted between 25 to 35 minutes.
It was composed of relaxation sessions, reading tasks, and quizzes.
The experimental flow is shown in Fig.
First, participants started with a relaxation session and listened to a calming piano piece while sitting and breathing comfortably.
Participants were instructed to proceed to the next page after they have reached a relaxed state.
Consequently, the relaxation period ranged from 2 to 5 minutes for different participants.
The experimenter calculated MBR from SenseView readings and set the system's parameters accordingly.
Participants interacted with the system and confirmed the parameters, including minB, maxB, and GBR.
Afterwards, they did a first reading task followed by a question set.
Then, a second reading task was presented, followed by a set of questions.
Finally, participants were told to relax while reading an article.
They were informed about the fact that there was no quiz after the "relaxing and reading" task.
In the end, the participants filled out a survey and rated their experience with the system along with their self-reported focus and calmness states.
In order to elicit stress, which is associated with faster and irregular breathing patterns, participants were told that they would be tested on the tasks and their results would be compared to others.
The participants were strictly timed during the tasks and the form would automatically proceed to the next page after the time limit.
The experimenter was blind to the condition and only interacted with the participants before the reading tasks and after the session was over, to avoid affecting their breathing response to the system.
The intervention group was exposed to BrightBeat during reading tasks and the final relaxation part but not during question sets.
Figure 4-2: Pilot I - Experiment design.
Pre XS: Initial survey and experience sampling.
RI: Relaxation while watching video.
R2 : Relaxation while reading.
Post XS: exit survey and experience sampling.
4-3, during the first relaxation session, the user is breathing deeply and calmly.
During this phase, the breathing rate is mostly lower than GBR.
It is also shown how the BrightBeat intervention influenced the user to breathe slowly and deeply.
During the first reading task, the user started to breathe fast at the beginning of the task but as soon as he had received two BrightBeat interventions, he began breathing below his GBR for a few minutes.
He became stressed near the end of the reading task as the time was going to be over and the BrightBeat appeared to him.
4-4 shows a user in the control group.
Most of the time, he is breathing faster than his GBR.
At the beginning of the reading task, he is more aware of his breathing and is below his GBR.
However, the effect soon wears off.
4-5 shows the average breathing rate for all the participants during different tasks in the control and intervention groups with one standard deviation error bars.
The red line shows the GBR for each user.
As shown in the figure, the control group is usually above their personalized GBR unlike the intervention group.
Figure 4-3: Pilot I - A sample user in the intervention group.
The red horizontal line is the goal breathing rate  of 10 BPM.
GBR is set 2 BPM above the mean breathing rate of the first relaxation session.
When the user breathes faster than his GBR, BrightBeat appears.
As plotted, delivering BrightBeat resulted in deep and slow breaths with some lasting influence that wore off only gradually.
Color codes: grey: BrightBeat on, green: relaxation, red: parameter setting, white: reading, yellow: question answering.
Figure 4-4: Pilot 1 - A sample user in the control group.
The red horizontal line is the goal breathing rate  of 13 BPM.
GBR is set 2 BPM above the mean breathing rate of the first relaxation session.
This user is reaching his GBR only at the beginning of the first reading task being more aware of his breathing.
Color codes: green: relaxation, red: parameter setting, white: reading, yellow: question answering.
There is no significant difference between the average MBR of the two groups.
Participants in the control and intervention groups are shown by blue and green color respectively.
4-6 shows the task-by-task performance of the participants.
Figure 4-5: Pilot I - The average breathing rate of all the participants during different tasks with one standard deviation error bars.
The individual MBRs are written on top of the plots and the red line shows the GBR.
Intervention group users tend to reach their GBR more and during wider range of tasks.
We have used MBR in this analysis to have a baseline of zero during the relaxation session.
The red line shows zero.
Blue and green refer to participants in the control and intervention group respectively.
To visualize the difference more clearly, the points in each group are sorted.
Overall, the intervention group is lower.
This means that the intervention participants have been closer to their relaxed state of breathing compared to their control counterparts.
In order to measure how the average participant did in the control and intervention group, we calculated the percentage of the time spent below the GBR during each task for each group.
On average, the control group reached their GBR less than 10% of the time while it was 68% for the intervention group.
While answering questions, participants in the intervention group reached their GBR more than 70% of the time even though they did not receive the BrightBeat during that part of the experiment.
However, the control group reached their GBR less than I % of the time in the same condition.
This hints at a lasting effect of the BrightBeat intervention.
Figure 4-6: Pilot I - The task-by-task average difference between the breathing rate  and the MBR with one standard deviation error bars.
The red line shows zero.
Blue and green points refer to the participants in the control and intervention group respectively and are sorted in ascending order.
During the first relaxation task, the average breathing rate is the same as MBR and thus all points fall on the zero line.
In the rest of the tasks, the intervention group is lower.
This means that the intervention participants have been closer to their relaxed state of breathing compared to their control counterparts.
Figure 4-7: Pilot I - Percentage of the time achieved the GBR in each task.
The intervention group has achieved its GBR more than the control group during several tasks.
Q: answering questions, R2: relaxing and reading.
While this work focused on changing breathing rate, and did not make any hypotheses about task performance, we did want to examine whether BrightBeat, which could have cost some cognitive load or distraction, might have interfered with task performance.
In order to objectively quantify the influence of BrightBeat on cognitive performance, we have looked at the quiz results.
4-8 shows the bar chart of the average user performance in each group, across different tasks with one standard deviation error bars.
No significant difference was observed between the control and the intervention groups.
This shows that BrightBeat did not negatively impact performance.
However, it is important to mention that many factors influence task performance including the time of the day, the user's fluency in English, and his/her prior knowledge about the task.
Please refer to Appendix B for the content of the reading tasks and quizzes.
1: Pilot I - The average user rating .
The higher average number in each row is highlighted in red.
Overall, the intervention users reported higher focus and calmness compared to the control users.
Extreme labels were as follows: * 1: not at all, 7: very much, **1: decreased it significantly, 7: increased it significantly, ***1: stressed me out, 7: calmed me down.
Overall, participants in the intervention group reported improvements on focus and calmness more than the control group.
However, more variance is observed in the intervention group.
Both groups have a preference for using the system in the future.
Users in the control group had difficulty defining the system.
They could still self-report their experience throughout the lab study, but "using the system in the future" was vague for them.
Some attributed it to a quiet place to work in, or the office environment, or even the time of the day instead of the placebo version of the BrightBeat.
As a result, we have removed this question from the next rounds of the study as we believe it is not a reliable measure to compare the intervention group against.
Users' feedback was a valuable source of information to improve the system.
User M5 mentioned: "I like the way that it kind of hypnotized me!
It really boosted my focus."
User M13 mentioned: "I would like to try it in a real situation I...I".
There were also constructive comments about increasing the flexibility of the system; M2 said: "It's cool that it reminds me to breathe calmly.
But I want to limit it to a few times in an hour.
M4 mentioned: "The settings were fine, but not the best.
If they were the best, I would have felt much more comfortable with them."
The comfortability of the wearables is very important as M6 stated: "The  band didn't let me breathe as easily as I normally do.
Primary results from the first experiment were promising.
Thus, we made several improvements to the system and planned a larger study.
In summary, we automated the system, minimized interactions between the experimenter and the user, changed parameter setting to make BrightBeat even less perceptible, updated instructions, and engaged auditory and tactile senses along with vision.
This section explains the details of this process and the results of the corresponding studies.
In this round, we highly improved the system design by automating the process and extending BrightBeat to engage other senses besides vision.
We utilized pyzephyr , an open source python library to connect to Zephyr BioHarness via bluetooth.
We have used a subset of modules from pyzephyr.
Through "Protocol" reading the data stream from the device and sending command messages to the device is available.
5-I provides a schematic view of data flow between device and pyzephyr.
Note that the relationship between the BrightBeat module and pyzephyr modules is also depicted.
BrightBeat was triggered whenever the user was above his/her GBR.
Moreover, a second computer was added as the BrightBeat control terminal.
This allowed the experimenter to stay away from the user, log-in to the computer running BrightBeat, and control the procedure.
These automations made it easier for the experimenter, more accurate for BrightBeat delivery, and reduced bias in the data by minimizing interactions between the experimenter and the participant.
Also, BrightBeat evolved to a combination of interventions.
Figure 5-2: Custom wristband with oscillating temperature.
This oscillation would sound like an ocean wave.
Also, we developed a custom thermoelectric cooler  wristband that would alternate between cool and warm temperatures.
This device works based on Peltier effect : when a current is made to flow through a junction between two conductors of different materials, heat may be generated or removed at the junction.
HeatBeat module was developed to control the Peltier device.
HeatBeat would work similarly as the other modules.
The wristband would start from the cool temperature, linearly go up to the warm temperature, then the power source would reverse voltage and it would return to the cool temperature.
The power source would reverse voltage with the same frequency as GBR.
The temperature changes were very subtle and the cool and warm extremes were barely perceptible.
5-2 shows the wristband prototype and circuit schematics.
5-3 summarizes the updated version of the system.
In study 1, some participants became engaged with the music video instead of becoming calmed by it.
Some were more distracted, were fidgeting, or paying attention to the study environment.
As a result, the physiological responses didn't represent a resting state for some of the participants.
As GBR was set according to the relaxation phase, it wasn't a good approximation of resting breathing rate for some of the participants.
Thus, in the second round, we included a short introduction video about meditation followed by a guided breathing exercise to make it easier for participants to reach a relaxed state.
Also, we included 3 tasks with different lengths and difficulty levels.
The content and questions were updated, so that the returning participants from study I weren't familiar with them.
Also, a few questions were added in the beginning of the study for measuring self-efficacy and user's motivation in order to cancel out the effect of such social-cognitive elements on the response to the intervention.
In study 1, users were asked to rate how BrightBeat affected their focus and calmness.
Pre XS: Initial survey and experience sampling.
RI: Relaxation while watching video.
Post XS: exit survey and experience sampling.
This would enable us to account for the variations in initial stress levels and observe how they affected participants to respond differently to the intervention.
The experimental flow is shown in Fig.
Last but not least, we changed the instructions so that the user didn't feel obliged to respond to BrightBeat.
We mentioned that the goal of the study was reading tasks and answering questions, rather than focusing on BrightBeat which is only a reminder for fast breathing: "These oscillating interventions are not there to tell you exactly when to breathe.
You do NOT have to inhale/exhale when it is light/dark, mute/unmute, cold/warm.
Instead, you should just try to focus on your task.
BrightBeat, HeatBeat, and VolumeBeat are not tasks.
They are only gentle reminders to breathe in a way that you think is best to help you do your task."
Given these tweaks, the experiment took 40 to 50 minutes in total.
Figure 5-5: Pilot 2 - A sample user in the control group.
The red horizontal line is the goal breathing rate  of 10 BPM.
GBR is set according to the first relaxation session.
This user is mostly breathing faster than her GBR and only occasionally slows down by taking deep breaths or sighing.
Color codes: green: relaxation, yellow: reading, red: quizzes.
Figures 5-5 and 5-6 show an example user in the control and intervention group respectively.
The first observation when comparing the two plots, is that the control user is mostly breathing much faster than her GBR and only occasionally slowing down by taking deep breaths or sighing.
However, the intervention user is usually below his GBR and sometimes going up during the quizzes where BrightBeat has been off.
However, both users have healthy variability of breathing rate.
5-7 shows the task-by-task performance of the participants.
We show the average difference between the breathing rate and the MBR for each user and each task with one standard deviation error bars.
The red line shows zero.
To visualize the difference more clearly, the points in each group are sorted.
Overall, the intervention group is lower.
This means that the intervention participants have been closer to their relaxed state of breathing compared to their control counterparts.
Figure 5-6: Pilot 2 - A sample user in the intervention group.
The red horizontal line is the goal breathing rate  of 1 I BPM.
GBR is set according to the first relaxation session.
When the user breathes faster than his GBR, BrightBeat appears.
This user is often reaching his GBR except a few times including during the quizzes where BrightBeat has been off.
Color codes: green: relaxation, yellow: reading, red: quizzes.
Figure 5-7: Pilot 2 - The task-by-task average difference between the breathing rate  and the MBR with one standard deviation error bars.
The red line shows zero.
Blue and green points refer to participants in the control and intervention group respectively and are sorted in ascending order.
During the first relaxation task, the average breathing rate is the same as MBR and thus all points fall on the zero line.
In the rest of the tasks, the intervention group is lower.
This means that the intervention participants have been closer to their relaxed state of breathing compared to their control counterparts.
An overall trend is observed which is the intervention group reached their GBR more than the control group even during the tasks where BrightBeat was not presented.
However, the detailed task-by-task difference for control and intervention groups is not significant.
5-9 shows the results aggregated for different types of the tasks.
The intervention group are reaching their GBR more than the control group overall  and during the reading tasks .
The same trend is observed during quizzes and the final relaxation task though not significant.
In order to objectively quantify the influence of BrightBeat on cognitive performance, we have looked at the quiz results.
5-16 shows the bar chart of the average user performance in each group, across different tasks with one standard deviation error bars.
The only significant difference was observed in QI response in which the intervention users performed better than the control users .
However, no other significant difference was observed between the two groups.
This shows that BrightBeat did not negatively impact performance.
However, it is important to mention that many factors influence task performance including the time of the day, the user's fluency in English, and his/her prior knowledge about the task.
Please refer to Appendix B for the content of the reading tasks and quizzes.
1: Pilot 2 - The average user rating .
The highest average number in each row is highlighted in red.
Overall, the intervention users reported higher focus and calmness compared to the control users.
Extremes labels were as follows: * 1: not at all, 7: very much, ** 1: decreased it significantly, 7: increased it significantly, *** 1: stressed me out, 7: calmed me down.
However, we realized users' responses to different intervention mechanisms were completely different.
Among 4 users, I highly preferred the brightness module, I the temperature module, and 2 the volume module.
In this case, averaging the numbers does not provide a good representation.
Instead, clusters of users who preferred a specific type of intervention can be averaged together.
We will conduct a more comprehensive analysis of user feedback in the main study.
After the pilot study, we improved the system and deployed a larger study with more participants .
Modifications include removing the temperature module, updating parameter settings section, and adding experience sampling after each task.
This section explains the details of system design, procedure, and data analysis of this round.
However, the brightness and sound modules where controlled with the same Python code in the BrightBeat main module.
Thus, the brightness and volume oscillations were synced but the temperature change would face unnecessary delays frequently.
Although some of the participants expressed particular interest in the temperature module, we had to remove it from the main study as it could confuse participants.
In total, N=32 participants including undergraduate , graduate , and staff  members of MIT were recruited among which 19 were females and the rest were males.
The experimental procedure was similar to the pilot study, composed of relaxation sessions, reading tasks, and quizzes.
Pre XS: Initial survey and experience sampling.
R1: Relaxation while watching video.
XSO, XS 1, XS 2 , XSj: Experience sampling.
R 2 : Relaxation while reading.
Post XS: exit survey and experience sampling.
In this round, we added experience sampling after each task, as well.
First, it gave us a better and more detailed understanding of how the tasks and BrightBeat affected users' mood.
Also, it allowed us to notice the participants with fluctuating mood reports vs. the ones who maintained a steady mood over the course of the experiment.
This enabled us to account for resilience: someone's ability to maintain their current mood when introduced to a stressful task.
The experimental flow is shown in Fig.
In this round, a few details were changed.
First, we tweaked the instructions.
Besides mentioning that the goal of the study was to focus on the reading tasks and answering quizzes correctly, we stressed BrightBeat as an alternative method of notification which appears when the user is breathing fast and is probably tense.
Thus, it might be helpful to respond to it either by adjusting posture or breathing more slowly and deeply.
Also, we slightly modified the parameter setting section.
Figure 5-13: Main - The task-by-task average difference between the breathing rate  and the MBR with one standard deviation error bars.
The red line shows zero.
Blue and green points refer to participants in the control and intervention group respectively and are sorted in ascending order.
During the first relaxation task, the average breathing rate is the same as MBR and thus all points fall on the zero line.
In the rest of the tasks, the intervention group is lower.
This means that the intervention participants have been closer to their relaxed state of breathing compared to their control counterparts.
Figure 5-13 shows the task-by-task performance of the participants.
We show the average difference between the breathing rate and the MBR for each user and each task with one standard deviation error bars.
The red line shows zero.
Blue and green refer to participants in the control and intervention group respectively.
To visualize the difference more clearly, the points in each group are sorted.
Overall, the intervention group is lower which means they were able to hit their goal more frequently comparing to the control group.
In order to measure how the average participant did in the control and intervention group, we calculated the percentage of the time spent below the GBR during each task for each participant.
Figure 5-15: Main - Percentage of the time achieved the GBR in each task.
The intervention group has significantly achieved its GBR more than the control group during all types of tasks.
Overall: overall except baseline, T: reading tasks, Q: quizzes, R2: relaxing and reading.
No significant difference was observed between the control and intervention groups.
This shows that BrightBeat did not negatively impact performance.
However, it is important to mention that many factors influence task performance including the time of the day, the user's fluency in English, and his/her prior knowledge about the task.
Please refer to Appendix B for the content of the reading tasks and quizzes.
Table 5.2: Main - The average user rating .
The highest average number in each row is highlighted in red.
Overall, the intervention users reported higher focus and calmness compared to the control users.
Extremes labels were as follows: *1: not at all, 7: very much, ** 1: decreased it significantly, 7: increased it significantly, ***1: stressed me out, 7: calmed me down.
Analysis of self-reported measurements Table 5.2 shows the summary of user ratings.
The highest average number in each row is highlighted in red.
Overall, the intervention group reported improvements in focus and calmness compared to the control group.
Among different BrightBeat components, the response to the oscillating volume has been the most positive.
However, we observed different preferences among users for the visual and auditory components.
Some preferred a specific intervention type for the future and some rated both the visual and the auditory elements the same.
Table 5.3 averages the results for the favorite type of the intervention.
Overall, 3 participants greatly favored the visual component.
12 greatly favored the auditory component.
The remaining 4 rated both components the same.
Consequently, the overall rating for the visual component is based on N=7 users  and the auditory component based on N= 16 users .
Table 5.3: Main - The average user rating for the participants with the preferred type of intervention .
Overall, the intervention users reported the preferred intervention to improve their focus and calmness compared to the control users.
Extremes labels were as follows: *1: not at all, 7: very much, ** 1: decreased it significantly, 7: increased it significantly, ***1: stressed me out, 7: calmed me down.
User feedback As mentioned earlier, our goal was to simulate a stressful task and analyze the effectiveness of BrightBeat in that context.
Users' comments confirmed the stressful nature of the task in different ways: "The content of the articles was difficult to digest in such a short time without prior knowledge..."; "The timed reading and tests made me more stressed out.
However, there were interesting insights about how different components of BrightBeat could help focus.
Specially, users mentioned it was mostly attracting attention when they were distracted and it helped them regain focus: "The subtle changes were helpful at keeping my focus.
I would appreciate the use of this during the work day, but especially times when I'm feeling distracted."
Another user mentioned: "I was only aware of subtle changes on the screen a couple of times, I think I became more aware of it the more distracted I was."
Another user said: "The screen brightness was noticeable and helpful as a reminder...".
Also, users mentioned the calming effect of BrightBeat, specifically the volume component.
I often work with "noisli" playing in my headphones, even with music from time to time."
Another user said: "The soothing sounds were great".
We have designed and written BrightBeat software.
We have built and tested entirely new kinds of interventions in the form of oscillation of screen brightness, headphone volume, and wristband temperature.
We have evaluated these interventions through rigorous user testing.
We have carried out a series of studies to explore the potential of bringing mindfulness to everyday activities through mindless computing and testing the hypothesis of physiological synchrony while interacting with technology.
We showed that the participants in the intervention group were closer to the breathing rate in their relaxed state and had significantly lower relative breathing rate.
Also, the intervention users reported higher calmness.
We provided a successful example of behavior change intervention that does not require constant attention.
The interventions were scalable, respectful of users' privacy, and did not demand attention and thus, could run alongside users' primary attentional task.
In fact, they improved self-reported focus rather than distracting the user from his/her primary task.
They also didn't affect the user's performance in the reading tasks and quizzes.
Our plan was not to design a one-size-fits-all solution, but instead respect users' differences and preferences.
We originally planned to measure breathing using personal electronic devices to make BrightBeat more scalable.
For example, using the laptop camera, respiration rate can be extracted from the subtle color changes of the skin .
Also, using smartphone's built-in accelerometer, subtle motion changes can be captured and analyzed to provide respiration rate .
However, these methods are prone to motion artifacts and thus, we utilized a commercial sensor, Zephyr, to capture physiological data more reliably.
In the future, a more robust method using camera or motion data analysis can replace the current sensor and highly improve the scalability of this work.
In order to measure the effectiveness of BrightBeat, we simulated a situation resembling everyday work-related stress.
This allowed us to keep all the variables constant except the intervention and compare participants through the same situation of reading tasks and quizzes.
However, people's response in real life situations may be different.
Thus, future studies in real life settings will strengthen our analyses.
In this thesis, we have mostly focused on the breathing rate.
However, the breathing pattern can also be further explored.
For example, Diest et al.
They showed that lower i/e ratio was associated with relaxation, stress reduction, mindfulness, and positive energy .
In the future, we would like to explore the role of i/e ratio in the effectiveness of the intervention.
Also, more detailed analysis on respiration signal can be conducted including inter-breath intervals and frequency analysis.
For example, we have gathered EDA on both wrists in the main study.
Posture data gathered from Zephyr can be analyzed to see if there's a relation between breathing and posture and if BrightBeat indirectly affected posture.
Also, given ECG from Zephyr and BVP from E4 wristbands, breathing in relation to heart functions can be studied.
Figure A-i: Pilot I - Box plot of breathing rate for each individual in control and intervention groups.
The individual MBRs are written on top of the plots.
The red squares show the mean in each task for each user.
This plot gives a more detailed view of participants breathing rates during several tasks.
Figure A-2: Pilot 2 - Normalized amplitude versus breathing rate for each user.
The individual MBRs are written on top of the plots.
The intervention users have points under lower rate and higher amplitude that stand out from majority of the points.
However, for the control users, higher amplitude points have higher relative rate.
Figure A-3: Pilot 2 - Box plot of breathing rate for each individual in control and intervention groups.
The individual MBRs are written on top of the plots.
The red squares show the mean in each task for each user.
This plot gives a more detailed view of participants breathing rates during several tasks.
Figure A-6: Main - Box plot of breathing rate for each individual in control and intervention groups.
The individual MBRs are written on top of the plots.
The red squares show the mean in each task for each user.
This plot gives a more detailed view of participants breathing rates during several tasks.
Figure A-8: Main - Timeline of self-reported calmness, focus, and valence throughout the experiment.
Each point is a number between 1  and 7 .
These self-reported measures have been sampled before the session, after the original relaxation task, after each of the three reading+quizzes, and at the end of the session.
The intervention group has reported higher improvements on self-reported focus and calmness.
Figure A-I 1: Main - Normalized histogram of future usage preference for the intervention group.
Most users have either preferred or been neutral about the different BrightBeat components.
However, the overall response to the volume component is more positive with a peak on high preference on future usage.
The response to the brightness component is more bimodal, with a peak around neutral and a peak around high preference for future usage.
Title of Study Regulating breathing and posture by an unobtrusive desktop application 2.
Principal Investigator Name: Rosalind W. Picard Building and Room #:E14-348A Title: Professor Email: picard@media.mit.edu Department: Media Arts and Sciences Phone: 617.253.0611 3.
Key Personnel All key personnel' including the P1 must be listed below, with a briefstatement of qualifications andstudy role.
MIT key personnel include all individuals who contribute in a substantive way to the execution and monitoring of the study at or on behalf of MIT or affiliated institutions.
Typically, these individuals have doctoral or other professional degrees, although other individuals may be included.
In particular, investigators and staff involved in obtaining informed consent are considered key personnel.
If at MIT please indicate where on campus.
Ifyou plan to use the facilities of the ClinicalResearch Centeryou will need to obtain approval of the MIT Catalyst ClinicalResearch Center.
If the researchis funded by an outside sponsor, please enclose one copy of the researchproposal with your application.
A draft of the researchproposal is acceptable.
Do not leave this section blank.
Ifyour projectis not funded check No Funding.
This supplemen, together with detailed guidance on this sulject and definitions of the highlighted terms, is available in the COUHES site under Policies & Proceduresin the FinancialConflicts of Inleresi section.
All study personnel MUST take and pass a trainingcourse on human subjects research.
MIT has a web-based course that can be accessed from the main menu of the COUHES web site.
COUHES may acceptproofof training from some other institutions.
List the names of all study personneland indicate if they have taken a human subjects training course.
Pleaseprovide a concise statement of the background, nature and reasons for the proposed study.
Use non-technicallanguage that can be understood by non-scientist members of COUHES.
Deep breathing has been scientifically proven to affect the heart, brain, digestive system, and the immune system.
It can have a profound effect on our health and physiology.
Besides, research has shown that high-power postures, even for as short as two minutes, can increase testosterone and decrease cortisol hormones.
This can be interpreted as higher confidence and lower stress level.
Though there are many scientific clues to the profound health effects of deep breathing and high power postures, there's a lack of conscious attention to them throughout the day.
We believe designing a technology to promote this behavior has a positive effect on health and wellbeing.
Nowadays, many people are spending a significant amount of time sitting in front of screens.
This makes screens great candidates for providing visual feedback.
If they can promote a healthier posture and regulate breathing rate/pattern, they can highly affect wellbeing.
Visual ambient feedback has long been studied and is proved to be effective.
It has been explored in desktop screens, smartphones, and even external objects, ranging from ambient interactive wallpapers to pop-op notifications.
However, our aim is designing an intervention that is unobtrusive and doesn't keep people from doing their primary work.
Something that doesn't need extra attention so that users can keep it running for longer hours in order to take advantage of the positive health-related outcomes without sacrificing their attention.
In order to find the best trade-off between efficacy and obtrusiveness of the intervention, we have designed a controlled study comparing traditional superliminal visual feedback to a more sub-liminal feedback and how they will receive feedback in control, superliminal, or subliminal group.
A control group is also included.
All groups are informed about the details beforehand.
The first includes showing breathing rate and posture on the periphery of the screen using visualization techniques that have been used in the literature for the same or similar goals.
The latter includes showing similar feedback full screen, but only on a few frames out of a second.
The frame rate is higher to be recognized consciously, but is proved to have subliminal influence.
Visual and auditory masking has been researched and used to adopt healthy behaviors.
It has been effective in several contexts including boosting academic performance and learning capacity, helping quit smoking, losing weight and healthy eating.
For biomedical, engineering and related research, pleaseprovide an outline of the actual experiments to be performed.
Where applicable,provide a detailed description of the experimental devices or procedures to be used, detailed information on the exact dosages of drugs or chemicals to be used, total quantity of blood samples to be used, and descriptionsof special diets.
Forapplications in the social sciences, management and other non-biomedical disciplines pleaseprovide a detailed description ofyour proposed study.
Where applicable, include copies of any questionnairesor standardizedtests you plan to incorporateinto your study.
Ifyour study involves interviews please submit an outline indicatingthe types of questionsyou will include.
You shouldprovide sufficient informationfor effective review by non-scientist members of COUHES.
Define all abbreviationsand use simple words.
Unlessjustification is providedfor additionallength, this partof the applicationmust not exceed 5 pages.
Attaching sections of a grantapplicationis not an acceptablesubstitutefor a descriptionofyour study as requested here.
Logging screen usage and providing feedback with a desktop application There are 5 types of applications:  Control: The app will only log the screen usage.
In other terms, it will record when the screen was turned on and when turned off/dimmed.
It will also show recommended postures.
The visual feedback happens only on a few frames out of many.
This means it will not be recognized consciously.
It also barely perceptably oscilates the brightness of the screen, and the volume of the speaker.
Participants will be randomly assigned to a category and will be given the respective application.
The details of each version of application will be fully explained to them before starting the study.
Logging breathing, posture, Electrocardiogram , and electrodermal activity  through commercially available wearable devices Participants are asked to wear tracker sensors throughout the day and charge them during the night for the course of three weeks.
They are instructed how to download data from their device.
We will send daily emails to them and provide them with the link to upload their data to the portal.
The sensors should be returned after the study is over.
Spire, and Zephyr, and Empatica E4 for the biosignal measurements.
They are all commercially available and approved trackers.
As there are several sensors coming out every day, in case we find more accurate and easier to wear devices, we may substitute them for measurement.
There is a short-term and a long-term version of the study.
Participants will either join the former or the latter: 1.
Long-term study: Participation time for the entire study is three weeks.
The first week is the same for all groups and used for measurement and getting the baseline of physiology in participants.
Feedback will be added to the intervention groups in the second and third weeks of the study.
Short-term study: Participants follow the same protocol but only under a 40-minutes lab study.
Also, they will wear a thermo-electric cooler wristband that provides a barely perceptable temperature change.
There's no possible risk in using thermo-electric cooler.
The voltage is regulated by a heat sink.
It is used in commercial products like Wristify and has proved to have no harm.
If the study involves the administrationof an investigationaldrug that is not approved by the Food and DrugAdministration  for the use outlined in the protocol, then the principalinvestigator  must obtain an InvestigationalNew Drug  numberfrom the FDA.
If the study involves the use of an approved drug in an unapprovedway the investigator  must submit an applicationfor an IND number.
Please attach a copy of the IND approval , or application .
If the study involves the use of an investigationalmedical device and COUHES determines the device poses significantrisk to human subjects, the investigator  must obtain an investigationalDevice and Equipment number from the FDA.
Will drugs or biological agents requiring an IND be used?
YES NO Ifyes, pleaseprovide details: Will an investigational medical device be used?
Radiation If the study uses radiationor radioactivematerials it may also have to be approved by the Committee on RadiationExposure to Human Subjects .
COUHES will determine ifyou need COREHS approval.
Are any inclusion or exclusion criteria based on age, gender, or race/ethnic origin?
No vulnerable populations will be included.
Students may be recruited from the MIT, only if they follow the above guidelines.
Subject recruitment Identificationand recruitment of subjects must be ethically and legally acceptableandfree of coercion.
Describe below what methods will be used to identify and recruitsubjects.
We intend to recruit individuals from MIT students and staff.
They will be approached via email and the Media Lab's internal messaging platforms.
Please attach a copy of any advertisements/ notices and letters to potential subjects 3.
Subject compensation Payment must be reasonable in relation to the time and trouble associatedwith participating in the study.
It cannot constitute an undue inducement to participate.
The participant compensation is proportional to their compliance to the study.
Registration counts for $3.5 and measurements for each day add $1.5 where each source of data counts for $0.5.
The sources include two provided sensors  and the application.
Upon finishing the study successfully, they will earn an extra $15.
For the short-term study: Participants will receive a $15 Amazon giftcard.
Will subjects be reimbursed for travel and expenses?
The study will not demand travel nor should cause expenses to the subjects.
A risk is a potential harm that a reasonableperson would consider important in deciding whether to participatein research.
Risks can be categorizedas physical, psychological, sociological, economic and legal, and includepain, stress, invasion ofprivacy, embarrassmentor exposure of sensitive or confidential data.
All potential risks and discomforts must be minimized to the greatest extent possible by using e.g., appropriatemonitoring, safety devices and withdrawal of a subject if there is evidence of a specific adverse event.
What are the risks / discomforts associated with each intervention or procedure in the study?
Participants may not be used to wearing trackers throughout the day.
This may be uncomfortable at first.
However, particpation is fully voluntarily and participants can drop any time they felt discomfort.
What procedures will be in place to prevent / minimize potential risks or discomfort?
In this case, subjects will be reminded that participation is absolutely voluntary, and that they can drop at any time throughout the study.
All investigators will be available throughout the study to address any concern participants may have.
Potential benefits What potential benefits may subjects receive from participating in the study?
Subjects will receive up to $50 Amazon gift cards in the long-term study and $15 Amazon gift cards in the short-term study.
Also, they have the opportunity to use a novel interface to regulate their breathing as well as wearing newly available fitness/wellbeing trackers, Spire, and Zephyr.
Furthermore, they may appreciate contribution to research that can help develop methods to promote healthier posture and breathing and overall wellbeing.
What potential benefits can society expect from the study?
Novel, unobtrusive, non-invasive methods for changing people's breathing pattern and posture for the better will positively affect long-term wellbeing of the society.
Data collection, storage, and confidentiality How will data be collected?
Data will be recorded via three main procedures:  The application will record screen on/off times and record the times the intervention is running along with timestamp.
Only breathing rate is used in this study.
Will data be associated with personal identifiers or will it be coded?
Personal identifiers M Coded EExplain the procedures you plan to follow.
All data gathered from a subject will be associated with a number, which will be kept separately from her/his name.
No information, such as name or other private identifying information will be included in any material that will be published.
Where will the data be stored and how will it be secured?
All the data will be annonymized and accessed only by the investigators and will be cleaned from identifiers.
No materials that identify the subjects will be released to publication without disguising the individuals.
What will happen to the data when the study is completed?
The data will only be available to the investigators for further reference.
Collected data is raw ECG, breathing, and acceleration data along with app usage.
The data are fully de-identified and will not affect a subject's relationship with other individuals.
Deception Investigators must not exclude informationfrom a subject that a reasonable person would want to know in deciding whether to participatein a study.
Will information about the research purpose and design be withheld from subjects?
YES NOE If YES, explain and justify.
Serious or unexpected adverse reactionsor injuriesmust be reportedto COUHES within 48 hours.
Other adverse events should be reportedwithin 10 working days.
What follow-up efforts will be made to detect any harm to subjects, and how will COUHES be kept informed?
Investigators will be available throughout the entire study to be contacted by participants and report any adverse effects directly to COUHES.
Documented informed consent must be obtainedfrom allparticipants in studies that involve human subjects.
You must use the templates availableon the COUHES website to preparetheseforms.
Draft informed consentforms must be returnedwith this application.
Under certain very limited circumstances COUHES may waive the requirementfor informed consent.
Attach informed consent forms with this application.
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act .
MIT Health Plan or another healthcareprovider, then you must complete the questions below because HIPAA likely applies to your study.
Formore information regardingthe applicabilityof HIPAA to human subjects research, please click here.
Do you plan to obtain, use or disclose identifiable health information in connection with your research study?
YES F-1 NOIE If YES, then allparticipantsmust complete an Authorization for Release of ProtectedHealth Information Form.
Please attach a copy of this draftform.
You must use the template available on the COUHES website.
Alternatively, COUHES may grant a Waiver ofAuthorization in certain verV limited circumstances when use of individually identifiablehealth information would pose only minimal risk to study participants.
Foradditionalinformation regarding whether your study might qualify for a waiver, please click here.
Are you requesting a Waiver of Authorization?
In addition, please explain your planfor  ensuring the participanthealth information is not improperly used or disclosed either within MIT or to any outside thirdparties and  destroying identifiers at the earliestpossible opportunity.
If YES, you do not need to obtain a signed Authorization for Release of ProtectedHealth Information Form from study participants.
Note, however, that ifyou receive identifiable participanthealth information that you plan to convert into de-identified information for use by other researchers, then you must obtain a signed Authorizationfor Release of ProtectedHealth information Form from each participantbefore receiving their identifiable health information for use in your study.
If YES, andyou will receive identifiableparticipanthealth information that you plan to convert into limited data set formfor use by other researchers, then you must obtain a signed Authorizationfor Release of ProtectedHealth Information Formfrom each participantbefore receiving their identifiable health information for use in your study.
You must complete a formal data use agreement in orderfor your application to be approved..
INVESTIGATOR'S ASSURANCE I certify the information provided in this application is complete and correct.
I understand that I have ultimate responsibility for the conduct of the study, the ethical performance of the project, the protection of the rights and welfare of human subjects, and strict adherence to any stipulations imposed by COUHES I agree to comply with all MIT policies, as well all federal, state and local laws on the protection of human subjects in research, including: * ensuring all study personnel satisfactorily complete human subjects training; * performing the study according to the approved protocol; * implementing no changes in the approved study without COUHES approval; * obtaining informed consent from subjects using only the currently approved consent form; * protecting identifiable health information, to the extent required by law, in accordance with HIPAA requirements; and - promptly reporting significant or untoward adverse effects.
The amendment to the above-referenced protocol has been APPROVED following expedited review by the Committee on the Use of Humans as Experimental Subjects .
This approval covers the following change/modification: -A short-term version of the study is being added in which participants interact with the system through a lab-study composed of pre-defined tasks  compared to the original long-term study .
Heatl3eat will also be introduced using thermocooling wristband for providing barely perceptible temperature change on the wrist.
If the research involves collaboration with another institution then the research cannot commence until COUHES receives written notification of approval from the collaborating institution's IRB, It is the Principal Investigator's responsibility to obtain review and continued approval before the expiration date.
Please allow sufficient time for continued approval.
You may not continue any research activity beyond the expiration date without COUHES approval.
Failure to receive approval for continuation before the expiration date will result in the automatic suspension of the approval of this protocol.
Information collected following suspension is unapproved research and cannot be reported or published as research data.
If you do not wish continued approval, please notify the Committee of the study termination.
Adverse Events: Any serious or unexpected adverse event must be reported to COUHES within 48 hours.
All other adverse events should be reported in writing within 10 working days.
Amendments: Any changes to the protocol that impact human subjects, including changes in experimental design, equipment, personnel or funding, must be approved by COUHES before they can be initiated.
Prospecitve new study personnel must, where applicable, complete training in human subjects research and in the HIPAA Privacy Rule before participating in the study.
You are asked to participate in a research study conducted by Asma Ghandeharioun and Rosalind Picard, Sc.D.
You were selected as a possible participant in this study because of the collaborative nature of your professional work and your willingness to test new technologies.
You should read the information below, and ask questions about anything you do not understand, before deciding whether or not to participate.
Your participation in this study is completely voluntary and you are free to choose whether to be in it or not.
If you choose to be in this study, you may subsequently withdraw from it at any time without penalty or consequences of any kind.
The investigator may withdraw you from this research if circumstances arise which warrant doing so.
To participate, you should be 18 years or older and not have any ongoing medical condition  and also not be on any drug regimen.
Deep breathing and good posture have been scientifically proven to affect health and wellbeing positively.
Thus, we aim at designing a technology to promote these behaviors without the need of continuous effort and concious attention throughout the day.
In this study, we will compare three conditions that are explained in the next section.
If you volunteer to participate in this study, we would ask you to do the following things: 1.
Engage in a series of relaxation, reading, and questions tasks You will be given a link to a test composed of two reading tasks and questions.
The readings are selected from scientific articles about reasearch on improving wellbeing.
Respond to the BrightBeat intervention BrightBeat is an intervention that appears when you are breathing faster than your goal.
We ask you to sync your breathing with the BrightBeat.
You will randomly be assigned to a category to either receive this intervention as it is or another version which is below the level of perception.
Wear the Zephyr sensor throughout the experiment We ask you to wear the Zephyr BioHarness chestband.
The sensor should be returned after the study is over.
Fill in a survey at the end of the study We ask you to fill out an exit survey which includes questions about the usability of the app and your user experience.
You will have the opportunity to use a novel interface to regulate your breathing and posture to improve your wellbeing as well as wearing newly available fitness trackers.
Furthermore, you may appreciate that you are contributing to research that can help develop methods to promote more healthy breathing and overall wellbeing.
During the course of the study, you will be informed of any significant new findings , such as changes in the risks or benefits resulting from participation in the research or new alternatives to participation, that might cause you to change your mind about continuing in the study.
If new information is provided to you, your consent to continue participating in this study will be re-obtained.
If you feel you have suffered an injury, which may include emotional trauma, as a result of participating in this study, please contact the person in charge of the study as soon as possible.
In the event you suffer such an injury, M.I.T.
In any case, neither the offer to provide medical assistance, nor the actual provision of medical services shall be considered an admission of fault or acceptance of liability.
Your insurance carrier may be billed for the cost of emergency transport or medical treatment, if such services are determined not to be directly related to your participation in this study.
You are not waiving any legal claims, rights or remedies because of your participation in this research study.
If you feel you have been treated unfairly, or you have questions regarding your rights as a research subject, you may contact the Chairman of the Committee on the Use of Humans as Experimental Subjects, M.I.T., Room E25-143B, 77 Massachusetts Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, phone 1-617-253 6787.
You are asked to participate in a research study conducted by Asma Ghandeharioun and Rosalind Picard, Sc.D.
You were selected as a possible participant in this study because of the collaborative nature of your professional work and your willingness to test new technologies.
You should read the information below, and ask questions about anything you do not understand, before deciding whether or not to participate.
Your participation in this study is completely voluntary and you are free to choose whether to be in it or not.
If you choose to be in this study, you may subsequently withdraw from it at any time without penalty or consequences of any kind.
The investigator may withdraw you from this research if circumstances arise which warrant doing so.
To participate, you should be 18 years or older and not have any ongoing medical condition  and also not be on any drug regimen.
Deep breathing has been scientifically proven to affect health and wellbeing positively.
Thus, we aim at designing a technology to promote these behaviors without the need of continuous effort and concious attention throughout the day.
In this study, we will compare different conditions that are explained in the next section.
If you volunteer to participate in this study, we would ask you to do the following things: For the short-term study: 1.
Engage in a series of relaxation, reading, and questions tasks You will be given a link to a test composed of reading tasks and questions.
The readings are selected from scientific articles about research on improving wellbeing.
You will be given a subset of interventions including BrightBeat, HeatBeat, and VolumeBeat that appear when you are breathing faster than your goal.
BrightBeat changes your screen brightness in a barely perceptible way.
VolumeBeat does the same with the volume.
HeatBeat does the same on a thermo-cooling wristband you are wearing.
These oscilating interventions are not there to tell you exactly when to breathe.
You do NOT have to inhale/exhale when it is light/dark, mute/unmute, cold/warm.
Instead, you should just try to focus on your task.
BrightBeat, HeatBeat, and VolumeBeat are not tasks.
They are only gentle reminders to breathe in a way that you think is best to help you do your task.
We ask you to wear the Zephyr Bioharness chestband and Empatica E4 sensor and a thermocooling wristband.
The sensors should be returned after the study is over.
Fill in a survey at the beginign and end of the study We ask you to fill out an exit survey which includes questions about the usability of the app and your user experience.
For the long-term study: If you volunteer to participate in this study, we would ask you to do the following things: 1.
Install an app on your desktop There are 5 types of application:  The app will only log your screen usage.
In other terms, it will record when the screen was turned on and when turned off/dimmed.
It will also show recommended postures.
The visual feedback happens only on a few frames out of many.
This means you will not recognize that conciously.
You will be randomly assigned to a category and will be given the respective application.
The details of your version of application will be fully explained to you before starting the study.
Wear E4 and Zephyr sensor throughout the study We ask you to wear these two sensors throughout the day and charge them during the night for the course of three weeks.
You are instructed how to download data from your device.
We will send daily emails to you and provide you with the link to upload your data to the portal.
The sensors should be returned after the study is over.
Fill in surveys at the beginning and end of the study We ask you to fill out a scientifically verified wellbeing questionnaire at the begning and end of the study.
The exit survey will include questions about the usability of the app and user experience, too.
You will have the opportunity to use a novel interface to regulate your breathing to improve your wellbeing as well as wearing newly available fitness trackers.
Furthermore, you may appreciate that you are contributing to research that can help develop methods to promote more healthy breathing and overall wellbeing.
For the short-term study: You will receive a $15 amazon giftcard for your participation.
For the long-term study: You will receive an Amazon gift card of up to $50.
Details of payment are provided in the next section.
For the long-term study: You will receive an Amazon gift card of up to $50.
You will earn a flat amount of $3.5 by only registration and filling out start and end of the study surveys.
For each day of data you provide including E4, zephyr, and running the application on your desktop, you will earn an extra $1.5.
Upon finishing the study successfully, you will earn an extra $15.
In total, if you complete the 21 days of usage, you can earn up to $50.
Any information that is obtained in connection with this study and that can be identified with you will remain confidential and will be disclosed only with your permission or as required by law.
When the results of the research are published or discussed in conferences, no information will be included that would reveal your identity.
All the data gathered from you will be associated with a number, which will be kept separately from your name.
During the course of the study, you will be informed of any significant new findings , such as changes in the risks or benefits resulting from participation in the research or new alternatives to participation, that might cause you to change your mind about continuing in the study.
If new information is provided to you, your consent to continue participating in this study will be re-obtained.
If you feel you have suffered an injury, which may include emotional trauma, as a result of participating in this study, please contact the person in charge of the study as soon as possible.
In the event you suffer such an injury, M.I.T.
In any case, neither the offer to provide medical assistance, nor the actual provision of medical services shall be considered an admission of fault or acceptance of liability.
Your insurance carrier may be billed for the cost of emergency transport or medical treatment, if such services are determined not to be directly related to your participation in this study.
You are not waiving any legal claims, rights or remedies because of your participation in this research study.
If you feel you have been treated unfairly, or you have questions regarding your rights as a research subject, you may contact the Chairman of the Committee on the Use of Humans as Experimental Subjects, M.I.T., Room E25-143B, 77 Massachusetts Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, phone 1-617-253 6787.
You are asked to participate in a research study conducted by Asma Ghandeharioun and Rosalind Picard, Sc.D.
You were selected as a possible participant in this study because of the collaborative nature of your professional work and your willingness to test new technologies.
You should read the information below, and ask questions about anything you do not understand, before deciding whether or not to participate.
Your participation in this study is completely voluntary and you are free to choose whether to be in it or not.
If you choose to be in this study, you may subsequently withdraw from it at any time without penalty or consequences of any kind.
The investigator may withdraw you from this research if circumstances arise which warrant doing so.
To participate, you should be 18 years or older and not have any ongoing medical condition  and also not be on any drug regimen.
Deep breathing has been scientifically proven to affect health and wellbeing positively.
Thus, we aim at designing a technology to promote these behaviors without the need of continuous effort and concious attention throughout the day.
In this study, we will compare different conditions that are explained in the next section.
If you volunteer to participate in this study, we would ask you to do the following things: For the short-term study: 1.
Engage in a series of relaxation, reading, and questions tasks You will be given a link to a test composed of reading tasks and questions.
The readings are selected from scientific articles about research on improving wellbeing.
You will be given a subset of interventions including BrightBeat and VolumeBeat that appear when you are breathing faster than your goal.
BrightBeat changes your screen brightness in a barely perceptible way.
VolumeBeat does the same with the volume.
These oscilating interventions are not there to tell you exactly when to breathe.
You do NOT have to inhale/exhale when it is light/dark, mute/unmute, cold/warm.
Instead, you should just try to focus on your task.
BrightBeat and VolumeBeat are not tasks.
They are only gentle reminders to breathe in a way that you think is best to help you do your task.
However, you might find it helpful to pay attention to them and let them guide you toward deep and slow breathing.
We ask you to wear the Zephyr Bioharness chestband and Empatica E4 sensor and a thermocooling wristband.
The sensors should be returned after the study is over.
Fill in a survey at the beginign and end of the study We ask you to fill out an exit survey which includes questions about the usability of the app and your user experience.
For the long-term study: If you volunteer to participate in this study, we would ask you to do the following things: 1.
Install an app on your desktop There are 5 types of application:  The app will only log your screen usage.
In other terms, it will record when the screen was turned on and when turned off/dimmed.
It will also show recommended postures.
The visual feedback happens only on a few frames out of many.
This means you will not recognize that conciously.
The details of your version of application will be fully explained to you before starting the study.
Wear E4 and Zephyr sensor throughout the study We ask you to wear these two sensors throughout the day and charge them during the night for the course of three weeks.
You are instructed how to download data from your device.
We will send daily emails to you and provide you with the link to upload your data to the portal.
The sensors should be returned after the study is over.
Fill in surveys at the beginning and end of the study We ask you to fill out a scientifically verified wellbeing questionnaire at the begning and end of the study.
The exit survey will include questions about the usability of the app and user experience, too.
You will have the opportunity to use a novel interface to regulate your breathing to improve your wellbeing as well as wearing newly available fitness trackers.
Furthermore, you may appreciate that you are contributing to research that can help develop methods to promote more healthy breathing and overall wellbeing.
For the short-term study: You will receive a $15 amazon giftcard for your participation.
For the long-term study: You will receive an Amazon gift card of up to $50.
Details of payment are provided in the next section.
For the short-term study: You will receive a $15 Amazon giftcard.
For the long-term study: You will receive an Amazon gift card of up to $50.
You will earn a flat amount of $3.5 by only registration and filling out start and end of the study surveys.
For each day of data you provide including E4, zephyr, and running the application on your desktop, you will earn an extra $1.5.
Upon finishing the study successfully, you will earn an extra $15.
In total, if you complete the 21 days of usage, you can earn up to $50.
Any information that is obtained in connection with this study and that can be identified with you will remain confidential and will be disclosed only with your permission or as required by law.
When the results of the research are published or discussed in conferences, no information will be included that would reveal your identity.
All the data gathered from you will be associated with a number, which will be kept separately from your name.
During the course of the study, you will be informed of any significant new findings , such as changes in the risks or benefits resulting from participation in the research or new alternatives to participation, that might cause you to change your mind about continuing in the study.
If new information is provided to you, your consent to continue participating in this study will be re-obtained.
If you feel you have suffered an injury, which may include emotional trauma, as a result of participating in this study, please contact the person in charge of the study as soon as possible.
In the event you suffer such an injury, M.I.T.
In any case, neither the offer to provide medical assistance, nor the actual provision of medical services shall be considered an admission of fault or acceptance of liability.
Your insurance carrier may be billed for the cost of emergency transport or medical treatment, if such services are determined not to be directly related to your participation in this study.
You are not waiving any legal claims, rights or remedies because of your participation in this research study.
If you feel you have been treated unfairly, or you have questions regarding your rights as a research subject, you may contact the Chairman of the Committee on the Use of Humans as Experimental Subjects, M.I.T., Room E25-143B, 77 Massachusetts Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, phone 1-617-253 6787.
Sleep between encoding and retrieval, relative to wakefulness, promotes memory storage in some circumstances, perhaps from internally generated memory reactivation .
Moreover, reinstating a learning context  during slow-wave sleep enhances retrieval of spatial information learned in that context .
It remains unclear whether exposure during sleep to cues associated with newly learned information can selectively enhance the storage of individual memories.
Certain associations may be preferentially reactivated during sleep as a normal part of memory stabilization and consolidation.
Whereas opportunities for enhancement of memory storage may be available every time we sleep, reminders during sleep can be used to target the reactivation and strengthening of individual memories.
Accuracy at the final stage of learning was matched for objects subsequently cued or not cued by the sounds .
Vertex brain potentials differed according to level of forgetting for corresponding object locations.
Better spatial-location retention for cued compared with uncued objects was reflected by a smaller change in error .
Average EEG amllitudes measured over the interval finom 600 to 1000 ins after sound onset were 15.3 pV greater when there was less forgetting .
While asleep, people heard sounds that had earlier been associated with objects at specific spatial locations.
Upon waking, they recalled these locations more accurately than other locations for which no reminder cues were provided.
Consolidation thus operates during sleep with high specificity and is subject to systematic influences through simple auditory stimulation.
We need to consistently keep a posture for a long time to experience its physiological, psychological, and behavioral change.
Posing a powerful posture for a few minutes can cause a physiological change, but no psychological or behavioral change.
Posing a powerful posture for a few minutes can cause a psychological and behavioral change, but no pshysiological change.
Our posture can change our sense of power/powerlessness physically, pshycologicaly, and behaviorally even for as short as a few minutes.
Abstract Humans and other animals express power through open, expansive postures, and they express powerlessness through closed, contractive postures.
But can these postures actually cause power?
The results of this study confirmed our prediction that posing in high-power nonverbal displays  would cause neuroendocrine and behavioral changes for both male and female participants: High-power posers experienced elevations in testosterone, decreases in cortisol, and increased feelings of power and tolerance for risk; low-power posers exhibited the opposite pattern.
In short, posing in displays of power caused advantaged and adaptive psychological, physiological, and behavioral changes, and these findings suggest that embodiment extends beyond mere thinking and feeling, to physiology and subsequent behavioral choices.
That a person can, by assuming two simple I-min poses, embody power and instantly become more powerful has real-world, actionable implications.
The proud peacock fans his tail feathers in pursuit of a mate.
By galloping sideways, the cat manipulates an intruder's perception of her size.
The chimpanzee, asserting his hierarchical rank, holds his breath until his chest bulges.
The executive in the boardroom crests the table with his feet, fingers interlaced behind his neck, elbows pointing outward.
Humans and other animals display power and dominance through expansive nonverbal displays, and these power poses are deeply intertwined with the evolutionary selection of what is "alpha" .
What happens when displays of power are posed?
Can posed displays cause a person to feel more powerful?
Do people's mental and physiological systems prepare them to be more powerful?
The goal of our research was to test whether high-power poses  actually produce power.
To perform this test, we looked at the effects of high-power and low-power poses on some fundamental features of having power: feelings of power, elevation of the dominance hormone testosterone, lowering of the stress hormone cortisol, and an increased tolerance for risk.
Powerful individuals  demonstrate greater willingness to engage in action  and often show increased risk-taking behavior' .
The neuroendocrine profiles of the powerful differentiate them from the powerless, on two key hormones-testosterone and cortisol.
For example, testosterone rises in anticipation of a competition and as a result of a win, but drops following a defeat , and these changes predict the desire to compete again .
In short, testosterone levels, by reflecting and reinforcing dominance, are closely linked to adaptive responses to challenges.
Power is also linked to the stress hormone cortisol: Power holders show lower basal cortisol levels and lower cortisol reactivity to stressors than powerless people do, and cortisol drops as power is achieved .
Although short-term and acute cortisol elevation is part of an adaptive response to challenges large  and small , the chronically elevated cortisol levels seen in low-power individuals are associated with negative health consequences, such as impaired immune functioning, hypertension, and memory loss .
Low-power social groups have a higher incidence of stress-related illnesses than high-power social groups do, and this is partially attributable to chronically elevated cortisol .
Thus, the power holder's typical neuroendocrine profile of high testosterone coupled with low cortisol-a profile linked to such outcomes as disease resistance  and leadership abilities -appears to be optimally adaptive.
It is unequivocal that power is expressed through highly specific, evolved nonverbal displays.
Expansive, open postures  project high power, whereas contractive, closed postures  project low power.
All of these patterns have been identified in research on actual and attributed power and its nonverbal correlates .
Although researchers know that power generates these displays, no research has investigated whether these displays generate power.
Will posing these displays of power actually cause individuals to feel more powerful, focus on reward as opposed to risk, and experience increases in testosterone and decreases in cortisol?
In research on embodied cognition, some evidence suggests that bodily movements, such as facial displays, can affect emotional states.
For example, unobtrusive contraction of the "smile muscle"  increases enjoyment , the head tilting upward induces pride , and hunched postures  elicit more depressed feelings .
However, no research has tested whether expansive power poses, in comparison with contractive power poses, cause mental, physiological, and behavioral change in a manner consistent with the effects of power.
We hypothesized that high-power poses  would cause individuals to experience elevated testosterone, decreased cortisol, increased feelings of power, and higher risk tolerance.
Such findings would suggest that embodiment goes beyond cognition and emotion and could have immediate and actionable effects on physiology and behavior.
Forty-two participants  were randomly assigned to the high-power-pose or low-power-pose condition.
Participants believed that the study was about the science of physiological recordings and was focused on how placement of electrocardiography electrodes above and below the heart could influence data collection.
Participants' bodies were posed by an experimenter into high-power or low-power poses.
Each participant held two poses for 1min each.
Participants' risk taking was measured with a gambling task; feelings of power were measured with self-reports.
Saliva samples, which were used to test cortisol and testosterone levels, were taken before and approximately 17 min after the power-pose manipulation.
Poses were harvested from the nonverbal literature  and varied on the two nonverbal dimensions universally linked to power: expansiveness  and openness .
The two high-power poses into which participants were configured are depicted in Figure 1, and the two low-power poses are depicted in Figure 2.
To be sure that the poses chosen conveyed power appropriately, we asked 95 pretest participants to rate each pose from 1  to 7 .
To be sure that changes in neuroendocrine levels, powerful feelings, or behavior could be attributed only to the highpower or low-power attributes of the poses, we had 19 pretest participants rate the comfort, difficulty, and pain of the poses.
Participants made all four poses  and completed questionnaires after each pose.
After manually configuring participants' bodies into the two poses, the experimenter left the room.
Participants were videotaped; all participants correctly made and held either two high-power or two low-power poses for 1 min each.
While making and holding the poses, participants completed a filler task that consisted of viewing and forming impressions of nine faces.
After they finished posing, participants were presented with the gambling task.
They were endowed with $2 and told they could keep the money-the safe bet-or roll a die and risk losing the $2 for a payoff of $4 .
Participants indicated how "powerful" and "in charge" they felt on a scale from 1  to 4 .
Testing was scheduled in the afternoon  to control for diurnal rhythms in hormones.
Saliva samples were taken before the power-pose manipulation  and again 17 min after the power-pose manipulation .
Standard salivary-hormone collection procedures were used .
Before providing saliva samples, participants did not eat, drink, or brush their teeth for at least 1 hr.
Participants rinsed their mouths with water and chewed a piece of sugarfree Trident Original Flavor gum for 3 min to stimulate salivation .
Participants provided approximately 1.5 ml of saliva through a straw into a sterile polypropylene microtubule.
Samples were immediately frozen to avoid hormone degradation and to precipitate mucins.
Within 2 weeks, samples were packed in dry ice and shipped for analysis to Salimetrics , where they were assayed in duplicate for salivary cortisol and salivary testosterone using a highly sensitive enzyme immunoassay.
For cortisol, the intra-assay coefficient of variation  was 5.40% for Time 1 and 4.40% for Time 2.
The average interassay CV across high and low controls for both time points was 2.74%.
The average interassay CV across high and low controls for both time points was 3.80%.
Our results show that posing in high-power displays  causes physiological, psychological, and behavioral changes consistent with the literature on the effects of power on power holders-elevation of the dominance hormone testosterone, reduction of the stress hormone cortisol, and increases in behaviorally demonstrated risk tolerance and feelings of power.
These findings advance current understanding of embodied cognition in two important ways.
First, they suggest that the effects of embodiment extend beyond emotion and cognition, to physiology and subsequent behavioral choice.
For example, as described earlier, nodding the head "yes" leads a person to be more easily persuaded when listening to a persuasive appeal, and smiling increases humor responses.
We suggest that these simple behaviors, a head nod or a smile, might also cause physiological changes that activate an entire trajectory of psychological, physiological, and behavioral shifts-essentially altering the course of a person's day.
Second, these results suggest that any psychological construct, such as power, with a signature pattern of nonverbal correlates may be embodied.
These results also offer a methodological advance in research on power.
Many reported effects of power are limited by the methodological necessity of manipulating power in a laboratory setting .
The simple, elegant power-pose manipulation we employed can be taken directly into the field and used to investigate ordinary people in everyday contexts.
Is it possible that our findings are limited to the specific poses utilized in this experiment'?
Although the power-infusing attribute of expansiveness and the poses that capture it require further investigation, findings from an additional study  suggest that the effects reported here are not idiosyncratic to these specific poses.
These findings suggest that, in some situations requiring power, people have the ability to "fake it 'til they make it."
Over time and in aggregate, these minimal postural changes and their outcomes potentially could improve a person's general health and well-being.
This potential benefit is particularly important when considering people who are or who feel chronically powerless because of lack of resources, low hierarchical rank in an organization, or membership in a low-power social group.
We are gratefully indebted to the following individuals for their insight, support, and assistance with this research: Daniel Ames, Max Bazerman, Joe Ferrero, Alan Fiske and lab, Adam Galinsky, Deborah Gruenfeld, Lucia Guillory, Brian Hall, Bob Josephs, Brian Lucas, Malia Mason, Pranj Mehta, Michael Morris, Joe Navarro, Michael Norton, Thomas Schubert, Steve Stroessner, and Bill von Hippel.
The effect of power on risk taking is moderated by factors such as prenatal exposure to testosterone .
Cortisol scores at both time points were sufficiently normally distributed, except for two outliers that were more than 3 standard deviations above the mean and were excluded; testosterone scores at both time points were sufficiently normally distributed, except for one outlier that was more than 3 standard deviations above the mean and was excluded.
Power, testosterone and risktaking: The moderating influence of testosterone and executive functions.
I have a confession to make, but first, I want you to make a little confession to me.
In the past year, I want you to just raise your hand if you've experienced relatively little stress.
How about a moderate amount of stress?
Who has experienced a lot of stress?
But that is not my confession.
My confession is this: I am a health psychologist, and my mission is to help people be happier and healthier.
But I fear that something I've been teaching for the last 10 years is doing more harm than good, and it has to do with stress.
For years I've been telling people, stress makes you sick.
It increases the risk of everything from the common cold to cardiovascular disease.
Basically, I've turned stress into the enemy.
But I have changed my mind about stress, and today, I want to change yours.
Let me start with the study that made me rethink my whole approach to stress.
This study tracked 30,000 adults in the United States for eight years, and they started by asking people, "How much stress have you experienced in the last year?"
They also asked, "Do you believe that stress is harmful for your health?"
And then they used public death records to find out who died.
People who experienced a lot of stress in the previous year had a 43 percent increased risk of dying.
But that was only true for the people who also believed that stress is harmful for your health.
In fact, they had the lowest risk of dying of anyone in the study, including people who had relatively little stress.
Now the researchers estimated that over the eight years they were tracking deaths, 182,000 Americans died prematurely, not from stress, but from the belief that stress is bad for you.
Now, if that estimate is correct, that would make believing stress is bad for you the 15th largest cause of death in the United States last year, killing more people than skin cancer, HIV/AIDS and homicide.
You can see why this study freaked me out.
Here I've been spending so much energy telling people stress is bad for your health.
So this study got me wondering: Can changing how you think about stress make you healthier?
And here the science says yes.
When you change your mind about stress, you can change your body's response to stress.
It's called the social stress test.
You come into the laboratory, and you're told you have to give a five-minute impromptu speech on your personal weaknesses to a panel of expert evaluators sitting right in front of you, and to make sure you feel the pressure, there are bright lights and a camera in your face, kind of like this.
And the evaluators have been trained to give you discouraging, non-verbal feedback like this.
Now that you're sufficiently demoralized, time for part two: a math test.
And unbeknownst to you, the experimenter has been trained to harass you during it.
Now we're going to all do this together.
It's going to be fun.
I want you all to count backwards from 996 in increments of seven.
You're going to do this out loud as fast as you can, starting with 996.
That guy made a mistake.
We are going to have to start all over again.
Okay, so you get the idea.
Now, if you were actually in this study, you'd probably be a little stressed out.
Your heart might be pounding, you might be breathing faster, maybe breaking out into a sweat.
And normally, we interpret these physical changes as anxiety or signs that we aren't coping very well with the pressure.
But what if you viewed them instead as signs that your body was energized, was preparing you to meet this challenge?
Now that is exactly what participants were told in a study conducted at Harvard University.
Before they went through the social stress test, they were taught to rethink their stress response as helpful.
That pounding heart is preparing you for action.
If you're breathing faster, it's no problem.
It's getting more oxygen to your brain.
And participants who learned to view the stress response as helpful for their performance, well, they were less stressed out, less anxious, more confident, but the most fascinating finding to me was how their physical stress response changed.
Now, in a typical stress response, your heart rate goes up, and your blood vessels constrict like this.
And this is one of the reasons that chronic stress is sometimes associated with cardiovascular disease.
It's not really healthy to be in this state all the time.
But in the study, when participants viewed their stress response as helpful, their blood vessels stayed relaxed like this.
Their heart was still pounding, but this is a much healthier cardiovascular profile.
It actually looks a lot like what happens in moments of joy and courage.
Over a lifetime of stressful experiences, this one biological change could be the difference between a stress-induced heart attack at age 50 and living well into your 90s.
And this is really what the new science of stress reveals, that how you think about stress matters.
So my goal as a health psychologist has changed.
I no longer want to get rid of your stress.
I want to make you better at stress.
And we just did a little intervention.
If you raised your hand and said you'd had a lot of stress in the last year, we could have saved your life, because hopefully the next time your heart is pounding from stress, you're going to remember this talk and you're going to think to yourself, this is my body helping me rise to this challenge.
And when you view stress in that way, your body believes you, and your stress response becomes healthier.
Now I said I have over a decade of demonizing stress to redeem myself from, so we are going to do one more intervention.
I want to tell you about one of the most under-appreciated aspects of the stress response, and the idea is this: Stress makes you social.
To understand this side of stress, we need to talk about a hormone, oxytocin, and I know oxytocin has already gotten as much hype as a hormone can get.
It even has its own cute nickname, the cuddle hormone, because it's released when you hug someone.
But this is a very small part of what oxytocin is involved in.
It fine-tunes your brain's social instincts.
It primes you to do things that strengthen close relationships.
Oxytocin makes you crave physical contact with your friends and family.
It even makes you more willing to help and support the people you care about.
Some people have even suggested we should snort oxytocin to become more compassionate and caring.
But here's what most people don't understand about oxytocin.
Your pituitary gland pumps this stuff out as part of the stress response.
It's as much a part of your stress response as the adrenaline that makes your heart pound.
And when oxytocin is released in the stress response, it is motivating you to seek support.
Your biological stress response is nudging you to tell someone how you feel instead of bottling it up.
Your stress response wants to make sure you notice when someone else in your life is struggling so that you can support each other.
When life is difficult, your stress response wants you to be surrounded by people who care about you.
Okay, so how is knowing this side of stress going to make you healthier?
Well, oxytocin doesn't only act on your brain.
It also acts on your body, and one of its main roles in your body is to protect your cardiovascular system from the effects of stress.
It also helps your blood vessels stay relaxed during stress.
But my favorite effect on the body is actually on the heart.
Your heart has receptors for this hormone, and oxytocin helps heart cells regenerate and heal from any stress-induced damage.
This stress hormone strengthens your heart, and the cool thing is that all of these physical benefits of oxytocin are enhanced by social contact and social support, so when you reach out to others under stress, either to seek support or to help someone else, you release more of this hormone, your stress response becomes healthier, and you actually recover faster from stress.
I find this amazing, that your stress response has a built-in mechanism for stress resilience, and that mechanism is human connection.
I want to finish by telling you about one more study.
And listen up, because this study could also save a life.
This study tracked about 1,000 adults in the United States, and they ranged in age from 34 to 93, and they started the study by asking, "How much stress have you experienced in the last year?"
They also asked, "How much time have you spent helping out friends, neighbors, people in your community?"
And then they used public records for the next five years to find out who died.
Okay, so the bad news first: For every major stressful life experience, like financial difficulties or family crisis, that increased the risk of dying by 30 percent.
But -- and I hope you are expecting a but by now -- but that wasn't true for everyone.
People who spent time caring for others showed absolutely no stress-related increase in dying.
How you think and how you act can transform your experience of stress.
When you choose to view your stress response as helpful, you create the biology of courage.
And when you choose to connect with others under stress, you can create resilience.
Now I wouldn't necessarily ask for more stressful experiences in my life, but this science has given me a whole new appreciation for stress.
Stress gives us access to our hearts.
The compassionate heart that finds joy and meaning in connecting with others, and yes, your pounding physical heart, working so hard to give you strength and energy, and when you choose to view stress in this way, you're not just getting better at stress, you're actually making a pretty profound statement.
You're saying that you can trust yourself to handle life's challenges, remembering that you don't have to face them alone.
Chris Anderson: This is kind of amazing, what you're telling us.
It seems amazing to me that a belief about stress can make so much difference to someone's life expectancy.
How would that extend to advice, like, if someone is making a lifestyle choice between, say, a stressful job and a non-stressful job, does it matter which way they go?
It's equally wise to go for the stressful job so long as you believe that you can handle it, in some sense?
Kelly McGonigal: Yeah, and one thing we know for certain is that chasing meaning is better for your health than trying to avoid discomfort.
And so I would say that's really the best way to make decisions, is go after what it is that creates meaning in your life and then trust yourself to handle the stress that follows.
CA: Thank you so much, Kelly.
I read these offers one at a time.
The first offer-the Internet subscription for $59-seemed reasonable.
The second option-the $125 print subscription-seemed a bit expensive, but still reasonable.
But then I read the third option: a print and Internet subscription for $125.
I read it twice before my eye ran back to the previous options.
Who would want to buy the print option alone, I wondered, when both the Internet and the print subscriptions were offered for the same price?
Now, the printonly option may have been a typographical error, but I suspect that the clever people at the Economist's London offices  were actually manipulating me.
I am pretty certain that they wanted me to skip the Internet-only option  and jump to the more expensive option: Internet and print.
But how could they manipulate me?
I suspect it's because the Economist's marketing wizards  knew something important about human behavior: humans rarely choose things in absolute terms.
We don't have an internal value meter that tells us how much things are worth.
Rather, we focus on the relative advantage of one thing over another, and estimate value accordingly.
In the case of the Economist, I may not have known whether the Internet-only subscription at $59 was a better deal than the print-only option at $125.
But I certainly knew that the print- and-Internet option for $125 was better than the print-only option at $125.
In fact, you could reasonably deduce that in the combination package, the Internet subscription is free!
And I have to admit.
If I had been inclined to subscribe I probably would have taken the package deal myself.
So what was going on here?
Let me start with a fundamental observation: most people don't know what they want unless they see it in context.
We don't know what kind of racing bike we want-until we see a champ in the Tour de France ratcheting the gears on a particular model.
We don't know what kind of speaker system we like-until we hear a set of speakers that sounds better than the previous one.
We don't even know what we want to do with our lives-until we find a relative or a friend who is doing just what we think we should be doing.
Everything is relative, and that's the point.
Like an airplane pilot landing in the dark, we want runway lights on either side of us, guiding us to the place where we can touch down our wheels.
In the case of the Economist, the decision between the Internet- only and print-only options would take a bit of thinking.
Thinking is difficult and sometimes unpleasant.
So the Economist's marketers offered us a no-brainer: relative to the print-only option, the print-and-Internet option looks clearly superior.
So LET'S RUN through the Economist's slow motion.
As you recall, the choices were: 1.
When I gave these options to 100 students at MIT's Sloan School of Management, they opted as follows: 1.
Print-only subscription for $125-zero students 3.
Print-and-Internet subscription for $125-84 students So far these Sloan MBAs are smart cookies.
They all saw the advantage in the print-and-Internet offer over the print-only offer.
But were they influenced by the mere presence of the print-only option .
In other words, suppose that I removed the decoy so that the choices would be the ones seen in the figure below:
Would the students respond as before ?
Certainly they would react the same way, wouldn't they?
After all, the option I took out was one that no one selected, so it should make no difference.
This time, 68 of the students chose the Internet-only option for $59, up from 16 before.
And only 32 chose the combination subscription for $125, down from 84 before.
What could have possibly changed their minds?
Nothing rational, I assure you.
It was the mere presence of the decoy that sent 84 of them to the print-and-Internet option .
And the absence of the decoy had them choosing differently, with 32 for print-andInternet and 68 for Internet-only.
This is not only irrational but predictably irrational as well.
Welcome to The Economist Subscription Centre Pick the type of subscription you want to buy or renew.
Li Economist.com subscription - US $59.00 One-year subscription to Economist.com.
Includes online access to all articles from The Economist since 1997.
J Print & web subscription - US $125.00 One-year subscription to the print edition of The Economist and online access to all articles from The Economist since 1997.
In the MIT studies A and B, which option was more preferred?
Over 500 million people interact daily with Facebook.
Yet, whether Facebook use influences subjective well-being over time is unknown.
We addressed this issue using experience-sampling, the most reliable method for measuring in-vivo behavior and psychological experience.
We text-messaged people five times per day for two-weeks to examine how Facebook use influences the two components of subjective well-being: how people feel moment-to-moment and how satisfied they are with their lives.
Our results indicate that Facebook use predicts negative shifts on both of these variables over time.
The more people used Facebook at one time point, the worse they felt the next time we text-messaged them; the more they used Facebook over two-weeks, the more their life satisfaction levels declined over time.
Interacting with other people "directly" did not predict these negative outcomes.
They were also not moderated by the size of people's Facebook networks, their perceived supportiveness, motivation for using Facebook, gender, loneliness, self-esteem, or depression.
On the surface, Facebook provides an invaluable resource for fulfilling the basic human need for social connection.
Rather than enhancing well-being, however, these findings suggest that Facebook may undermine it.
Citation: Kross E, Verduyn P, Demiralp E, Park J, Lee DS, et al.
This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
Funding: The authors have no support or funding to report.
Competing Interests: The authors have declared that no competing interests exist.
Online social networks are rapidly changing the way human beings interact.
Yet, no research has examined how interacting with Facebook influences subjective well-being over time.
Indeed, a recent article that examined every peer-reviewed publication and conference proceeding on Facebook between 1/2005 and 1/2012  did not reveal a single study that examined how using this technology influences subjective well-being over time 
So, how does Facebook usage influence subjective well-being over time?
Ihe cross-scctional approach used in previous studies makes it impossible to know.
We addressed this issue by using expcriencc-sampling, the most reliable method for measuring invivo behavior and psychological experience over time 1121.
We text-messaged participants five times per day for 14-days.
Each text-message contained a link to an online survey, which participants completed using their smartphones.
We performed lagged analyses on participants' responses, as well as their answers to the Satisfaction With Life Questionnaire  1131, which they completed before and immediately following the 14-day experience-sampling period, to examine how interacting with Facebook influences the two components of subjective well-being: how people feel  and how satisfied they are with their lives  114,151.
Subjective well-being is one of the most highly studied variables ini the behavioral sciences.
Given the frequency of Facebook usage, identifying how interacting with this technology influences snbjective well-being represents a basic research challenge that has important practical implications.
Whereas some cross-sectional research reveals positive associations between online social network use  and well-being 161, other work reveals the opposite 17,81.
Facebook Use Predicts Declines in Well-Being qualify for the study.
They received $20 and were entered into a rafile to receive an iPad2 for participating.
Following prior research 1241, we pruned the data by excluding all of the data firom two participants who responded to <33% of the texts, resulting in 4,589 total observations.
The results did not change substantively when additional cutoff rates were used.
We also assessed participants' motivation for using Facebook by asking them to indicate whether they use Facebook "to keep in touch with friends ," "to find new friends ," "to share good things with friends ," "to share bad things with friends 36 ," "to obtain new information ," or "other: please explain ."
Examples of other reasons included chatting with others, keeping in touch with family, and facilitating schoolwork and business.
Participants were text-messaged 5 times per day between 10am and midnight over 14-days.
Text-messages occurred at random times within 168-minute windows per day.
Each text-message contained a link to an online survey, which asked participants to answer five questions using a slider scale:  How do you feel right now?
When the protocol for answering these questions was explained, interacting with other people "directly" was defined as face-to-face or phone interactions.
An experimenter carefully walked participants through this protocol to ensure that they understood how to answer each question and fulfill the study requirements.
Participants always answered the affect question first.
Next the worry and loneliness questions were presented in random order.
The Facebook use and direct social interaction questions were always administered last, again in random order.
Our analyses focused primarily on affect  because this affect question is the way "affective well-being" is typically operationalized.
Participants returned to the laboratory following Phase 2 to complete another set of questionnaires, which included the SWLS  and the Revised UCLA Loneliness Scale 1231 .
Participants' number of Facebook friends  was also recorded during this session fi-om participants' Facebook accounts .
We examined the relationship between Facebook use and affect using multilevel analyses to account for the nested data structure.
Specifically, we examined whether T2 affect .
Note that although this analysis assesses Facebook use at '12, the question refers to usage between TI and '1'2 .
This analysis allowed us to explore whether Facebook use during the time period separating T, and T2 predicted changes in affect over this time span.
When non-compliant cases were observed, we used participants' responses to the last text message they answered to examine the lagged effect of Facebook use on well-being to maximize power.
So, if we were interested in examining whether 12 3 Facebook use predicted '1' Affect controlling for 12 Affect, but did not have data on '1'2 Affect, then we used T, Affect instead.
Excluding trials in which participants did not respond to the previous texts  did not substantively alter any of the results we report.
Significance testing of fixed effects was performed using chisquared distributed  Wald-tests.
All level- 1 predictors were group-mean centered, and intercepts and slopes were allowed to vary randomly across participants .
We tested for moderation by examining whether each moderator variable was related to the slope oft'T 2 Facebook use when predicting 12 affect, controlling for T, affect.
Data from one person who scored 4SDs above the sample mean on the BDI were excluded fi'om the BDI moderation analyses; data from one person who scored 4SDs above the sample mean on number of Facebook friends were excluded fi'om the moderation analyses based on Facebook friends.
The relationship between mean Facebook use and life satisfaction was assessed using OLS regressions because these data were not nested.
Both unstandardized  and standardized  OLS regression coefficients are reported .
We examined whether people's tendency to interact with Facebook during the time period separating two text messages influenced how they felt at T2 , controlling for how they felt at T,.
To examine how Facebook use influenced "cognitive well-being," we analyzed whether people's average Facebook use over the 14-day period predicted their life satisfaction at the end of the study, controlling for baseline life satisfaction and average emotion levels over the 14-day period.
Three participants did not complete the study.
As the methods section notes, participants received a text message directing them to complete a block of five questions once every 168 minutes on average .
Facebook use predicts declines in affect and life satisfaction over time.
Average Facebook use over the course of the 14-day experience-sampling period predicts decreases in life satisfaction over time; values are standardized regression weights from OLS regression analysis .
Facebook Use Predicts Declines in Well-Being Another alternative explanation for these results is that people use Facebook when they feel bad , and feeling bad leads to decliies in well-being rather than Facebook use per se.
The analyses we reported earlier partially address this issue by demonstrating that affect does not predict changes in Facebook use over time and Facebook use continues to significantly predict declines in life satisfaction over time when controlling for affect.
However, because participants also rated how lonely and worried they felt each time we text messaged them, we were able to test this proposal further.
The more lonely people felt at one time point, the more people used Facebook over time.
Given this significant relationship, we next examined whether controlling for loneliness renders the relationship between Facebook use and changes in affective and cognitive well-being non-significant what one would predict if Facebook use is a proxy for loneliness.
This was not the case.
Neither worry nor loneliness interacted significantly with Facebook use to predict changes in affective or cognitive well-being .
Next, we examined whether a number of theoretically relevant individual-difference variables including participants' number of Facebook Friends, their perceptions of their Facebook network support, depressive symptoms, loneliness, gender, self-esteem, time of study participation, and motivation for using Facebook  interacted with Facebook use to predict changes in affective or cognitive well-being .
Although we did not have a priori predictions about whether Facebook use and direct social contact would interact to predict changes in affective and cognitive wellbeing, we nevertheless explored this issue in our final set of' analyses.
To understand the meaning of the former interaction, we performed simple slope analyses.
These analyses indicated that the relationship between Facebook use and declines in affective wellbeing increased linearly with direct social contact.
Specifically, whereas Facebook use did not predict significant declines in affective well-being when participants experienced low levels of direct social contact , it did predict significant declines in well-being when participants experienced moderate levels of direct social contact  and high levels of direct social contact .
We addressed this issue by performing lagged analyses on experience sampled data, an approach that allowed us to take advantage of the relative timing of participants' naturally occurring behaviors and psychological states to draw inferences about their likely causal sequence I17,181.
These analyses indicated that Facebook use predicts declines in the two components of subjective wellbeing: how people feel moment to moment and how satisfied they are with their lives.
Critically, we found no evidence to support two plausible alternative interpretations of these results.
First, interacting with other people "directly" did not predict declines in well-being.
In fact, direct social network interactions led people to feel better over time.
This suggests that Facebook use may constitute a unique form of social network interaction that predicts impoverished wellbeing.
Second, multiple types of evidence indicated that it was not the case that Facebook use led to declines in well-being because people are more likely to use Facebook when they feel bad neither affect nor worry predicted Facebook use and Facebook use continued to predict significant declines in well-being when controlling for loneliness .
Would engaging in any solitary activity similarly predict declines in well-being?
We suspect that they would not because people often derive pleasure from engaging in some solitary activities .
Supporting this view, a number of recent studies indicate that people's perceptions of social isolation  a variable that we assessed in this study, which did not influence our results are a more powerful determinant of well-being than objective social isolation 1251.
A related question concerns whether engaging in any Internet activity  would likewise predict well-being declines.
Here too prior research suggests that it would not.
Although these findings raise numerous future research questions, four stand out as most pressing.
First, do these findings generalize?
We concentrated on young adults in this study because they represent a core Facebook user demographic.
However, examining whether these findings generalize to additional age groups is important.
Future research should also examine whether these findings generalize to other online social networks.
Theref'ore, it is possible that the current findings may not neatly generalize to other online social networks.
Second, what mechanisms underlie the deleterious effects of Facebook usage on well-being?
The latter idea is particularly interesting in light of the significant interaction we observed between direct social contact and Facebook use in this study i.e., the more people interacted with other people directly, the more strongly Facebook use predicted declines in their affective well-being.
If harmful social comparisons explain how Facebook use predicts declines in affective well-being, it is possible that interacting with other people directly either enhances the frequency of such comparisons or magnifies their emotional impact.
Finally, although the analytic approach we used in this study is useful for drawing inferences about the likely causal ordering of' associations between naturally occurring variables, experiments that manipulate Facebook use in daily life are needed to corroborate these findings and establish definitive causal relations.
Though potentially challenging to perform Facebook use prevalence, its centrality to young adult daily social interactions, and addictive properties may make it a difficult intervention target such studies are important for extending this work and informing future interventions.
Rather than enhancing well-being, as frequent interactions with supportive "offline" social networks powerfully do, the current findings demonstrate that interacting with Facebook may predict the opposite result for young adults it may undermine it.
Two caveats are in order before concluding.
First, although we observed statistically significant associations between Facebook usage and well-being, the sizes of these effects were relatively "small."
Subjective well-being is a multiply determined outcome it is unrealistic to expect any single factor to powerfully influence it.
Moreover, in addition to being consequential in its own right, subjective well-being predicts an array of mental and physical health consequences.
Therefore, identifying any factor that systematically influences it is important, especially when that factor is likely to accumulate over time among large numbers of people.
Facebook usage would seem to fit both of these criteria.
Second, some research suggests that asking people to indicate how good or bad they feel using a single bipolar scale, as we did in this study, can obscure interesting differences regarding whether a variable leads people to feel less positive, more negative or both less positive and more negative.
Future research should administer two unipolar affect luestions to assess positive and negative affect separately to address this issue.
Health Psychol 30: Diener E  Happy people live longer: Subjective well-being conti'ibutes to health and longevity.
Appl Psychol Health Well Being 3: 1 43.
Valenzuela S, Park N, Kee KF  Is There Social Capital in a Social Network Site?
Chou H, Edlge N  'They are happier and having better lives than I am : The impact ol' using Facebook on perceptions of others' lives.
Kahneman D, Deaton A  High iniCiimie iptipoiVes evaltation ut life bUt not emotional well-being.
Holiann W, Vohs KD, Bauieister RI"  What people desire, feel conflicted ab >ut, aid try to resist ill everyday life.
Bolge N, Davis A, Ral ieli E  Diar'y Methods: CaptUriing lile as it is liVed.
Adam EK, Hawkley I C, Ktidielka BNI, Cacioppo J'  Day-to-cay dynamics of experieoce ciuirtisOl assOCiatio ins ii a population-based sample Ofi older adults.
Killingsworth NIA, Gilbert DT  A Wandering NMind Is an Unhappy Mlind.
Beck AT, Steei RA, Biiown GK  BDI-1l Nlanual San Antonio: Haricourt Brace & Company.
Rosenberg NI  Society and the adolescent sell-iiage.
Russell D, Peplau LA, Cutiona CE  The revised UCLA Loneliness Scale: CurrieiCnit antd discriiminant Validity evidence.
Ntobeily NJ, Watkins ER  Ruiinative self-locus, negative lilt events, and inegative allect.
Cacioppo j', Hawckley 1LC, Normanii GJ, Berntson GG  Social isolation.
Halerkamp N, Kramer NC  Social Comparison 2.0: Examining the Eilects of Online Profiles on Social-Netiorking Sites.
Prentice DA, Miller DT  When small eflects are impressive.
House JS, Landis KR, Uiberson D  Social relationships and health.
Ybarra 0, BiUrnstein E, Winkielman P, Keller NIC, Chan 1, et al.
Abstract I Stress necessitates an immediate engagement of multiple neural and endocrine systems.
However, exposure to a single stressor causes adaptive changes that modify responses to subsequent stressors.
This rich repertoire of plasticity is likely to represent an important building block for dynamic, experience-dependent modulation of neuroendocrine stress adaptation.
A stressor is a real or imagined threat that is interpreted by an organism as requiring immediate, adaptive responses.
Stress has also been implicated in the emergence of numerous pathologies, including depression and anxiety disorders, and as a behavioural modifier that affects fundamental processes, such as decision making' '.
In addition to these direct effects of stress on other systems, it is clear that exposure to one stressor often results in altered responses to subsequent stressors' '2.
This implies that the neural circuits that launch the response to stress are capable of learning and remembering.
More precisely, these circuits can extract information about an individual stress event, store this information and then use it to modify subsequent responses.
What are the mechanisms involved in storing this information?
Where is this information stored?
How does the brain make causal links between stressful experiences and embed these links within the neurons and synapses that drive stress responses?
In an attempt to address these questions, investigators have examined synapses and plasticity in several key brain structures that gate stress responsiveness, including the hippocampus, prefrontal cortex and amygdala1 ".
More recently, focus has turned towards understanding synaptic function and plasticity in the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus .
Neurons in the PVN, and more precisely those that synthesize corticotropin-releasing hormone ,
CRH-producing neurons are embedded within a population of parvocellular neuroendocrine cells  in the PVN that release their contents into the hypophyseal portal circulation.
Hotch-iss Brain Institute and the Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary, 3330 Hospital Drive NW, Calgary, Alberta T2N 4N 1, Ccnada.
IPresentaddress: Robarts Research Institute, Department of Physiology and Pharmcology, Schulich School of Medicine and Dentistry, University of Western Ontario, 1151 Richmond Street North, London, Ontario N6A 5B 7, canada.
This Review focuses largely on recent studies that have examined changes at glutamatergic and GABAergic synapses onto PNCs.
These studies have revealed that several unique forms of short- and long-term plasticity occur at these synapses.
Figure 1 I Stress and functional connectivity.
Corticotropin-releasing hormone -producing neurons in the PVN serve as primary coordinators of the endocrine stress response.
Corticosteroids have multiple effects on peripheral systems but also feed back to help guench the stress response through actions in the hippocampus  and modify subsequent responses to stress through actions in the PVN.
The square denotes that glucocorticoids are responsible for negative feedback and can promote more-complex adaptive changes.
The lashed arrow denotes that brainstem neurons signal via the amygdala in response to some homeostatic challenges.
Parvocellular neuroendocrine cells  in the PVN are activated and release CRH from axon endings located at the median eminence.part of pituitary portal circulation.
CRH stimulates release of adrenocorticotropic hormone  from pituitary corticotrophs in the anterior pituitary, which in turn act on the adrenal cortex to increase glucocorticoid release into the general circulation.
Glucocorticoids act peripherally and slowly cross the blood-brain barrier to elicit diverse CNS effects, including negative feedback on the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal  axis.
BNST, bed nucleus of the stria terminalis: PFC, prefrontal cortex.
Although reports supported the idea of glutamate and GABA regulation of the output of the PVN"', it was the seminal findings by van den Pol and colleagues that provided the first demonstration of fast synaptic transmission mediated by glutamate and GABA in the PVN" 2.
These findings also support the idea that peptidergic synapses can use either glutamate or GABA as a co-transmitter '.
The potential interactions between slow-acting neuromodulatory systems and fast ionotropic signals are discussed in detail below.
As in other brain regions, both asymmetrical  and symmetrical  synapses are present in the PVN'"""'.Quantitative immunoelectron microscopy studies indicate that approximately half of all synapses onto CRH-synthesizing neurons are GABAergic and that the others are non-GABAergic, asym metrical and presumably glutamatergic'.
The proportion of GABAergic synapses in the PVN is substantially higher than that in other brain regions, such as the CA I in the hippocampus  and the visual cortex "".
Consequently, the PVN may be ideally suited for studying mechanisms of plasticity at GABAergic synapses, which have proven difficult to investigate in other systems.
Approximately 30% of all synapses onto PVN neurons are also adrenergic or noradrenergic.
These synapses have an asymmetric morphology ' but it is unclear whether they, like noradrenergic synapses in other brain areas, also release glutamate ".
Both glutamatergic and GABAergic synapses make axosomatic as well as axodendritic contacts onto PN;s. ".
Moreover, microinjection of glutamate into the PVN stimulates HPA-axis output, whereas administration of an ionotropic glutamate receptor antagonist before exposure to stress blunts the neuroendocrine stress response" ".
By contrast, GABAergic synaptic transmission restrains baseline HPA-axis activity.
For example, microinjections of GABA AR antagonists in the absence of a stressor robustly activate PVN neurons and the HPA axis suggesting that the release from the tonic inhibitory GABA tone  is an important mechanism for PVN activation.
Such in vivo experiments in rodents are largely consistent with ex vivo electrophysiological recordings showing that GABA AR blockade increases PNC firing3".
However, the activation of PNCs is probably regulated by the balance between opposing drives from glutamate and GABA inputs, as disinhibition -induced activation of these cells is blunted in the presence of a glutamate receptor antagonist3 Anatomy Information from the internal and external environment is processed in distinct brain regions and eventually reaches CRH-producing neurons in the PVN to initiate HPA-axis activation.
There are several excellent and detailed reviews on the neuroanatomical architecture of PVN afferents2" and so we will only briefly describe this architecture here .
The direct, monosynaptic inputs to the PVN primarily arise from deep brain structures, including hypothalamic, extrahypothalamic and brainstem nuclei that are classically implicated in instinctive behaviour and physiological functions.
By contrast, limbic forebrain structures, such as the hippocampus, amygdala and prefrontal cortex, which are critical for relaying information about psychological stressors, send few direct projections to the PVN.
Instead, they direct monosynaptic projections to many of the aforementioned deep brain structures, which in turn relay information to the PVN.
Figure 2 1Major direct and indirect CNS connections to the PVN.
Compiled from multiple anatomical studies, this topological map shows key regions implicated in the brain response to stress, specifically the major glutamate, GABA and monoamine projections to the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus .
The halos represent areas of the brain in which high levels of glucocorticoid receptors  have been described.
Particular attention is paid here to limbic regions of the brain implicated in regulation of hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal -axis responses to psychogenic stressors and glucocorticoid feedback.
AHA, anterior hypothalamus; ARC, arcuate nLUcleus; BLA, basolateral amygdala: BNST, bed nucleus of the stria terminalis; CeA, central amygdala; DMH, dorsomedial hypothalamus: Hc, hippocampus; LC, locus coeruleus; MeA, medial amygdala; MnPO, medial preoptic nucleus; NTS, nucleus tractus solitarus; PBN, parabrachial nucleus: PVT.
As a point of comparison, the spine density in neurons in other stress-responsive regions, such as the basolateral amygdala or the prefrontal cortex, is one order of magnitude higher than that observed in PNCs'"'.
This physical architecture, featuring a dearth of spines combined with the interspersed nature of glutamate and GABA contacts, may contribute to neurotransmitter spillover, heterosynaptic modulation and intracellular signalling crosstalk between glutamate and GABAergic synapses.
Both glutamate and GABA have key roles in regulating the activity of PNCs.
The inputs to the PVN from the median preoptic nucleus and the posterior bed nucleus of the stria terminalis  are primarily GABAergic.
Given the extensive innervation of these hypothalamic territories by all major limbic structures, understanding the functional circuit formed by these inputs will be an important task for future investigation.
A recent study using optogenetic methods revealed a functional septum-AHA-PVN circuit that regulates neuroendocrine output following a single stressor".
Similar approaches will be critical for revealing the necessity and sufficiency of different cell populations for mediating responses to distinct stressors.
The BNST is a major extrahypothalamic source of GABAergic inputs.
Activity mapping  and inactivation and lesion studies have demonstrated an important role for BNST substructures in the regulation of the HPA axis!, 2 , but a detailed dissection of the BNST-PNC circuit architecture is still needed to better understand the specific contributions of defined inputs during various stressful situations.
The brainstem, especially the A2 and C2 cell groups of the nucleus tractus solitarius and the Al and Cl cell groups of the ventrolateral medulla, provides the main monoaminergic inputs to PVN.
PNCs express a range of ionotropic glutamate receptor subunits that can form AMPARs, kainate receptors and NMDARs".
Electrophysiological recordings from PNCs in acute brain slices ex vivo show both spontaneous and evoked synaptic currents that are sensitive to NMDAR and non-NMDAR antagonistsI".
During repeated synaptic recruitment at rates greater than 2 Hz, the release of glutamate from the presynaptic terminals onto PNCs shows frequency-dependent short-term depression.
This means that transmission is more faithful  at lower rates of synaptic activity3!.
One potential consequence of this is that lowering the release probability at these synapses could allow for more faithful transmission at higher frequencies, thereby altering the filtering capacity of these synapses.
In addition to synaptic glutamate currents, extrasynaptic NMDAR-mediated signalling has been described in PNCs".
Histological studies have shown that the parvocellular subdivision of the PVN expresses high levels of mRNAs for the kainate-preferring receptor subunits glutamate receptor ionotropic, kainate 1  and GLUK5 ", which are upregulated following stress".
Although the synaptic transmission to PNCs that is mediated by these kainate receptors remains to be characterized, GLUKI expression is highly enriched in CR1H-releasing axon terminals at the median eminence, and has been implicated in the release of the hormone during stress".
Glutamatergic synapses are a key target for several modulators that regulate HPA-axis output.
For example, noradrenaline, which potently activates the HPA axis during stress 27 3 acts on al-adrenergic receptors to robustly increase the frequency of spontaneous glutamatergic synaptic currents in PNCs".
Moreover, in vivo demonstrations that increases in circulating ACTH and CORT - induced by electrical stimulation of noradrenergic afferents to the PVN or by intra-PVN administration of an a l-adrenergic receptor agonist - are blocked by intraPVN microinjections of glutamate receptor antagonists  provide additional evidence for a pivotal role of glutamate in noradrenalin-induced HPA-axis activation".
Although the contribution of this eCB-mediated, activity-dependent modulation of glutamate transmission to HPA-axis activity remains to be determined, one possibility is that it curtails excitatory synaptic input during periods of high PNC activity.
In hypothalamic slices, application of CORT or its 7 synthetic analogue, dexamethasone" 1', stimulates the rapid synthesis of eCBs and inhibits glutamate release from presynaptic terminals.
This requires rapid actions through a non-canonical, putative membrane receptor that signals through a G protein and adenylase cyclase activation pathway' "7".
Glutamatergic synapses following acute stress.
A single acute stress alters signalling at glutamatergic synapses on PNCs.
This manifests as an increase in the ratio of AMPAR- to NMDAR-rmediated transmission 5 Surprisingly, this is not due to an increase in signalling via AMPARs, but rather to a long-lasting decrease in NMDAR signalling 5 that results from the downregulation of postsynaptic NMDARs by local release of CRH during stress.
It is unclear whether CRH is released in an autocrine fashion or originates from extra-PVN sources 2,13.
This CRH-mediated NMDAR downregulation is an important priming step that allows these synapses to exhibit a subsequent form of activity-dependent plasticity, or metaplasticity".
Figure 31 Glutamatergic synapses - function and plasticity.
Fast transmission is mediated by AMPA receptors  and NMDA receptors  - .Synapses also exhibit endocannabinoid -mediated depression.
This eliminates the retrograde signal.
As a result, glutamatergic synapses, when recruited with high activity rates, can release multiple vesicles of transmitter.
This results in a short-term potentiation that persists for a few minutes after the synaptic burst.
This manifests as a progressive loss of depolarization-induced suppression of excitation .
CORT is also ineffective in recruiting eCB signalling under these conditions.
HFS, high-frequency stimulation; mGR, membrane glucocorticoid receptor.
STP is not due to an increase in postsynaptic glutamate signalling or an increase in release probability; instead, it is due to a switch in the mode of release at glutamatergic synapses from univesicular  to multivesicular .
Importantly, STP can also be unmasked in naive slices " by postsynaptic blockade of NMDAR, Ca'+ signalling and SNARE -dependent exocytosis .
Future studies are needed to determine the identity of the retrograde messenger.
More information is also needed to better understand how this stress-induced metaplasticity at glutamatergic synapses may contribute to the adaptation of HPAaxis responses to repeated stress.
This time course is consistent with that of stress-induced HPA-axis sensitization, as reported elsewhere".
In addition to CRH, several other stress mediators act both independently and in concert to drive complex forms of metaplasticity at PNC synapses.
This functional downregulation of CB1 requires the activation of cytosolic glucocorticoid receptors.
As discussed below, the actions of noradrenaline and CORT during stress functionally upregulate mGluRl and mGluR5, respectively, at PNC synapses.
This stress-induced modulation of mGIuRs primes PNC synapses for subsequent activity71 , thus in dependent plasticity of GABAergic synapses 7 0 a way resembling CRH-mediated metaplasticity at glutamatergic synapses.
Clearly, a state-dependent change in synaptic plasticity is an emerging idea that needs further investigation.
Long-term changes in glutamate transmission after stress.
Exposure to chronic stress, or even to a single stressor, can cause long-term changes in HPA-axis activity and responsiveness, resulting in, for example, baseline hyperactivity and hypersensitivity to a novel stressor" ".
Like other types of experience-dependent learning, such changes in the sensitivity and/or gain of H PA-axis responses probably involve activity-dependent, long-term synaptic changes.
Neuroanatomical and electrophysiological evidence collectively suggests that experience -dependent plasticity occurs at PNC glutamatergic synapses.
Only a few examples of this type of plasticity have been described to date, and most of these involve changes that are consistent with an increase in the number of glutamatergic synapses.
Repeated variable stress over 3 weeks causes approximately a twofold increase in the number of synaptic contacts terminating on CRH-expressing PNCs ; this study reported increases in both GABA and nonGABA  terminals.
Functionally, repeated homotypic stress  for 3 days in rats increases the frequency of spontaneous excitatory postsynaptic currents ".
Likewise, early life stress  increases the frequency of sEPSCs and miniature EPSCs , which is paralleled by an increase in VGLUT2 expression in the PVN in animals examined after weaning These findings collectively showing an increase in excitatory glutamate inputs to PNCs begin to provide a foundation for earlier studies indicating that these stress exposures cause a lasting sensitization and/or baseline hyperactivity of the HPA axis.
These findings highlight a potentially important, but under-investigated, role for glial cells in stress-induced glutamatergic synapse plasticity in the PVN.
The effects of chronic stress on PNC glutamatergic synapses raise the question of whether reducing stress levels may have the opposite effect.
This was assessed in a study" in which rats were exposed to an enriched early life environment , which is known to persistently attenuate neuroendocrine stress responses" ".
The authors proposed that synaptic changes in early life initiate lifelong epigenetic changes that affect subsequent transcription events in PNCs.
GABAergic synapses GABAergic synapses under basal conditions.
GABA transmission mediated by anion-permeable, pentameric GABA, receptors  consists of distinct phasic and tonic currents.
In addition, tonic  inhibition mediated by 6-subunits has also been demonstrated".
The specific localization and function of other GABAR subunits remains unexplored.
In cell-attached recordings in which anion gradients are unperturbed, GABAAR blockade increases the activity of PNC7".
These data are largely consistent with in vivo studies showing that ongoing GABA transmission in the absence of a stressor constrains PNC activity and, thereby, HPA-axis output GABAergic synapsesfollowing acute stress.
Given the evidence for tonic constraint of HPA-axis activity by GABA, it is worth considering possible mechanisms through which disinhibition may occur at the onset of a stressor.
One possibility is that GABA neurons that directly synapse onto PNCs may become less active, although currently there is no direct evidence in support of this idea.
This may be due to a lack of definitive in vivo recording data and the limitations of immediate early gene mapping.
For example, FOS mapping studies are instructive, but fail to reflect short-lived increases in activity or decreases in activity, for example, in nuclei that provide GABA inputs to PVN".
Observations that acute stress decreases the probability of GABA release are consistent with this idea""' .
This is based on electrophysiological recordings in slices prepared immediately after a single 30-minute restraint stress, which reported a depolarizing shift in chloride reversal potential in PNCs"'.
Enkephalin acts as a retrograde signal and inhibits the release of GABA from presynaptic terminals.
Changes in GABA transmission following chronic stress.
Chronic or repeated stress can also cause several alterations in PNC GABAergic synapses.
These may include 1 changes in the expression of GABAAR subunitst S 3 ,"' and a reduction in retrograde eCB signalling".
Perhaps the most striking observations are those of putative GABAergic synaptogenesis and subcellular synapse redistribution.
Under non-stress conditions, GABAergic synapses are uniformly distributed between somatic and dendritic compartments of PNCs".
Chronic stress causes two distinct changes.
First, there is a dramatic increase in the total number of GABAergic synaptic contacts; second, there is a change in relative distribution of these contacts, such that dendritic inputs become more highly represented".
The functional consequences of such structural plasticity warrant further investigation but, interestingly, chronic stress results in a paradoxical decrease in the number of functional GABAergic synapses in electrophysiological recordings"".
One possible explanation for this is that chronic stress may lead to the formation of  silent synapses that are subjected to dynamic recruitment by subsequent synaptic activities in a mechanism that involves an LTP 3 -,like mechanism ".
Furthermore, the effect of this synaptic rearrangement on H PA-axis function remains unknown.
In many neuronal circuits, the location of GABAergic synaptic input onto a principal or projection neuron reflects innervation by functionally distinct GABA subpopulations, which modify neuronal firing and/or integration of excitatory input in a very specific fashion.
A rearrangement of GABA inputs onto PNCs may alter the relative contributions of specific nuclei.
Such compartmentalization of GABA input also determines the efficacy of inhibition through activity-dependent shifts in the chloride driving force.
A collapse of inhibition under high rates of synaptic activity occurs preferentially at dendritic GABA inputs, where chloride extrusion mechanisms and diffusional capacity are volume-limited"".
Further investigation will be necessary to address how changes at specific GABAergic synapses contribute to chronic stress-induced HPAaxis adaptations and the behavioural and physiological pathologies that accompany them.
Functional implications It is increasingly clear that synapses onto PNCs are dynamic, can be modified by experience and need to be an important part of any discussion that invokes plasticity of responses to stress.
One consequence of this reduction in chloride extrusion capacity is that engagement of GABA afferents has a nonlinear effect on PNC firing"": at low levels of GABA input the decrease in KCC2 function results in a weakening of inhibition, whereas at higher rates of synaptic transmission and/or after enhancement of tonic GABAAR currents there is a paradoxical GABAARdependent excitation that increases action potential firing"".
Consistent with this model, genetic deletion of GABAR 6-subunits" or pharmacological blockade of positive allosteric modulation of extrasynaptic GABAAR 6-subunits blunts HPA-axis responses".
Recent experiments offer new insights into the rules and expression mechanisms for synaptic plasticity at GABAergic synapses on PNCs.
These findings  describe a form of metaplasticity but are unique from classical metaplasticity in that the timing of the induction after the initial exposure to stress is critical.
Importantly , whether synapses exhibit LTP or LTD is not a consequence of the induction protocol used; rather, it is a function of when slices were prepared after stress.
Specifically, LTP can be induced only in slices prepared immediately after a stress, whereas LTD can be induced only in slices prepared 90 minutes after stress.
These temporal windows for opposing forms of plasticity arise because two specific neuromodulators, noradrenaline and CORT, exhibit discrete time domains for actions in the PVN".
More precisely, noradrenaline, which is released at the onset of stress, is the essential associative signal for LTP .ABA* That is, activation of P-adrenergic receptors and the downstream activation of protein kinase A cause a functional upregulation of  mGluRl on PNCs.
This noradrenaline-induced priming of mGluRl creates a time window in which subsequent bursts of glutamate afferent activity effectively activates mGluRl.
Figure 4 1GABAergic synapses - function and plasticity.
Fast transmission is mediated by GABAA receptors .
This primes group I metabotropic glutamate receptors  in PNCs through a mechanism that is unresolved"'.
Once primed, mGluR activation increases intracellular Ca", which drives phosphorylation of calcium/calmiodulin-dependent protein kinase II  and the insertion of GABAARs at previously silent GABAergic synapses .
The longer recovery period allows circulating corticosterone  to affect biochemical processes in PNCs.
Specifically, CORT amplifies signalling through mGIURS, by inhibiting the regulator of G protein signalling 4  in PNCs".
This removes the'brake' from mGluR5 downstream signalling and allows synaptically released glutamate to liberate an opioid retrograde signal.
The opioid, which is probably enkephalin, binds to presynaptic p-opioid receptors  and decreases GABA release probability.
This is due to the recovery of CB1 Rs at presynaptic terminals.
The effects of novel stressors can be mimicked either by globally increasing neural activity using electroconvulsive seizures or by increasing synaptic activity in situ.
In the classic interpretation of synaptic plasticity , presentation of a stimulus  that engages two synaptically coupled neurons  modifies the efficacy of the synapse between them.
Depending on the stimulus, the original synaptic response  may be potentiated  or depressed .
In synaptic metaplasticity between synaptically coupled neurons , presentation of S1 causes embedded biochemical changes  but does not C change synaptic strength.
Presentation of a U subsequent stimulus  may either potentiate C  or depress  the synapse.
The direction of the C plasticity depends on the nature of S2.
C In kairoplasticity , the Time Time presentation of S1 causes biochemical changes S1 52 S1 52 but, as in metaplasticity, does not change -v synaptic strength.
Again, presentation of S2 may i t, either potentiate  or depress  the synapse.
However, the direction of the plasticity depends -z on the temporal window after S1 rather than on C+1 the nature of S2.
For example, if S2 is presented C within a narrow temporal window of S1, the C synapse is potentiated .
If the temporal window is longer , S2 will cause a synaptic depression despite being the same Time Time stimulus .
However, it is important to consider that chloride homeostasis is dynamic and is directly influenced by the chloride flux through GABA, Rs.
Thus, during a period of postsynaptic depolarization  that generates a large driving force for chloride influx, LTPs augments the rate of chloride influx "".
When combined with the impaired chloride extrusion mechanism  during stress, LTP GABA favours the development of subsequent depolarizing GABA response and can, paradoxically, contribute to the stress-induced sensitization of PNCs.
In this model, the role of LTPABA and LTD in shaping HPAaxis responses fits with existing evidence from in vivo studies suggesting that noradrenaline contributes to sensitization of H PA-axis output"'"" and that CORT provides negative feedback to prevent overactivation of the HPA axis""'.
Conclusions and future perspectives The descriptions of multiple forms of plasticity at synapses onto PNCs indicate that there are multiple mechanisms by which the brain adapts to stressors.
Importantly, they provide a framework in which to ask more precise questions about how organisms use information from one exposure to stress to make adjustments to ensuing stressful experiences.
Here, we have described multiple embedded biochemical changes following an acute stress that can bias synapses towards plasticity when these synapses are subsequently recruited in an activity-dependent fashion.
This is consistent with the definition of metaplasticity"'.
We have also noted that the nature of the plasticity is dependent on how soon after stress the synapses are interrogated.
In other words, there seem to be opportune moments for the induction of distinct forms of plasticity following stress.
Temporal windows for bidirectional plasticity following stress have also been described in the amygdala "', suggesting that it may be important to incorporate time as a key variable when discussing plasticity or metaplasticity.
Consequently, we propose a new descriptor for the lexicon of plasticity, kairoplasticity, which incorporates distinct temporal windows for bidirectional changes in synaptic strength BOX 1.
One plausible consequence of such a mechanism is that it contributes to the versatility of the system, enabling context-specific adjustment of the stress response.
These observations also raise new questions: for example, how are these distinct modes of plasticity encoded by one stressor affected by subsequent experiences?
Glutamatergic synapses onto PNCs, for example, are primed for multivesicular release for more than 3 days after a single stress challenge 5 ; how subsequent stressors are integrated during this time window remains unclear.
Moreover, it is possible that mechanisms exist to reverse these synaptic changes.
For example, living in an 'enriched' environment could be one way in which stress-embedded synaptic changes are erased.
Recent work demonstrating that stress-induced loss of eCB signalling at PNC synapses can be restored following exposure to novel stimruli" 2 is consistent with the idea that the salience of an experience may be a critical element in returning HPA-axis activity to baseline' 2.
Although recent studies have increased our understanding of synaptic function and plasticity in the PVN, there are still many important and unresolved issues.
The adoption of new tools that enable specific activation of identified cell populations will be extremely beneficial for gaining a better understanding of the interactions between co-transmitters in the PVN.
Using glutamate microdrops, this study maps the potential locations of GABA cells that provide input to the PVN.
Evanson, N. K., Van Hooren, D. C. & Herman, J. P. GluR5-mediated glutamate signaling regulates hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenocortical stress responses at the paraventricular nucleus and median eminence.
Expression of ionotropic glutamate receptor subunit mRNAs by paraventricular corticotropinreleasing factor  neurons.
Herman, J. P, Eyigor, 0., Ziegler, D. R. & Jennes, L. Expression of ionotropic glutamate receptor subunit mRNAs in the hypothalamic paraventricular nucleus of the rat.
Levine, S. Maternal and environmental influences on the adrenocortical response to stress in weanling rats.
Francis, D. D., Champagne, F. A., Liu, D. Meaney, M. J. Maternal care, gene expression, and the development of individual differences in stress reactivity.
Maguire, J. Neurosteroidogenesis is required for the physiological response to stress: role of neurosteroidsensitive GABAA receptors.
This paper shows that stress causes a post-translational modification of KCC2 to modify chloride gradients and also demonstrates a clear role for extrasynaptic GABAA receptors.
Wamsteeker Cusulin, J. I., Fuzesi, T., Watts, A. G. Bains, J. S. Characterization of corticotropin-releasing hormone neurons in the paraventriCular nucleus of the hypothalamus of Crh-/RES-Cre mutant mice.
A., Davies, P A. Moss, S. J. Hyperpolarizing GABAergic transmission depends on KCC2 function and membrane potential.
Morilak, D. A. et ol, Role of brain norepinephrine in the behavioral response to stress.
Match each row with its correct column.
For most leaders today, frequent stress is inevitable.
But with awareness and a little skill, its negative impacts are not.
Intense negative experiences of stress are all too common.
Consider Stefano, coauthor of this article.
In 1998, Stefano began a career abroad while simultaneously completing an MBA.
He worked and studied 14 hours a day, seven days a week, fueled by a constant flow of stress hormones.
By the end of that year, he suffered from fatigue, headaches, impatience, and irritability, yet he ignored his symptoms and kept going.
Soon those symptoms escalated into full-blown burnout: dizziness, heart palpitations, inability to concentrate, panic attacks, apathy, insomnia, and depression.
He eventually decided that he needed to take a full six months to rebuild his mental and physical well-being before he could return to work.
Chronic stress impacts people in different ways.
In a recent global survey we conducted of 740 leaders, 84% reported experiencing stress on a regular basis .
As you might expect, more than half of the 84% said stress had a negative impact on their effectiveness, interactions, or business results.
However, the remaining leaders - around 45% - told a different story.
In their experience, stress either had no impact on their leadership or had a positive effect.
More than 25% said stress actually improved their effectiveness.
What accounts for these results?
And what are those people doing that Stefano did not?
The leaders we've worked with over several decades have given us a wide variety of answers.
In this article, we focus on two: tipping point awareness and stress shifting.
Like many other leadership capacities, stress management requires self-awareness.
Each of us has our personal "tipping point," the critical edge where moderate, tolerable stress transitions to chronic stress - and a constant flux of stress hormones drive us to the point of a breakdown.
Leaders who manage stress well are able to recognize signs that they're approaching that point and consciously, deliberately step back from the edge.
Signs of chronic stress fall into three main categories: physical, mental/emotional, and behavioral.
The symptoms listed below are some of the most common complaints that leaders have told us they experience only, or to a greater degree, under chronic stress.
While each of these can adversely impact leadership, they all either directly or indirectly stem from instinctive reactions we evolved to protect ourselves.
When we're faced with a threat, whether real or imagined, our body mobilizes to prepare us for one of three survival responses: fight, flight, or freeze.
For instance, a racing heart sends a rush of blood to the major muscles used to hit, kick, or run away.
As primitive, unconscious reactions kick in, higher cognitive functions suffer.
Stress hormones can dramatically impair concentration, planning, and decision making, all of which happen within the prefrontal cortex.
These inborn survival mechanisms are ill-matched with present-day realities.
Success in our professional and personal lives requires flexible intellectual, emotional, and social responses rather than instinctive physical reactions.
And the challenges we face often persist for long periods of time, leading to chronic activation of a survival system that evolved to function only in emergencies.
Eventually, that chronic activation can push any of us to our tipping point.
We all have our limits, and when we stretch them too far we experience some combination of physical, mental/emotional, and behavioral symptoms that intensify as our stress levels rise.
We need the awareness to notice them, as well as the courage to make tough choices to bring our stress levels down.
As one leader put it, "In a world that constantly invites us to go beyond our limits, the most courageous response is to be aware of our limits and resist the mermaids' chant that invites us to keep going."
Seventeen years ago, if Stefano had heeded his own physical and emotional warning signs, he could have prevented them from escalating, avoiding a great deal of suffering.
Stress shifting Of course, committing to reducing stress is only useful if you have some idea of how to do that.
We encourage leaders to use whatever techniques work for them.
But there's one practice we consistently recommend that can enable and support all the others: intentional breathing.
Breathing is both involuntary and voluntary.
This gives us the power to interrupt our involuntary stress responses and establish greater balance in our autonomic nervous system.
The autonomic nervous system has two branches: the sympathetic  and parasympathetic .
When these two branches are alternately activated in a consistent pattern, we can enter into a state called coherence.
Coherence is characterized by emotional stability and increased access to the prefrontal cortex, which promotes mental clarity, focus, and concentration -just what we need to tackle leadership challenges more effectively.
Stress, in contrast, is characterized by strong sympathetic activation with less parasympathetic activation, so we are constantly accelerating.
And this is where breathing comes in: On the inhale our heart rate accelerates, and on the exhale it slows down.
This heart rate information is sent directly to the brain, which plays a part in regulating the autonomic nervous system.
Therefore, when we engage in a regular pattern of inhalation and exhalation, we help to establish a balance between sympathetic and parasympathetic activation.
We recommend using a three-step approach to engage intentional breathing: 1.
When stress hits, it's helpful to have a cue - like a simple sign saying "Breathe" - that reminds you to take a breath.
Start with a couple of strong, long, and deep breaths.
Try to notice the physical sensations that accompany these breaths.
After a few of these initial breaths, move to a technique called resonant breathing,where the total time spent on each inhalation and exhalation together is 10 seconds, for a total of six breaths per minute.
Resonant breathing is particularly helpful in accessing coherence.
You may find it helpful to learn how to do this while walking; the pace of your steps can provide a regular tempo for your breath.
Eventually the rhythm will continue on its own, and you can stop timing.
Continue until your state of mind shifts and you feel a sense of control over your own reactions.
Establishing coherence is useful in almost any context, not just high-stress situations.
The more you practice the three steps, the easier it will be to engage in intentional breathing when you need it most.
Intentional breathing played a critical role in Stefano's recuperation.
In time, Stefano gained more energy, his heart palpitations ceased, and his heart rhythms became more coherent.
At the same time, his depression lifted and his impatience and irritability disappeared, leaving him calm and relaxed.
Today, Stefano is in excellent health.
Like all of us, he sometimes faces stressors that tempt him to push beyond his limits.
But he now has the awareness, knowledge, and skill to bring himself back into balance.
Specific respiratory patterns distinguish among human basic emotions.
The effects of emotional behaviour on components of the respiratory cycle.
Respiratory sinus arrhythmia, emotion, and emotion regulation during social interaction.
Evening exposure to a light-emitting diodes -backlit computer screen affects circadian physiology and cognitive performance.
Clinical applications of breathing regulation beyond anxiety management.
The virtual meditative walk: virtual reality therapy for chronic pain management.
Biophone: Physiology monitoring from peripheral smartphone motions.
Virtual reality as an adjunctive non-pharmacologic analgesic for acute burn pain during medical procedures.
Physiology of long pranayamic breathing: neural respiratory elements may provide a mechanism that explains how slow deep breathing shifts the autonomic nervous system.
Effects of a relaxation breathing exercise on anxiety, depression, and leukocyte in hemopoietic stem cell transplantation patients.
Effects of stress throughout the lifespan on the brain, behaviour and cognition.
Effect of yoga-based and forced uninostril breathing on the autonomic nervous system.
Let me relax: Toward automated sedentary state recognition and ubiquitous mental wellness solutions.
In Proceedingsof the 5th EAI InternationalConference on Wireless Mobile Communication and Healthcare, pages 28-33.
Psychological stress and the human immune system: a meta-analytic study of 30 years of inquiry.
Confusion and controversy in the stress field.
A virtual reality system combined with biofeedback for treating pediatric chronic headache?a pilot study.
Adverse health effects of high-effort/low-reward conditions.
Use of mindfullness mediation to increase attentiveness in the inclusive classroom.
Respiratory sinus arrhythmia: A marker of resilience to pain induction.
Inhalation/exhalation ratio modulates the effect of slow breathing on heart rate variability and relaxation.
Interactively mediating experiences of mindfulness meditation.
Nonpharmacologic treatment of resistant hypertensives by device-guided slow breathing exercises.
Sigh rate and respiratory variability during mental load and sustained attention.
A sigh following sustained attention and mental stress: effects on respiratory variability.
The demands?control model of job strain: A more specific test.
