This paper considers the design, construction, and example use of a new type of 3D printer which fabricates threedimensional objects from soft fibers .
This printer allows the substantial advantages of additive manufacturing techniques  to be employed with a new class of material.
This material is a form of loose felt formed when fibers from an incoming feed of yarn are entangled with the fibers in layers below it.
The resulting objects recreate the geometric forms specified in the solid models which specify them, but are soft and flexible - somewhat reminiscent in character to hand knitted materials.
This extends 3D printing from typically hard and precise forms into a new set of forms which embody a different aesthetic of soft and imprecise objects, and provides a new capability for researchers to explore the use of this class of materials in interactive devices.
Additive manufacturing - most commonly referred to as 3D printing - offers exciting new possibilities for the creation of physical objects.
It allows object geometry to be specified  in purely virtual form on the computer, and then realized in physical form seemingly "at the push of a button".
As a result, it enables both rapid prototyping of physical forms and new forms of mass customization not previously practical.
Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Publication rights licensed to ACM.
A 3D Printed Teddy Bear.
Solid model , printing in progress  and result .
Finally, recent advances have dramatically reduced the cost of this technology , making it accessible to a broad range of people and allowing the formation of a community of mostly non-professional makers who can share and customize object designs .
In this paper we introduce a technique which extends the range of additive manufacturing to include a new class of material which we believe is interesting to the HumanComputer Interaction  community.
Currently, nearly all additive manufacturing has focused on the production of precise forms using hard materials such as plastic and metal.
In the work presented here we consider a technique to manufacture objects made from needle felted yarn .
This material moves away from an aesthetic of very precise shapes and hard lines, towards the more varied texture and feel of hand crafted fiber arts.
However, at the same time we retain the ability to create designs using solid modeling software and fabricate them on demand, which is central to the advantages of additive manufacturing.
This opens up new possibilities in the creation of interactive objects which are soft and flexible, and so more suitable to be worn or simply "held close".
Figure 1, shows one such example in the form of a printed Teddy Bear.
In the next section we will very briefly consider related work.
We will then consider the details of how our prototype printer is constructed and used.
Then we will explore several techniques for going beyond creating of simple soft solid forms, considering how hard objects  might be embedded inside prints, how the connection between hard and soft materials can be managed, and how we might systematically manipulate the stiffness of objects.
The design and construction of an example object using these techniques will be considered, then limitations and prospects for future will be discussed.
The felting needle used in this work is triangular with barbs in the form of notches placed approximately 2mm apart around the needle.
Soft sensors in particular are of considerable interest for HCI .
These developments all form important prerequisites for progress in this area.
Substantial prior work has been done on embedding electronics in fabric and fabric-based objects .
This has in turn been an enabler for new types of interactive devices and new styles of interaction.
We will not attempt to review this large literature here, but can point to several important themes and a few exemplars of each.
These include: the development of techniques for creation of circuits  on and with fabric , examining new applications that are enabled by an ability to work with a soft, flexible, or otherwise more "personal" forms for electronic device , and the personal and community effects engendered by extending electronic making into new domains, looking for example at the relationship of this work to crafts and the DIY movement .
More generally, new technologies for personal fabrication have begun to open up new possibilities for exploring the space of interactive devices.
Recent work has looked at making use of new materials for 3D printed input and output components , new fabrication techniques using existing technology , as well as new classes of fabrication .
Work has also considered better systems and tools for supporting existing fabrication processes for prototyping of devices .
Another emerging area of considerable overlap with the work presented here is soft robotics .
Felt is a textile which is created by entangling and compressing sheets of fibers .
The printing technique introduced in this paper involves a process of needle felting where a barbed needle  is repeatedly passed through a body of fibers in order to draw fibers down into layers below and entangle them there.
Barbed needles are used for this purpose in the commercial manufacture of felt  as well as the craft of needle felting.
Needle felting craft objects include fibrous decorative materials such as felt, yarn, and loose fiber roving, joined onto  loosely woven or knitted clothing .
In a more closely related, but less structured form, needle felting can also used to construct full 3D forms from fiber .
In the process introduced here we produce threedimensional felted forms in a layered fashion.
Like many other forms of 3D printing we form solid objects by creating a series of thin layers of material, each representing a horizontal slice of the final geometry.
By working from the bottom of the object up, and bonding each layer of material together  a complete 3D object with fairly arbitrary geometry can be formed.
For each layer in this process we place fiber, in the form of yarn, along a winding 2D path which fills the layer.
As we deposit this yarn along the printing path, we bond it to the layers below by repeatedly piercing it with a felting needle - dragging down individual fibers from the yarn into the layer below and entangling them there.
To accomplish this process mechanically we use a new custom felting print head  attached to a precision 3D motion platform.
The motion platform is driven by stepper motors and control electronics which respond to the same "G-Code" commands used for RepRap 3D printers  and very similar to those used by many CNC machines .
Specifically the open hardware Arduino-based RAMPS control and drive electronics  and open source Repetier firmware  are used .
On the  bed of our printer we use a 50mm thick block of felting foam - a coarse, open pore, foam rubber which absorbs needle punches well without degradation.
This is topped by a sheet of manufactured felt which provides a body of "starter fiber" for the first printed layer to entangle with.
The final print may be carefully peeled away from this base felt, or it may be cut to shape and left in place for added strength.
The resulting prints are soft and flexible.
The dark mounting plate is laser cut acrylic, while white parts are 3D-printed This process of forming layers, each constructed from material deposited along a path to fill the layer, is tightly analogous to the process used for Fused Deposition Modeling   which is the most common process used for lower-end 3D printing today.
In fact, the process is so similar that we were able to simply attach our custom print head to an existing FDM printer  and directly employ an existing open source slicing and path planning program for FDM printing , augmented with custom translation software as a post-processor, to drive it.
Figure 3 shows the felting print head which is the heart of the printer described here.
The primary action of the print head is to drive a felting needle up and down through the incoming yarn and into the base of previously printed fibers.
This reciprocal motion is provided by a rack and pinion driven by a stepper motor.
A double helical  gear tooth pattern is used to reduce alignment issues and allow wider construction tolerances, and an endstop switch is used to establish a home position for the rack.
The felting needle is attached to the end of the rack and moves up and down within a custom 3D printed feed head whose interior geometry is shown in Figure 4.
This feed head allows new yarn to enter along the tube angled to the left.
The yarn then joins a 2mm diameter tube guiding the needle and is contained there with the needle for a length of 8mm until it emerges through a hole in the center of the foot.
This area where yarn and needle are together in a tightly confined space helps ensure that the barbs on the needle catch some part of the yarn on their trip down.
To regulate the entry of yarn into the feed head a feed lock mechanism controlled by a servo motor is used.
This mechanism either allows yarn to travel freely from a low friction spool  or stops the feed of yarn entirely by pinching it between two gripping bars.
This mechanism serves a purpose somewhat analogous to tension control in a conventional sewing machine in that it allows an appropriate amount of yarn to enter the machine for each step along a printing path.
However, conventional uniform tension was found not to work in this case.
Our experimentation with early versions of the printer showed that a very low friction feed of yarn is critical while the head is in motion between steps, and for the first needle punch of a printing step.
This is because even small amounts of tension on the yarn feed will create a tendency for the previous felting location to "pull out" rather than feeding new yarn in .
On the other hand, the yarn must not feed continuously, as each of the multiple needle punches necessary to properly felt the yarn into the layer below would pull in new yarn.
Our experimentation showed that this creates felting paths which "bunch up", rather than producing a single smooth line of material.
Tensioning which varies during the felting process is accomplished by opening the feed lock before the printer is moved to the next step location, and closing it after the first punch of the needle, leaving it closed for the remaining punches which serve to "felt in" the yarn at that spot.
In addition, we regulate the amount of yarn drawn in by the first punch by making it a bit shorter than later punches .
The printing paths produced from a 3D model by the slicing software are made up of a series of "G-Code" commands for linear movements , some of which also contain commands for extruding plastic, and some of which do not.
We use a custom program to translate these commands into modified G-Codes appropriate to drive our machine.
In particular, non-extruding moves  are tracked, but passed on to the movement controller as is, while each extruding linear moves are translated into a series of felting steps.
We use a step size as close to our target step size  as possible and still produce an integral number of steps per line.
At each step we do the following: 1.
Move to the step location Initiate the punch sequence with control line pulse Performed by independent print head controller: 2.1.
Perform an initial  needle punch 2.2.
Close the feed lock 2.3.
Perform N  full length felting punches 2.4.
Needle felting most typically uses unspun fibers  rather than yarn because the spinning process makes the fibers slightly less available for entanglement .
However, yarn has the significant advantage that it can be easily spooled and fed through the printing mechanism in a controlled and consistent fashion.
Nonetheless it may be useful in future work to consider mechanisms which can handle pencil roving rather than yarn.
Yarn used for the printer must be suitable for felting.
Yarn made from animal hair, most notably wool, is the most suitable material due to the micro-structure of its fiber surfaces.
However we have also had good success with wool blends which include at least 50% wool.
Synthetic yarns not blended with wool  appear to be unsuitable for felting because the very smooth microsurfaces of the fibers do not entangle well.
We also found cotton fibers to be wholly unsuitable and "superwash" wool  does not perform well.
Overall we found that less tightly spun yarns with a lot of loose fibers - what might be described simply as "fuzzy" - produced the best results.
However, the difference between the best and worst results for a particular fiber type were not found to be as dramatic as differences in fiber type - specifically all  wool and most wool blend yarn we tried felted quite well.
Because yarn is soft, inherently variable, and is compressed during printing, accurately measuring of the diameter of yarn to establish the proper thickness of layers is a bit difficult.
Most of the yarn we experimented with was approximately 2mm in diameter  and because printed layers are easily compressed this "round number" worked well for most prints.
However, for tall prints  sub-millimeter inaccuracy in the layer height is compounded.
We found it was necessary to empirically determine the best layer height for these tall prints.
For example we determined that the yarn we used most often printed best in tall prints using a layer height of 2.25mm instead of the 2mm.
Due to the comparatively large thickness of the material being depositing  dimensional accuracy is inherently more limited than in other forms of 3D printing.
In addition to this inherent limitation we also found that the flexibility and compressibility of the material also contributed to inaccuracies in the result.
Parts 1,2, and 3 are performed by the unmodified control board  of the original 3D printer.
While parts 2.1-2.4 are performed by custom drive electronics  for the print head when triggered by a pulse on a control line connecting the two controllers.
As currently configured, a punch sequence takes just under 1 second .
Moves between felting steps can be performed quickly, resulting in a printing rate of approximately 2mm per second.
One important limitation of the current prototype print head is that it does not have a mechanism for cutting the yarn.
Feeding extra yarn during non-felting moves often just requires a bit of additional "clean up" after printing .
However, in some cases previously felted yarn can be "pulled up" during a long move.
Further, this type of effect does not occur evenly.
This results in an overall randomness of the result which makes its character much more like hand knitting and much less like tightly woven manufactured cloth .
While this change of character can be seen as one of the interesting and desirable properties of the result, it also limits the feature size of things that can be printed with this material.
For example, the solid model for the test bear shown in Figure 1 contains features for a small nose and eyes .
However, these end up fairly indistinct in the final result.
Due to the flexibility of the material we were initially concerned that we would be unable to print taller objects.
However, in our tests we found that we could successfully print objects up to the limit of our initial prototype machine  as long as they were not too narrow.
For example we printed a 50mm diam x 75mm tall cylinder without much difficulty .
However, for a similar 30mm cylinder we encountered some distortions at higher layers from the "wobble", and large problems for a 20mm cylinder.
As in several other types of 3D printing, the geometry of printed objects cannot be completely arbitrary.
In particular, geometry containing overhangs, where part of a layer has little or no material in the layer below it, can be problematical since at the limit the layer can be "printing over thin air".
This same limitation applies to e.g., FDM printing.
For FDM printing this can be overcome by printing extra sacrificial support material which is removed in a post-processing step.
Even without support material, overhangs of up to 45 can typically be supported .
In fact in FDM printing overhangs of a bit more than 45 can sometimes be printed without support due the adhesion of the material when it is hot.
While the felting printer can also print extra material to provide support for overhanging elements of the geometry, it can be a tricky to determine exactly what material should be removed and remove it without damage to the layers above.
To determine how much overhang can be tolerated without support, we performed tests on objects with increasing overhang angles.
We found that as the overhang increased deeper layers would get pushed out farther from their intended locations resulting in a gradual degradation of the shape away from its intended geometry.
However, this gradual degradation also allowed overhang angles up to 55 in our tests to print without failure .
Many of these will occur inside the solid model.
However, the remainder can be easily removed with scissors.
In addition, the imprecision of the printing process  can sometime leave the outside perimeters of layers with small loops or bulges.
If desired, these can be "tidied up" by trimming with scissors and/or a bit of hand needle felting work to bind stray yarn more tightly back into the body of the print.
Note that these cleanup steps are very much analogous to the kind of trimming and sanding work that is very often needed to clean up FDM printed plastic models on typical lower-end printers.
In addition to cleanup steps it is also possible to increase the tightness of fiber binding within the resulting felt and the overall density of printed objects by agitating the objects in hot water .
Our experiments show that this makes the resulting objects considerably firmer.
However, the wool fibers making up the object also shrink changing the dimensions of the object.
Considerably more experimentation is needed to properly characterize these effects and of course this post-processing may be problematical if embedded electronics are used.
Printing of custom solid soft objects provides an interesting new capability in and of itself.
However, to take full advantage of this capability for innovative interactive devices, we would like to integrate additional electronic and mechanical components and may also want to manipulate the structural properties of the resulting object.
In this section we consider some of these aspects.
Considerable etextiles work has been done which shows e.g., how to integrate electronic components with fabric objects.
Much of this work is applicable in this domain as well and can largely be reused.
Consequently, we will not cover it in detail here.
For example, it should be easy to stitch in areas of conductive thread to create capacitive touch sensors .
In this section, we will instead concentrate more on aspects which are mostly unique to the nature of this work such as its 3D form.
To explore the full potential of soft printed objects as a form factor for interactive devices we would like to embed electronic components for sensing and display, as well as motors and mechanisms for actuation within the material.
Unfortunately, many of the components we might like to embed would not seem to be very compatible with repeated strikes from a very sharp motor-driven needle.
To address this challenge we have developed several different embedding mechanisms which can be used in different circumstances.
In this section we consider five methods: Sew in/on later, Deep pocket embedding, Direct felt-over, Capped pockets, and Nylon braid tunnels.
The simplest solution, and one used by most previous fabric-based devices, is to simply sew components onto or into the body of the felted object after it has been constructed.
For example circuit boards and other components can be sewn on the outside of the object, or under a sewn on flap.
Also because the material is soft and fibrous, a sewing or yarn needle can be used to pull conductive thread through a considerable depth of material , or from the surface of the material to an interior cavity .
This would allow, for example, components such as LEDs sewn onto the surface, to be easily connected to interior components such as a micro-controller.
In fact, due to the pioneering fabric-based interface work of the past, a range of electronic components specifically designed for sew on use are currently available commercially .
Since both the exterior and interior geometry of an object can be fairly arbitrary, it is also possible to create interior cavities or pockets to hold components.
With this approach, an interior void is specified in the object geometry.
When the print reaches some number of layers past the bottom of this void, it can be paused.
Then a component can be placed in the partial or complete pocket, and the print continued, forming layers over the top of the pocket.
However, the nature of the printing process constrains this approach.
In particular, to create good felted bonds between layers our experimentation has shown that the felting needle should generally penetrate 15mm into the material .
This means that for hard or vulnerable components  there must be a 15mm gap between the top of the component and the top of the pocket.
Since we generally cannot "print in mid -air" over large unsupported areas, we accomplish this by placing a small piece of foam or other "stuffing material"  in the 15mm void above the embedded component.
Printed layers at the top of the deep pocket then felt into this support material and the needle does not strike the embedded component.
This deep pocket approach to embedding is suitable for large prints which can contain a ~20mm tall interior void.
For these cases we can consider several other approaches.
First, based on our experiments we have determined that it is possible to simply felt over a few more types of objects than is immediately apparent.
For thin wires  our experiments show that they can be simply placed on top of a layer in a paused print, held loosely in place by hand or with pins, and simply felted over.
Our observations show that when the thin needle strikes these objects they simply shift slightly to one side to allow it to pass .
Similar results were also obtained with conductive thread.
We did not see thread breakage in our tests.
We also have not observed spurious conductivity between felted in conductive threads crossing at right angles and separated by a layer of felted yarn.
However, we do not feel our tests at present are exhaustive enough to determine that this will always avoid shorts.
In a "torture test" we also successfully felted over a 2.5mm wide nylon wire tie.
In this case the needle hit the wire tie on every pass across it and was unable to shift it out of the way in most cases.
However, due to the flexibility of the wire tie itself and the compressibility of the 50mm foam pad on the bed of the printer, the material was depressed enough to avoid breaking the needle or causing its motor to skip steps, and the print continued successfully.
This indicates that the direct felt-over approach may be more viable than immediately obvious.
However, more testing is needed to define the range of its applicability.
For cases where direct felting-over is not viable, we have developed a more involved capped pocket method which allows objects to be placed in pockets no deeper than the embedded object so long as the pocket can be placed within a few printing layers of the top of the print .
To do this, we first separately print a thin cap consisting of a felt base with one or two layers of yarn felted on top of it.
The felt is cut with a ~4mm "lip" sticking out past the printed yarn layers.
In the main object we use a pocket geometry illustrated in the cutaway view of Figure 5 .
The print is stopped one layer above the top of the pocket, the embedded object is inserted, the previously printed cap  is placed on top, and the print is continued.
The remaining layers then felt through the cap lip and abut the cap yarn layers.
This results in a surface covered with felted yarn as shown at the bottom of Figure 5, but is formed in a way which never has the needle intrude into the embedded object's pocket.
In order to address this issue and provide more usefulness for resulting printed objects we have developed a simple technique for bridging between hard and soft materials.
This technique involves felting in a layer of nylon mesh fabric to form this interface.
The holes in the mesh allow felting fibers to pass through it and be entangled in layers below the mesh.
This thoroughly embeds the mesh within the felting and can be done without otherwise disturbing the print .
Since the mesh stretches slightly  this allows any forces on the mesh to be distributed over the whole area where it is embedded.
Specifically lateral forces on the mesh will be transferred to the fibers of the felting at the boundary of nearly every hole in the mesh rather than being concentrated in a small area, e.g., immediately around a hard connection point.
This leaves the problem of attaching hard objects to the nylon mesh.
The nylon mesh is much stronger than the printed felt and in many cases is sufficiently strong to attach to directly.
However, to provide more robustness for attachment and allow us to also spread out the forces applied from a hard object into the mesh, we have developed a double embedding technique.
This technique embeds the mesh within the plastic of a 3D print .
Figure 6  shows an example of this.
Here we have constructed a large grommet around a 5mm mounting hole which is embedded in a patch of nylon mesh.
To construct this embedding we create a solid model for the grommet which leaves a small  gap for the mesh.
The layers below the mesh are printed.
The print is then paused and the mesh taped in place over the partially constructed grommet.
The print is then resumed  to print layers of plastic over the mesh.
This results in an embedded patch of mesh which is tightly bound to the plastic layers surrounding it.
A mesh patch prepared in this way can then be felted into an object printed on the felting printer using one of the embedding techniques described in the last subsection.
For our experiments with this technique we used a nylon mesh with ~2mm holes which appears very suitable for embedding both in the FDM deposited plastic and the felting.
However, to provide clearance for potential unevenness in the mesh and/or very small wrinkles we used a 0.4mm layer height in the FDM print .
When initially deposited, the hot thermoplastic seems to flow over and through the mesh, including any small irregularities, and bonds firmly with the plastic in the layer below.
Cutaway view of capped pocket internal geometry , and resulting cap surface .
This method makes use of flexible nylon braided tubes which are sold for use as wire bundle covers.
In this case, the print is paused, and the nylon tube is placed on top, then loosely pinned or held in place.
The print then continues, felting the tube in place through the braid, first with one layer only at the edges, then fully over the tube .
After printing is complete, the interior of the tube can be partially cleared of fibers with e.g., a small screwdriver shaft, and then objects may be inserted into the relatively slippery nylon tube.
To accommodate thicker objects the layers above and below the tube can be constructed with small gaps or holes to allow more room for the tube to expand .
Figure 8 shows the use of this type of nylon braid tunnel as part of a flexible bend actuator.
In order to fasten printed objects to most types of materials it is necessary to bridge between hard "external" materials  and the soft felted material produced by the printer.
Such a bridging is also necessary if internal motors or other actuators are to be embedded in the object to move it, since the solid actuator must push or pull the felting.
Unfortunately, the felting which results from the printer is not as strong as e.g., typical fabric.
In addition, we do not necessarily have the ability to apply reinforcement techniques developed in that domain such as the extra stitching around button holes.
As a result, when forces end up being transferred from e.g., an attachment point with a bolt, rivet, or other solid connector, into the printed object, it is often not  strong enough, and will tend to  rip out.
However, we found that this sort of fabric stiffener could only increase stiffness to a low to moderate degree.
To achieve more stiffness  we also experimented with the creation of custom stiffening sheets.
In this technique we again used nylon mesh embedded in 3D printed plastic.
The nylon mesh can then later be embedded in a felting print to provide a smooth distribution of forces applied to the grommet across the many fibers felted through the mesh.
This technique is particularly flexible because the solid model for the plastic part of the interface can be specified to directly mate with the mounting holes and/or other geometry of the specific part being attached or embedded.
We also have flexibility in how much mesh surface is used to absorb and distribute forces and can tailor that surface area in the direction we expect forces from the hard/soft interface to be applied from.
A final area we explored was manipulating the stiffness of printed objects.
This is useful for example, for creating joints within articulated characters or foldable devices.
There we would like the joint to be more flexible than the material adjacent to it so that bending occurs at the joint rather than elsewhere.
For this purpose we looked at three techniques.
First we can increase the flexibility of the resulting printed object by leaving small gaps in the geometric model used to create it.
This causes the creation of small voids which bends can collapse into.
To increase stiffness we looked at two techniques.
In the first we placed a layer of low stretch fabric within the print.
This fabric was felted into the body of the print, with fibers from the layer above the fabric passing through it to felt with the layer below.
In our experiments we used a thin nylon organza fabric - essentially a very thin woven nylon mesh.
The properties of this particular fabric cause it to be both amenable to felting fibers through, and exhibit low stretch.
However, many other fabrics could likely be used for this purpose.
Since the fabric was less stretchable than the felt that was formed through it, it resisted bending somewhat more than the surrounding felt, thus somewhat increasing the stiffness of the area it was embedded in.
Additional layers of nonstretch fabric can be embedded to increase stiffness.
This allows us to create a range of different stiffnesses to meet different needs.
It also allows the stiffness of an object to shift incrementally across an area rather than changing at a single point from most to least stiff.
In this case we printed a series of thin lines bonded above and below the mesh as shown in Figure 6 .
This material is constructed from a solid model with the same mesh embedding procedure described above.
These lines were designed to be narrow enough  that they could be easily felted over - like other narrow objects we tried, the lines appear to shift slightly rather than break if they happen to be struck by the needle.
Sheets of this type can then be felted into the body of a print to significantly increase stiffness where desired.
Like the hard/soft material interface described above, the use of an embedded mesh allows forces to be distributed across an area, making the presence of a stiff material inside a soft one less problematic.
Because the stiffeners are 3D printed, the exact placement of stiff versus flexible regions can be easily specified as part of the solid model for the stiffening plastic.
Further the exact stiffness can be varied by leaving alternating gaps in the lines and/or manipulating the space between them.
This allows us to very finely manipulate the details of stiffness properties and thus to create objects which can be highly tailored to their intended use.
For example objects on the outside of clothing can be made to bend where they need to for comfort, while being more ridged in other locations.
For our experiments with custom stiffeners we used the same nylon mesh as our hard/soft material interfaces.
Like those tests we used two 0.4mm layers below the mesh, a 0.4mm gap for the mesh itself and two layers above the mesh.
We deposited the thinnest lines available on the printer .
As is evident in Figure 6 , the resulting print typically contained some flaws.
These were caused in two ways.
First the very narrow lines did not respond to unevenness in the mesh well in a few places.
In particular, the extruded plastic bead did not have plastic next to it which would help to hold it closer to its intended position when irregularities occurred.
Second, the very narrow separated lines stuck nearly as well to the printer bed as to the mesh and layer above, and so in a few spots the layers delaminated when they were removed from the printer.
Also, although inconclusive, our experiments raised questions about the long term robustness of the printed stiffeners - whether the thin lines might break over time and hence decrease stiffness.
Our tests were done with PLA thermoplastic.
However, it is likely that nylon would be a more robust material to deposit for this purpose.
Exploded view of a geometric model for articulated arm example.
The shape at the top left is printed on the felting printer, while the shapes along the lower right are 3D printed plastic parts, several of which are designed to include embedded nylon mesh.
These plastic parts are embedded inside of, or attached to, the felt component to form the final functioning arm which bends smoothly at shoulder, elbow, and wrist joints.
Partially printed arm example showing embedded components.
Here we can see an embedded black nylon mesh tube  which holds a yellow tendon wire.
This wire loops around a bolt which attaches the  assembly under it that is being printed over at this point.
This assembly contains an embedded metal nut, nylon mesh to spread forces from the hard attach point and 3D printed stiffening material.
In particular we consider an internally articulated arm which could be part of an interactive teddy bear.
This example combines embedding, hard/soft bridging and stiffness manipulation to create a soft arm which bends smoothly under control of a servo motor .
Figure 7 shows the solid model which was used to print each of the parts making up the final object which is depicted in Figure 9.
The form in the upper left of Figure 7 is the felted portion of the print which was printed on the felting printer.
The parts arrayed on the lower right are printed on an FDM 3D printer.
Several of these parts are designed to be embedded over nylon mesh as described in the last sections.
These parts include: a mounting bracket which connects a servo motor to a polyethylene tube which in turn connects to a nylon braid tube ; stiffening elements with gaps to support bending preferentially at shoulder, elbow and wrist joints; and an embedded connector  which attaches a tendon wire to the paw plate with a small bolt .
The tendon wire runs from the servo motor to a solid attachment point under the paw plate.
When this wire is retracted the arm bends  at the shoulder, elbow, and wrist joints formed by gaps in the stiffener as well as voids in the felt.
The full assembly arrayed in the lower right of Figure 7 is embedded inside  the felt shown at the upper left as it is printed.
Figure 8 shows some of this embedding part way through the printing process, while Figure 9 shows the final result.
This example illustrates some of the range of structures which might be combined to create fully interactive soft devices.
This allows for very rapid exploration of a space of prototypes which would not be possible without the use of this technology.
This paper has demonstrated the basic capability to 3D print objects in a soft material composed of needle felted yarn.
This new material opens up many new possibilities for 3D printed objects and extends the domain of 3D printing from primarily hard and precise objects into a domain which can include soft and imprecise objects.
This allows the exploration of a very different design aesthetic while still allows the many advantages of additive manufacturing techniques.
These include the ability to rapidly move from ideas, through virtual geometric models, to physically realized forms.
In this case we are able to design objects with mature solid modeling tools, and then print these objects in a few hours.
This can be contrasted with roughly equivalent hand knitted objects which do not have similar design tools  and would take days to create.
However, the work presented here is only a beginning.
The printing technique described here has several limitations and considerable future work is still needed.
Perhaps the most important limitation of this technique is the physical robustness of the resulting felted objects.
These objects exhibit reasonable strength for forces applied laterally to layers.
However, they are less robust to forces perpendicular to layers, tending to pull the layers apart.
To improve robustness in that direction in future work we may consider injecting very small amounts of a flexible adhesive in conjunction with the felting process in order to more permanently bind felted fibers between layers.
However, considerable experimentation will be needed to find an appropriate adhesive and application process.
In particular, a balance will need to be struck between adhesion and resulting stiffness if the soft character of the results are to be maintained.
Although imprecision is in some sense a desired part of our result, another limitation of the technique is that it may be too imprecise for some uses.
Finally, we feel that considerably more exploration is needed in designing new types of mechanisms, structures, and electronic sensors, within, around, and with this new material.
