T Touch screen surfaces large e enough for ten-finger inp put h have become increasingly popular, p yet typing t on touch s screens pales in comparison n to physical keyboards.
We W e examine typing g patterns that emerge when n expert users of p physical keybo oards touch-typ pe on a flat sur rface.
Our aim is to o inform future e designs of touch screen key yboards, with th he u ultimate goal of supporting to ouch-typing wi ith limited tacti ile f feedback.
To study s the issues inherent to flat-glass f typin ng, w we asked 20 expert typist ts to enter te ext under thr ree c conditions:  with no visual l keyboard and d no feedback on o in nput errors, then  with h and  without w a visu ual k keyboard, but with some feedback.
We W a also show that expert typists exhibit e spatiall ly consistent key p press distributi ions within an n individual, which provid des e evidence that eyes-free touc ch-typing may be possible on o to ersonalization in ouch surfaces and points to the role of pe s such a solution.
We conclude with implicati ions for design n.
Inadvertent to ouches occur frequently on n tabletops which makes touch screen keyboards vul lnerable to , w spuriou us input, espe ecially from t the user's arm m or palm.
Howev ver, touch scre een keyboards also offer rich potential for cus stomization and d adaptation be ecause they are e softwarebased.
Research a approaches e adaptive key yboards  and wearable keyboards include , bu ut have not yet offered high performance tex xt input.
In this paper, we exa amine typing patterns that em merge when ysical keyboar rds touch-type on a flat expert users of phy e .
O Our aim is to inform future designs of surface touch screen keyb boards, with the ultimate e goal of rting touch-typ ping with limit ted tactile feed dback.
T Touch surfaces s have become pervasive, mo ost commonly in th he form of mobile m phones s, and increas singly as larg ger ta ablets and in nteractive tabletops .
Unlike th heir mobile pho one counterparts, ta ablets and tabl letops are large e enough to ac ccommodate te enf finger text inpu ut.
To copy otherwis se, o or republish, to po ost on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires pri ior s specific permission n and/or a fee.
We were interested in questions such as: What will the distribution of key presses look like if users are given no visual constraints when typing?
Will the centroids for each key follow the layout of a standard rectangular keyboard?
Will certain keys have a larger spread of hits?
By using vision algorithms to detect hand contours, can we identify differences among users in key-to-hand mappings?
Our findings have implications for the design of static and personalized touch screen keyboards.
Based on finger touch data, we show that a curved keyboard with a gap between the hands is a more natural representation of actual typing patterns on flat surfaces than a standard rectangular keyboard.
We also show that some keys are more difficult to hit consistently than others, suggesting those keys should be made larger .
Typing patterns varied widely among users, but finger placement per key was highly reliable within an individual: with a simple classification approach using centroids of the key hit points, we classified key presses at 90% accuracy in a condition where there was no visual keyboard.
This paper contributes a formative study of unconstrained typing patterns on a flat surface, and an empirical basis for future development of ten-finger flat-surface keyboards.
We also show that expert typists exhibit spatially consistent key press distributions within an individual, which provides evidence that eyes-free text input may be possible on touch surfaces and points to the role of personalization in such a solution.
Finally, we also contribute design implications for both static and personalized touch screen keyboards.
Virtual keyboards provide a temporary allocation of screen space for text entry.
For the broader community, studies have largely focused on stylus or direct-touch interfaces.
Although findings described in this section are highly relevant to ten-finger typing, there will be differences in biomechanics and efficiency because most of these techniques support a single point of input.
Past research has examined key positioning and size.
However, later work by MacKenzie and Zhang  found that, although a smaller keyboard increased errors compared to a larger one, there was no reduction in speed.
This is in keeping with the application of Fitts' law to performance optimization of virtual keyboards .
Researchers have also explored relaxing the requirement to precisely hit each key.
Kristensson and Zhai  proposed a method whereby the overall geometric shape formed by all of the hit points for a word is considered in linguistic matching.
This approach was expanded on by Rashid and Smith  to enable typing without a priori determining the position of the keyboard, albeit with an extremely high error rate.
In similar work, Himberg et al.
Alternatives to tapping a virtual QWERTY keyboard have also been proposed, including alternate key layouts , gestures , and methods that enable users to stroke between keys .
Most of the on-screen methods were for small, mobile touch screens and none supported ten fingers.
In an observational study of tabletop use, Ryall et al.
Complementing our work, recent research has focused on tactile feedback to support tabletop text entry.
The first practical typewriter was introduced in 1874 and touch-typing gained prominence a few decades later due to performance advantages and reduced fatigue over hunt-andpeck typing .
The development of touch-typing expertise requires extensive training , with skilled typists reaching speeds of 60 WPM or higher .
Previous work on common typing errors serves as the basis for some of our own analysis.
Errors include misstrokes, which result from inaccurate finger movement, omissions, insertions, and interchanging of letters in the text .
Substitution errors, where one letter is substituted for another, occur most commonly in the same row or column, and can even be homologous  .
In a survey of typing studies, one relevant finding Salthouse  reports is that different fingers result in different error frequencies.
T The two cond ditions withou ut a visible keyboard  c captured natura al typing patter rns without the user adapting to a particular virt tual form facto or.
In the feedback c conditions , output was s in the form of asterisks for f e each non-space e touch.
The as sterisks allowe ed users to avo oid s spurious touch hes and ensure e touches regi istered with th he d device withou ut causing ch hanges in po ose and fing ger p placement by showing s which h key they ha ad hit.
Feedback w was also neces ssary to create a 1:1 mapping g between touch e events and lett ters in the pre esented phrase e in the asteri isk fe feedback, no keyboard k cond dition , sinc ce there was no n u underlying mod del of key loca ations.
We evaluated e typin ng e expertise with a physical keyb board typing te est at the start of e each session using u TextTest, a text entry evaluation to ool .
Participan nts typed twen nty phrases, ran ndomly selecte ed f from the MacK Kenzie phrase set s  .
On nly two partici ipants had exp perience with an nteractive table e, but all partic cipants had use ed a touch screen in m mobile phone.
Participants P we ere compensate ed $30.
A shor rt configuration n step was req quired at the st tart of each conditi ion: participan nts placed their r hands in a comfortable positio on within the input area  and t the system recorde ed the  loc cations of the t thumbs, and us sed them to place t the keyboard.
Participants could place th heir hands anywh here within the e input area for r this configur ration step.
The inp put area was in nactive at the s start of each trial.
P Participants sat t at a Microsof ft Surface table, which ran th he e experiment so oftware.
The Surface API reported touch e events, which served as the input signal.
In addition, our o s software processed raw imag ges provided by the Surface to e extract addition nal information n about the pa articipant's han nd p placement.
We e computed th he convex hul ll of each han nd u using custom vision algorith hms and Emg gu CV, an open s source C wrap pper for the Op penCV library.1 F Figure 2 show ws a screenshot of the exper riment softwar re, w with the prese ented phrase at the top of the screen, a r rectangular tex xt input area, and a the "Next phrase" butto on, w which allowed participants to o advance throu ugh the task.
The system recorded lo ogging data with w millisecond d timestamps.
For the physic cal ty yping test, an external e 22" monitor m  a and rectangular r keyboard wer re used.
The go oal of this cond dition was to ob bserve how exp pert typists positio on their hands s and fingers on the screen n and type withou ut the constrain nts of a visual k keyboard layou ut or issues with to ouch-input rec cognition errors.
We were in nterested in studyin ng hand and finger placem ment, such a as whether particip pants would re est their fingers s on the home r row during trials.
Participants u used the interf face shown in n Figure 2, t that the inpu ut area was c completely blan nk and no except feedba ack was provid ded on typing input .
To ma aintain a degre ee of consisten ncy across trial ls, two red dots a appeared at t the start of each trial, w where the particip pant's thumbs had been during the configu uration step .
The s her keys, as is s common on physical keyboards.
The the oth keyboa ard was placed d such that th he center of th he spacebar was p ositioned at t the mid-point of the thum mb location uration.
This p positioning wa as meant to during initial configu place th the keyboard m most comfortab bly for each use er.
Instruc ctions in both asterisk feedb back condition ns were to type c omfortably an nd naturally, b but with an em mphasis to place f fingers accura ately and to co orrect errors.
A As such, a backsp pace gesture w was provided as a right-to-left swipe  anywhere o on the right ha alf of the key yboard, we used th he gesture inst tead of a back kspace key to a avoid hand drift w while correcting g errors.
Partic cipants were in nstructed to ensure their asterisks s and spaces lin ned up with ch haracters in esented text be efore advancing g to the next tr rial .
The e ambiguity o of the asterisks s often made t the precise locatio on  o of an error d difficult to identify fy, especially y if partici ipants typed quickly.
Particip pants were ask ked to delete th he entire word containing an extr ra or missing character if th hey were uncer rtain about the exa act location of f the error.
Thi is obviously af ffected text entry s speeds but gave e us the ability y to infer users' intention, which is critical for t the purposes of f our study.
To provid e feedback on n the activatio on, the input a area turned e when all 10 fi fingers were de etected, and blu ue once the orange fingers s were lifted.
Because the e goals of th he asterisk feedba ack conditions s were not the same as s for the ricted conditi ion, the inco onsistency in activation unrestr method d did not affect t the quality of f collected data a.
The experimenter e did d s so by pressing a button on th he right of the e screen, causin ng th he red dots to o disappear an nd the input ar rea to turn lig ght b blue.
The partic cipant entered the phrase by touch-typing on o th he flat-glass surface.
No backspace b was provided, but b p participants cou uld request to restart r the trial l if they felt they h had committed typing errors.
T The goal of the e asterisk feed dback condition ns was to colle ect a an input strea am that could d be reliably processed an nd m mapped to user intention.
Ac ccurately label led touch even nts w were necessary y to evaluate typ ping patterns in n detail.
C Condition 2: As sterisk feedbac ck, no keyboar rd.
Similar to th he u unrestricted condition, this co ondition presen nted only a blan nk in nput area to participants.
Although A only a b blank input area was shown to o users, unlike e the unrestricted c condition, an underlying ke eyboard model disambiguated s spacebar presse es, letter key presses, p and al ll other touche es.
T This allowed spacebar s press ses to be prop perly labeled as s spaces and key y presses as ast terisks for the visual feedbac ck.
The simp ple h heuristic used to place the spacebar s was enough that th he h hidden spaceb bar worked fo or most parti icipants witho out h having to recon nfigure the loca ation of the thu umbs.
C Condition 3: Asterisk feedb back, visible keyboard.
Key y size and place ement were ba ased on the touch s screen keyboar rd provided by y the Microsof ft Surface.
Keys w were 0.9" in width and height, h slightly y larger than a p physical keybo oard .
We W confirmed d the use of th he la arger size base ed on feedback k during early pilots that 0.75"
We us sed a within-subjects, sing gle-factor desig gn .
The unres stricted conditi ion was always s presented o that participa ants would not t be biased by experience first so with in nput errors on t the touch scree en or by the lay yout of the visual keyboard.
As such, we e treat data fro om the unrest tricted and orders.
Study sessions were designed to la ast 1.5 hours.
P Participants eted a questio onnaire to col llect demograp phic inforcomple mation n and experience with touch screens, follow wed by the physica yping test.
Parti icipants then co ompleted 5 al keyboard ty practic ce phrases and 40 test phrase es with each o of the three typing conditions.
O Opportunities to rest were e provided ay through the test blocks.
The random phrases and pangrams were intermixed.
For each condition, the thumb configuration step was done once for the practice phrases and redone before the test phrases to allow participants to adjust their hands if they wished.
Finally, feedback questionnaires were administered.
Reported fractional degrees of freedom  are from Greenhouse-Geisser adjustments.
When parametric tests were not appropriate because the data violated the assumption of normality, we applied nonparametric equivalents, such as the Wilcoxon signed-rank test.
We report significant findings at p < .05.
Our goals were to learn how quickly users can type on a flat surface when they assume their input is accurate, and to observe the pattern of touches, especially those that were not the result of user-intended actions.
Figure 1 shows finger and non-finger touch points for all participants.
Typing speed was 31% slower than the physical keyboard.
We calculated WPM following MacKenzie : | | 1 1 WPM   60 5 where T is the final transcribed string and S is the elapsed time in seconds, in our case, from first to last finger touch in a trial.
For reset trials, we discarded input from before the reset.
This measure provides an indication of the speed that users could achieve on a flat surface under ideal conditions.
Although mean WPM was 31% slower than the physical keyboard, it is still almost 25 WPM faster than the predicted expert typing speed of a stylus-based QWERTY keyboard .
Fingers often rested on the screen, especially at the start of a trial.
At the start of each trial, participants placed their hands in preparation for typing, with most participants resting at least some fingers on the screen, as if on the home row .
We also compared the number of finger touches after the trial start to the length of the presented text.
There were slightly more finger touches than expected , indicating that participants sometimes rested their fingers on the screen or brushed them inadvertently against it.
However, looking at occurrences where three or more fingers were down simultaneously, we found that only five participants exhibited this behavior more than once .
These results demonstrate the need to support fingers resting on the home row between text entry sequences, but not necessarily during a sequence.
Hand and arm position varied.
Fewer than half the participants  consistently rested their hands on the screen, while the remaining participants rested their forearms on the edge of the table and hovered their palms.
These behaviors resulted in more than one non-finger touch per word .
How fast will users type with a visible keyboard versus no keyboard?
How many errors will they commit?
Is the emergent keyboard layout based on actual key presses different between the two conditions in terms of curvature and distance between hands?
Do some keys have greater x- or y-axis deviation than others?
Are such findings systematic by row or column?
Do key-to-hand mappings follow the touch-typing standard ?
Are key press locations for each key consistent?
How reliably can we classify key presses based on the observed centroids of key presses?
Across all participants, we collected 50,289 labeled key presses from the asterisk tasks, and 27,830 unlabeled finger touches in the unrestricted condition.
In addition, on every touch down event , we processed the raw image and recorded the convex hull around each hand.
Due to a technical problem, only the left hand convex hull was recorded for the first 8 participants-- this was remedied for the remaining participants.
Although we asked participants to correct all errors in the asterisk conditions, the ambiguity of providing asterisks as output meant that uncertainty remained in the labeling.
Expert typists recognize between 40-70% of their own typing errors by feel and without visual feedback , which means that errors likely remained in the data due to the ambiguous visual feedback we provided.
Clear cases of mislabeled key presses can be identified: for example, typing E then M instead of the opposite.
To account for these mislabelings, we removed outlying points for each key that were more than three standard deviations away from the mean in either the x or y direction .
We used repeated measures ANOVAs and paired two-tailed t-tests for our analyses.
F From the unre estricted typin ng condition, we w learned th hat u users can type quickly on a flat fl surface if th hey assume the eir f feedback is cor rrect.
With the e asterisk feed dback conditions w we can conduc ct a more detai iled analysis of f typing patter rns u using the 1:1 correspondenc ce between to ouch events an nd p presented text.
The no keyboard condition provides data to m most directly su upport touch-ty yping  on a flat fl s surface.
We co ompare the no keyboard k and visible keyboard c conditions in te erms of emerge ent keyboard shape, s the spread o of hits for indiv vidual keys, ke ey-to-hand map ppings, and ho ow a accurately finger touches can n be classified as specific key ys.
F Figure 6 shows s key presses fo or all participan nts.
Analyse es in this sectio on a are done on the e text entered after a a reset, if one o occurred.
O On average, 81 1.4% of key pr resses fell with hin the boundin ng b box of their corresponding c key for the visible v keyboard c condition .
This number n may se eem low, but it is n not surprising given that participants were e provided on nly w with asterisks and spaces as feedback.
We revisit th he r reliability of ke ey presses later r, in the Classif fication section n.
Althou ugh the main g goal of the aste erisk feedback conditions was no ot to measure typing speed d and errors, w we analyze them f ness.
We calc culated WPM as for the for completen unrestr ricted conditio on, with elapse ed time as the first to last key pr ress per trial.
The average WPM was sim milar across conditi ions: 27.5  with t the visible key yboard and 28.1  with h no keyboard.
That particip pants were s slower in the ese trials tha an in the unrestr ricted typing condition is unsurprising, given the empha asis on accuracy y and the prese ence of feedbac ck.
To qua antify errors, w we calculated th he keystrokes e entered per charact ter  ratio o :
Recall tha at participants had been the tra asked t to delete the e entire word con ntaining an err ror if there was un ncertainty abou ut where the e error had occu urred.
As a result, KSPC was re elatively high for both cond ditions: on ge, 1.26  for the v visible keyboar rd and 1.29 averag keyboard.
Sinc ce we counted backspace  for no k es as key press ses for this ana alysis, 13.0% and 14.5% gesture of type ed keys were c corrected in the e visible keyboard and no keyboa ard conditions, , respectively.
Overall, the si imilarity of the tw wo conditions i indicates partic cipants were n not signifiaving no visua al keyboard to r reference.
We w were interested in the overa all keyboard s shapes that n users were g given a visual l reference would emerge when visual constra aints .
Sin nce participants s could place t their hands here in the inp put area to ty ype, we norm malized the anywh centroi ids so that each participant's s centroids wer re centered around d the midpoint t between thei ir observed F and J key centroi ids .
Centro oids across all p participants are e shown in Figure 7.
Emerg gent keyboard d shape is more arched in the `no keyboa ard' condition than the `visi ible keyboard' condition.
We ex xamined wheth her having no visual constra aints would result i in a more anato omical keyboa ard layout.
All key y presses in aste erisk feedback conditions, c colo ored by key labe el.
Each participant's data is tr ranslated to the e s same midpoint between b F and J.
The visible ke eyboard shows m more consistenc cy across users than t no keyboar rd.
Centroids o rd deviations in n x and y direc ctions.
Bezier c curves fitted standar to the c centroids illustr rate curvature.
Each participa ant's data is transla ated to the same e midpoint betw ween F and J ke eys.
The mean absolute angle between each pair of keys in the no keyboard condition was 9.9 compared to the visible keyboard condition at 5.4 .
Thus, a curved keyboard design should best support touch-typing.
Distance between hands is greatest in the `no keyboard' condition.
We computed the average distance between the rightmost keys of the left hand and the leftmost keys of the right hand .
The mean distance in the visible keyboard condition is more than the 0.9" of space between visual key centers .
This result shows that users are most comfortable typing with a gap between their hands.
Even with a visible keyboard, the underlying key press model may need to take this gap into account.
The keyboard shape analyses showed that participants were most comfortable with a gap between their hands.
Although the most obvious split would be based on the standard keyto-hand mapping for touch-typing , an analysis of actual key-to-hand mappings indicates that even skilled typists have idiosyncrasies in this respect.
Spacebar use is predominantly by only one thumb.
Almost all participants used only one thumb for the spacebar , replicating previous results with a wearable keyboard .
There was no relationship between handedness and thumb choice.
Middle keys were often shared between hands.
Based on the 12 participants for whom we logged complete hand contour data, we checked within which hand each key press occurred.
Some participants used the opposite hand or alternated hands for the B, H, and Y keys .
Excluding potential noise from mislabeled data when there were few  key presses from a participant using the opposite hand, we saw the left hand accounted for 16.7% of Y presses  and 5.2% of H presses , while the right hand accounted for 11.4% of B presses .
In 0.15% of cases, the center of the touch point was offset such that it fell between the hand contours; half of such cases occurred with H.
Where the keyboard shape analysis examined centroids of key hits, a more detailed examination of the spread of hits per key allows us to identify individual keys that may benefit from an increase in size.
We first calculated the standard deviation of hits for each key per participant in xand y-directions.
We then grouped the 26 letter keys by finger and row, since previous research has shown these factors can affect error rates .
For example, the Q, A, Z, and P keys were grouped as little finger.
For each of x- and y-direction standard deviation, we ran a repeated measures ANOVA with the following within-subjects factors: typing input , row , and finger .
Overall, hit point deviations were greatest in the `no keyboard' condition.
These results reflect the pattern evident in Figure 6, that there was a smaller spread of hits for each key when participants were given visual constraints compared to when they were not.
The little finger resulted in the greatest horizontal spread of hits.
Pairwise comparisons showed the keys assigned to the little finger had significantly greater x-direction deviation than the ring  and middle fingers , while comparison to the index finger was only a trend .
No other significant main or interaction effects were found on xdirection deviation.
This finding suggests that keys pressed with the little finger should be widest.
Bottom row keys, especially with `no keyboard', resulted in the greatest vertical spread of hits.
The analyses presented above provide insight into how keyboard layout and key size may be improved to support touch-typing patterns on a flat surface.
In this section, we assess the reliability of key hit locations to evaluate how accurate the modified designs could be.
We perform simple distance-based classification of key presses, both within a participant, and between a participant and the group's average.
Again, the no keyboard condition offers the closest representation to eyes-free touch-typing.
User-dependent key press classification is highest with the visible keyboard, yet still 90% with no keyboard.
K Key strikes were w relatively y reliable for both keyboa ard c conditions, alth hough more so for the visible keyboard.
On the whol le, s subjects were consistent within w themsel lves, repeated dly h hitting the same e places for the e same keys.
C Classification accuracy a per le etter is shown in n Figure 8.
Keys in n the bottom ro ow were the most m difficult to o classify with no n k keyboard, whic ch follows our r earlier result that bottom ro ow k keys had the hi ighest y-directi ion deviation.
The U, I, J, an nd K keys were also a relatively y difficult to classify c in bo oth k keyboard con nditions.
Thi is finding requires mo ore in nvestigation, but b may be rela ated to hand displacement d th hat c could occur after a backspace e gesture with the t right hand.
I Incorrect class sifications mos st often occur rred as adjace ent k keys in the sam me row.
Based on o the classific cation results, we w c created confus sion matrices for each con ndition.
Exa amining wheth her misclassific cations occurred to o the left, in th he same colum mn, or to the rig ght, results we ere m more evenly sp plit: only 20.7 7% and 30.9% occurred in th he s same column for the visible e keyboard an nd no keyboard c conditions, re espectively.
T The predomina ance of same-ro ow errors in th he data, sugges sts th hat participant ts found it eas sier to reliably y hit keys in th he v vertical directio on than horizon ntally.
U User-independe ent classificati ion lowers acc curacy by 19.5 5% in n the `no keyb board' conditio on.
We calcula ated the averag ge o of key centroi ids for all us sers, translated d so they we ere c centered on the midpoint be etween the F and a J keys.
We W th hen classified d each user's input based on the averag ge c centroids.
The classification n accuracy dro opped from th he u user-dependent t analysis to, on n average, 93.1%  f for the visible keyboard k cond dition and 70.5% %  f for the no keyb board conditio on.
The large drop d in accuracy f from the user-d dependent clas ssification for the no keyboard c condition indic cates that some degree of pe ersonalization is n necessary for ey yes-free touch typing.
There was a larger spread of hits per key y with no keyb board than sible keyboard d. However, ke ey presses cou uld still be the vis classifi fied with 90% accuracy in th he no keyboard d condition using a simple user-dependent classification n method.
T To filter spurio ous hand and ar rm presses, three c columns of spa ace may be used, centered h horizontally at the m midpoint betw ween thumbs an nd extending d downward.
Using 4" columns, this simple he d eliminate euristic would r touches in the asterisk k feedback 95% of non-finger ions, and impa act only 0.2% o of finger touche es.
Spa acebar hits in o our visualizatio ons suggest the spa acebar should b be narrower an nd taller than a traditional spaceb bar.
Reducing t the size of key ys where possib ble has the potenti ial to reduce e spurious to ouch points.
Thus, we recomm mend a spaceb bar extending f from the middl le of C to the mid ddle of M for a keyboard of th he size tested h here.
Keyboa ard curvature e. Rather than arranging ea ach row of keys s straight across s, the asterisk k feedback, no o keyboard conditi ion demonstra ates that rows should be arc ched, more represe entative of rela ative finger len ngths and reach h. Space between hand ds.
Ten-finger keyboards sho ould allow n hands.
Whe en no constra aints were for a gap between ed on hand placement , the avera age distance be etween the cen nters of the rightm most keys on t the left side o of the keyboar rd and the leftmo st keys on the right side of th he keyboard wa as 1.41".
Th he keys assign ned to the little finger and Relativ the bo ottom row k keys had grea ater x- and y-direction deviati ion in key pre ess locations, respectively, than other keys.
T These keys sho ould be relative ely larger.
Keys in the e middle of the e keyboard, ally B, H, and d Y, are some etimes typed w with either especia hand.
T This finding is s relevant to sp plit keyboard d designs, or design s that place key ys relative to h hand locations.
Extr ra finger touch hes were large ely c constrained to between typin ng sequences, while w non-fing ger to s segme ented from the e finger touche es.
In general, a more ergonomic layout should improve input accuracy over a rectangular one.
In the asterisk feedback, visible keyboard condition, only 81.5% of key presses occurred within key bounds.
However, key press classification based on the emergent key centroids for all users was almost 12% higher.
We did not explore different visual designs, but the visual affordances of the keyboard would affect typing patterns.
Many of the recommendations listed here could be implemented with or without a visual affordance.
For example, allowing for space between the hands could mean the underlying keyboard model adjusts key centers away from the middle of the keyboard, but it does not necessarily mean that a visual gap must appear.
Future work should explore what the best visual affordance, if any, will be for each design recommendation, and how user behavior changes with respect to visual changes in the keyboard.
The conditions studied here provided either no feedback or masked feedback to users.
While this decision was necessary to achieve our goals, providing users with unmasked text output would certainly impact behavior, allowing users to adapt their typing patterns to create more accurate output if necessary.
We plan to explore methods to improve input accuracy, such as intelligently identifying spurious touch points or using a pressure sensitive surface.
Further study is needed on how close experienced users will come to achieving the ideal speeds seen in the unrestricted condition.
We predict that in real typing tasks users will achieve speeds somewhere between the asterisk feedback conditions and the unrestricted condition.
Our participants only included expert touch-typists, which is a critical user group to study if the goal is to design the most efficient text input methods possible.
Although the no keyboard conditions are not directly applicable to novice typists, the resulting design recommendations may still improve performance for those users; for example, the observed differences in hit point deviations per key may be reflective of basic human motor performance.
Future work will need to confirm the degree to which the visible keyboard findings also apply to novice typists.
Finally, we required users to place their hands consistently at the start of each trial to reduce noise from potential hand drift over the course of the study.
Without this requirement, we would expect a decrease in the reliability of key press locations.
Detecting the location of the user's hands and adjusting the keyboard if needed may be a useful approach for mitigating this issue.
Language modeling could also be used to offset this projected decrease in accuracy.
The goal of this study was not only to identify design recommendations for current whole-hand touch screen keyboards, but also to explore the feasibility of eyes-free touch-typing on a flat surface.
In the unrestricted typing condition, where participants were not aware of input errors, mean typing speed was 59 WPM.
This number is indicative of speeds that novice users could achieve with an ideal ten-finger touch screen keyboard, and performance should improve with use.
The unrestricted condition was slower than the physical keyboard, which we speculate may be due to differences in the mechanics of the two setups  and to previous negative experiences with touch screens, which could have made some participants initially hesitant.
Again, with more practice these effects should decrease.
Key press classifications from the asterisk feedback, no keyboard condition also point to the potential for touchtyping on a flat surface.
With no visual constraints, classification accuracy with a simple user-dependent model was 90%.
While 90% is hardly perfect, it could be improved through more sophisticated classification schemes.
Word-level correction approaches should be particularly effective here: such approaches require clean segmentation between words, and the spacebar was the easiest key to classify.
Personalization will most likely be a key element of any flat surface keyboard that allows for touch-typing.
We observed many individual differences in terms of spacing between hands, size and shape of key press distributions, and key-tohand mappings.
Underscoring these findings, userdependent key press classification was about 20% more accurate than user-independent classification for the asterisk feedback, no keyboard condition.
We have investigated the unconstrained typing patterns of 20 expert typists on a flat surface.
Our results demonstrate that typing patterns differ when users are provided with a visual keyboard compared to no visual affordance, yet key press locations remain relatively reliable within an individual.
Design recommendations emerging from this study should improve the effectiveness of static touch screen keyboard designs.
But our vision is to design keyboards that will allow users to touch-type on a flat surface.
The results presented here should encourage researchers to pursue this goal, and indicate that an effective solution will require an element of personalization.
Future work should apply the design recommendations here, and investigate the potential to which touch-typing on flat surfaces can be achieved.
