A study at a large IT company shows that mobile information workers frequently migrate work across devices .
While having multiple devices provides new opportunities to work in the face of changing resource deprivations, the management of devices is often problematic.
Workers' strategies of coping with these problems center on two interwoven activities: the physical handling of devices and cross-device synchronization.
These aim at balancing risk and effort in immediate and subsequent use.
Workers also exhibit subtle ways to handle devices in situ, appropriating their physical and operational properties.
The design implications are discussed.
We report on a field study of mobile information workers in a large IT company.
The paper first examines different ways in which devices are used, as well as the benefits of having multiple devices.
The second and the key part of the paper turns to the question of how workers handle devices, align their use to work situations, and prepare and plan their use.
The goal is to provide a rich account of the space of relevant strategies and practices.
To conclude, we discuss how to alleviate problems in multi-device management and augment users' existing routines.
Present-day information work is characterized by the proliferation of digital devices, ranging from desktop PCs and laptops to various types of handhelds.
Moreover, diverse I/O devices exist, such as keyboards, mice, displays, printers, and projectors, as well as accessories such as cables, adapters, docking stations, and storage media.
Several open questions are related to the proliferation of devices: To what extent are they utilized in different combinations?
What is achieved by having multiple devices instead of only one?
How is order achieved amidst possible problems?
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
We use the term multi-device management to refer to all actions oriented toward one's set of information devices, implemented with the purpose of securing the preconditions for work.
HCI research addressing the problem of multiple devices is only beginning to emerge.
A recent multi-cultural study showed that young urbanites design and manage mobile kits, including non-computational artefacts from wallets to keys .
The "work" that the urbanites were concerned about was how to express their identities and connect to "the urban interface" through this kit.
Our interest lies in understanding the kits of modern information work.
In addition to , important work in three areas helps us refine our research questions.
First, studies in mobile communication have touched on the issue of switching communication between various channels, such as between pagers and mobile phones, and email and SMS .
They generally show that users are able to channel communication in a situationally suitable manner but have not examined how this is possible.
In our study, we examine if and how work  can be shared between devices .
Second, research on mobility has centered both on "traveling" on the macro level  and on mobility on the micro level  .
Luff and Heath  note various resource deprivations which need to be taken into account for these types of mobility.
To address them, workers have to complete additional tasks collectively called mobilization work , which is distinguished from "actual work."
The paradox is that mobilization work can make actual work so inefficient that the cost of being mobile exceeds its benefits.
In this paper, we are interested in learning whether having multiple devices helps to counter resource deprivations or whether it simply introduces new mobilization work.
Third, studies of personal information management  have shown that users' strategies differ remarkably.
For example, some users pile their paper documents while others file them .
These studies have pointed out that such strategies evolve as responses to situational pressures  and anticipated retrieval demands .
Grudin , for example, showed that workers with multiple monitors use them to distribute tasks that they assume are frequently tapped.
In some domains, such as document management, assessing the future utility of information is more difficult and can lead to the adoption of premature strategies .
In our study, we aim to investigate not only the contents of strategies, but also how they emerge as responses to various demands.
First, the work is mobile, involving both longer travel and shorter trips.
Many of our participants traveled almost daily among various sites in the Helsinki city area.
In addition to visits to customers and suppliers, many frequently travel abroad.
A substantial part of the work consists of travel, remote collaboration, and telecommuting.
Second, mobility within the office is common as the employees move between meeting rooms distributed across several buildings.
Moreover, as a result of continuous efforts to support mobility, many kinds of dedicated spaces are available to the workers: "drop-in points" , "hotdesks and workdesks" , "silent rooms" , "community spaces" , "informal and formal meeting rooms" , and "virtual meeting rooms" .
Each provides different resources  for the use of devices.
Finally, employees typically have multiple devices to choose from.
All the participants had at least the smartphone, a laptop, and a mobile phone, as well as various necessary accessories such as docking stations, chargers, headsets, cables etc.
In 2004, we were approached by a representative of Nokia's internal IT organization, who proposed a study of their new multi-functional business smartphone prototype , which is equipped with WLAN/WiFi, GPRS, Bluetooth, a QWERTY keyboard, 80 MB memory, a VGA camera, and a large color display encased in a clamshell design.
It has support for email, WWW, and MS Office documents.
Although we call it here a smartphone, it is a sort of "hybrid device": not only does it have the capabilities and size of a mobile phone but some PC-like functionality as well.
Nokia was interested in how it fares "against its competitors" endowed with overlapping functionality.
Nokia's aim was in "concepting mobile work and specifying requirements for needed functionalities and solutions" .
To make the study of interest for the HCI community, we decided to investigate not only the smartphone, but the management of all the digital devices that a worker uses.
Our primary concern is with computational artefacts, especially primary devices such as PCs and mobile phones, but also auxiliaries such as mice and cables.
Moreover, when discussing the management of multiple devices, it is difficult to ignore their interplay with non-computational, often paper-based information artefacts, because they continually figure into decisions about which artefacts to use and in which combinations.
Therefore these are also considered.
The eleven participants were selected from an internal pilot study of the smartphone.
We visited them at four different Nokia sites in Finland, each consisting of an office complex spanning several buildings at which hundreds of employees worked.
Eight of the participants were based in the Helsinki metropolitan area, one elsewhere in Finland, and two outside of Finland: one in Dallas and one in Singapore.
Many worked in distributed teams, collaborating daily with team members situated globally.
The participants were categorized in Nokia's internal profiling as follows: An Executive  is in charge of a business area or support function and typically has a large organization reporting to him/her.
Responsibilities include business, marketing, technology, and support.
In higher positions, his/her responsibilities can also cover a larger geographical area.
In spite of these differences in responsibilities, the participants' typical work tasks appeared to be quite similar.
Conducting face-to-face meetings, placing conference calls, emailing, giving presentations, as well as creating, commenting on, and reviewing various office documents, formed the substance of the work for all three profiles.
Due to the openness of the research question, we implemented a qualitative, in-depth analysis of a few representative workers.
The combination of methods that we used allowed us to inquire about subjective experiences and observe the participants' routines.
We defined the problem from the perspective of an individual employee, rather than, say, of a team or an organization.
Two methods of ethnographic research were employed: The interviews focused on the participants' choice of device and the use of the devices for remote and faceto-face collaboration and during "dead time" .
The interviews took place at the workplaces of the interviewees  and were videotaped or audiotaped.
Each interview lasted from one-and-a-half hours up to two-and-a-half hours .
Two of the participants  were placed under close observation  a few days after the interview.
The 14 person-hours of observation revealed details of managing devices in day-today work and helped interpret the interview data through a deeper understanding of the workplace.
Overall, the participants engaged in a variety of situations, including meetings, phone conferences, customer visits, collaborative editing sessions, press conferences, tradeshows, lunches, breaks, airports and airplanes, and encounters in corridors and lobbies.
We were surprised at how often devices were switched, even at intervals of less than five minutes .
We call a device configuration the set of devices and non-computational support artefacts used in a situation, differentiating the active subset  and the passive subset .
Instead of listing all of the  configurations in our data, we present cases from one worker's data to illustrate more general observations.
The data collection took place between January and March of 2005.
The resulting data set consists of video- and audiotapes, their full transcriptions, as well as photographs and field notes.
Through enumerating device configurations and drawing diagrams of device use, we iteratively analyzed key episodes in our data to understand how tasks are shared across devices and what practices support this sharing.
The second picture in Figure 1 is taken in a steering group meeting attended by a CFE.
In it, several members have already seated themselves, keeping their phones and laptops in front of them on the table.
Having arrived at the meeting room, the CFE first places his laptop and papers on the table and connects the laptop to the network with a cable available in the center console of the table.
Then he takes his smartphone out of its carrying case, detaches its headset from his shirt, opens the keypad lock, and activates a user profile.
He places these devices, too, on the table.
After listening to the introduction of the meeting, he opens the smartphone, his paper notebook, and finally a bit later, starts to set up the laptop.
He first opens the lid, presses a button to exit standby mode, enters a password, and launches a spreadsheet application, which he then uses.
In contrast to Case 1, only one device was in use in situations such as lunch and ad hoc encounters.
The third picture in Figure 1 presents an example of a situation in which only the smartphones were in heavy use.
While waiting for the others to finish lunch, several workers were using their smartphones, perhaps trying to keep up with their workloads .
In addition to lunches, in many ad hoc encounters in the hallways, informal chatting shifted to workrelated tasks , ultimately leading to using the smartphone.
Common to both situations is that only one device was carried and utilized.
To begin with, we wanted to understand the benefits that an individual worker gains from having multiple devices.
We interviewed the participants about situations in which they had multiple devices at their disposal and where a certain configuration  was chosen.
Their answers indicate a multiplicity of social, personal, and work-related benefits for choosing a device.
We here list the seven most frequent benefits from their answers, highlighting that choosing devices appropriately is intimately intertwined with the worker's knowledge, skills, and personal preferences related to work.
But then if, say after lunch, one reads  on the web, then that I do on the laptop, because there again the format  does not fit on this small screen: one needs to scroll this way and that and then one gets frustrated with the scrolling."
In the first picture in Figure 1, the CFE is sitting at his desk and reading the morning email on his laptop, the lid of which is closed.
The laptop is in its docking station, which in turn connects to a CRT display, a full-sized keyboard, a mouse, a desktop printer, the LAN, and electrical power.
In addition, a portable radio is present, and the smartphone is connected to its headset and a charger.
In general, workstations were the most ergonomic use environments, featuring adjustable chairs and desks with room for folders, papers, and devices.
This case highlights that device configurations vary not only in their extent and complexity, but also in terms of their stability.
Then when you setup the  there, all four on both sides turn to look at what you've got.
By setup overhead, we refer not to the configuration of software but to all the effort employed to transform device from a "state of carrying" to a "state of being used."
This factor surfaced in situations in which a device was needed for a brief task.
For example, one EXE said that he preferred his "always on" smartphone over his laptop for viewing his calendar because of the setup overhead.
Booting up from the sleep mode, waiting, and entering a password were found to be problematic as they interrupted his work.
He also said that if there is a clear pause in work, "15 minutes, let alone an hour," he prefers the laptop.
Similarly, a CFE stated that at airports he prefers not to "fish out" his laptop while waiting for a flight but rather uses the smartphone for email, chatting, and music.
Thus, the anticipated length of the interruption caused by setup overhead, relative to the overall length of the task, is important:
But if I have, like a short thing or, or the mere checking of email, I use .
I mean I use this SMS-based , simply because with this  one needs to authenticate with a SecurID  every time."
The four cases indicate that daily work tasks vary in the complexity of the device configuration used, the configuration's stability vs. flexibility, and the amount of control the user has over it.
Throughout the day, the workers were actively constructing and re-constructing configurations as a response to and in preparation for unfolding events.
Although this involves a host of tasks, they apparently find it to be worthwhile.
Moreover, these actions are required so that their work is not compromised.
The rest of the paper is dedicated to understanding these issues.
Multiple devices were sometimes needed because no single device had the functions or data needed.
For example, some carried phones for phone calls and laptops for connecting to projectors, as neither device had both capabilities.
In one case, an EXE reported that when his laptop is in use showing a presentation, he takes notes on his smartphone or on paper.
Another reason related to multitasking is that users often wanted to reserve one device for their own personal use and dedicate another for the actual work task.
For example, one participant told us about his habit of using the laptop exclusively to take notes and his phone for its SMS abilities in meetings.
Thus having multiple devices can expand multitasking ability similar to multi-monitor use .
Some workers said that they carry the smartphone because its hands-free headset enables phone conferencing while accomplishing other tasks.
Finally, reasons due to organizational practices were also visible.
Users who were concerned about confidentiality issues chose either a device that can store their data securely or one that relies on accessing the data on the fly, thereby avoiding the need to store it at all.
The former requires preparation to make sure the device is always present when needed, while the latter depends upon being able to access the server.
As in Case 4 where privacy during the flight was crucial, the physical form of a device was also important.
But let's say 90 percent of the time when I leave  especially abroad, I take a backup with me."
To understand the benefits to distributed teamwork, we looked at email and document editing as two representative cases.
With a single device, this switching of working mode is much more difficult.
So when I got home I didn't have it  I dunno, it just gets left."
The limitations of the smartphone obviously hamper the usability of email in comparison to the laptop.
The informants said that on the laptop, forming a general view of the inbox is easier as more headers are shown at once, email folders other than the inbox can also be accessed, the connection is faster, and the authentication card is not required.
However, the smartphone was still used, but more selectively and for a specialized subtask: gaining a quick overview by skimming the headers, at times peeking at the contents and, when necessary, making brief replies to the pertinent parties.
As a worker is constantly involved in multiple dialogues, others' "turns" must be observed, acknowledged, and replied to.
Some workers habitually replied simply to announce that they intended to get back to the sender, thus achieving not only individual but shared awareness.
The laptop, by contrast, when connectivity and time could be secured, was set up for performing substantive work, particularly when an email involved large attachments or required a long reply or complex information gathering.
An analogous benefit is visible in another form of teamwork: collaborative document editing.
This involves revising the material in several passes and sharing the revisions through email.
The ways in which devices were used varied across the passes.
Our informants reported that the early stages of editing a document are often headwork.
Typically, micro-notes, or "personal jottings to ourselves" , were quickly written on the smartphone or paper and later transferred to the laptop.
After a draft had been created, or after larger changes, it was sent to the parties involved for review and familiarization.
In our data this was mostly--but not always--carried out on a laptop or PC.
The document was then discussed in a meeting to identify sections that need editing and to divide tasks and schedule the work accordingly.
This included annotating the document in preparation for subsequent editing, which was sometimes done also on a printed version.
Laptops were used almost exclusively at the meeting, and the notes were transferred from the printed versions to the laptops.
Finally, the time-consuming, relatively mechanical work of editing, which involves stylization and gathering data, is typically done alone.
For that task, a laptop was not often adequate, but the better user interface of a workstation PC was needed.
Ensuring access to data is a central concern for mobile workers.
They constantly need to access and update various records such as calendars, contacts, notes, email, and documents.
The practices of ensuring access--with regard to multi-device management--center on synchronization work: the actions of ensuring that two or more locations contain the same up-to-date information.
The workers faced many practical barriers to synchronization.
Although their laptops were automatically backed up to a file server, there was no easy way to access the server from the smartphone.
Accessing the intranet, although possible using the smartphone, was cumbersome as it required an authentication card.
Moreover, direct storage on the smartphone was not straightforward due to its limited storage capacity.
Establishing a connection, choosing which files to store, and waiting for the transfer to take place added to the effort of using that device.
The smartphone's file system was not encrypted, which could compromise confidential data.
For these reasons, the data often had to be either created on the smartphone or manually transferred to it.
Importantly, poor strategies in addressing this problem at times had negative latent consequences that were largely invisible to the workers.
Some of the coping strategies we observed relied on carrying more devices , some on preknowledge of the connectivity available , and others on manual labor in habitually synchronizing across devices .
The strategies are listed  in the order of increasing amounts of synchronization work.
Finally, we turned to the question of how workers managed their devices amid their fast-paced work.
In the light of research on PIM, we believed that it is unreasonable to assume that workers constantly make  decisions on what devices to pack and carry, which device to synchronize and operate, and so on.
Rather, habits and preparatory strategies were expected to emerge, enabling workers to strike a balance between risk and effort in immediate and forthcoming situations.
Both routine ways of taking action in familiar situations  and more deliberate efforts in preparing for forthcoming events were seen.
In contrast to the preparatory strategies for managing uncertain needs in upcoming situations, which were best captured in the interviews, the more habitual strategies are less articulated and less deliberate, often centering on minimizing the effort in transitions between devices, and thus manifest almost exclusively on videotape.
Common to all the strategies we observed is that the choices at one point save effort or minimize risk either immediately or later on.
We observed three types of strategies: 1.
The conservative strategy can be formulated as the maxim "change your habit of using a device as little as possible"; e.g., "always carry the same device."
In planful opportunism , just-in-case preparations are made for potential situations.
In some cases, the participants' use of devices was carefully planned, allocating devices to certain tasks, and preparing and carrying only those devices.
Perhaps the simplest conservative strategy is not to synchronize at all but to assign a certain type of information to a certain device.
For example, one EXE kept his calendar information only in his laptop.
As this strategy assumes the action of taking or leaving that device--it is intimately related to packing strategies .
In what follows we review the most salient strategies in our data.
The data also shows that these strategies are closely interrelated.
Some participants relied on wireless access to data on the server, which also eliminated the need for synchronization work.
As noted above, this was often difficult due to uncontrollable barriers.
Importantly, while avoiding the manual effort of synchronization, this strategy demands foresight and the planning of work so as to ensure connectivity.
Sometimes a task requires that some piece of information be recorded, but it is impossible or inconvenient at that moment to record it directly on the intended device.
Thus, a user employs whatever temporary storage is at hand and afterwards merges the data into a more permanent repository in the main device .
For example, a SME said that when he is in a taxi, he often jots down notes on his smartphone, transferring them to the laptop afterwards "when it is convenient."
This strategy trades off immediate convenience with the labor of synchronizing later.
But I guess it comes to mind about once a day, perhaps I should sync, and then you make the decision whether something that requires syncing has happened or not."
The analysis of synchronization strategies revealed that ensuring access is tightly related to the practices of handling and carrying devices .
The strategies of handling devices here refer to the manual selection, arrangement, operation, positioning, and moving of one's devices as material objects with a later use in mind.
These strategies are not simple, because for any device to be available in a mobile use situation, handling actually involves several steps or tasks to be carried out: 1.
Choosing and packing the device; Carrying the device; Setting up the device for use, perhaps connecting it to other resources, and opening the application; Using an application on the device, perhaps in concert with other present or remote devices; and Closing the applications, disassembling the connections and the setup, and returning the device back to its carrying state .
A variation of this "view copy" strategy was to mirror only a portion of the data, to keep a scaled-down version on a more mobile device.
For example, a CFE had copied the most frequently needed items from a large price list document he kept on a laptop onto a separate document on his smartphone.
He did not need to mirror it often, because having approximate prices of the frequently needed items available was more important than having exact prices.
In a sense, this strategy accomplishes the opposite effect of the post-event synchronization strategy: here, it is the mobile device that is updated after the master copy on the laptop has changed.
This approach is viable when viewing is more important than manipulation and if updating is not very frequent.
This strategy trades off the ability to make changes on both devices with the certainty that the master copy is in sync.
Moreover, this is quite a safe strategy: if changes need to be made to the mirrored copy, one can revert to the post-event strategy without much extra work.
The most laborious strategy reported here, two-way synchronization, completes the picture.
One CFE prepared for travel using this strategy, ensuring that all copies in all devices are updated.
The day before his trip he would synchronize his laptop with his smartphone through their docking stations at his workstation and use Bluetooth to synchronize his laptop and personal phone.
All the strategies relying on scrupulous cross-device synchronization face the problem that one must remember to synchronize and be able to dedicate some time to it.
As part of his post-event synchronization strategy, the CFE had picked up the habit of crossing out notes in his memo when transferring them to his laptop to indicate that they are no longer relevant.
He checked weekly that there are no items that he has forgotten to transfer.
Thus, some workers seem to discipline themselves for synchronization work:
What makes this sort of task analysis relevant is that at each step the user can make decisions on the status of her devices.
In other words, each step constitutes a potential branching point that can lead to the device being available or unavailable in a later situation, and the workers seem to appreciate this fact.
However, in real life these steps are much more nuanced, are rearranged, and may be intermingled.
Consider the following incident from our observations.
At one point, an EXE was waiting in a lobby for a conference meeting to start, carrying his laptop in a briefcase and the smartphone in his hand .
The meeting was late, and he needed his calendar to see how that would affect his schedule for the day.
Because the calendar on his smartphone was out of sync, he had to take the laptop from the briefcase , simultaneously putting away the smartphone.
He placed the laptop onto an empty corner of a serving cart that happened to be nearby.
After opening and unlocking the laptop, he waited for it to wake up, entered his password, started the calendar , and finally checked the relevant entry .
He then simply closed the laptop lid  and returned it to the case .
The workers exhibited all the aforementioned kinds of strategies in packing.
Planful opportunism is represented by having "fallback devices"  and packing devices "just in case," knowing that these might not be needed .
One informant had a less situation-dependent and more conservative strategy.
We call a mobile kit a reasonably stable set of personal devices kept together and carried when traveling .
This worker's kit was quite extensive, containing a laptop and the smartphone, a mouse, a CD-ROM drive, extra batteries, a WLAN  module, adapters for foreign power outlets, power supply units, and various cables.
Everything was carefully arranged in a briefcase dedicated for the kit .
We also examined whether the devices chosen differ between trips of different lengths, because of the different associated penalties .
We learned that workers do less contingency preparation for local mobility.
For example, for meetings held close to their workstations, some workers did not bring a laptop as it could be quickly retrieved if a need emerges.
This tactic relies on a non-present but conveniently close "just-in-case" device.
Many preferred to pack according to their plans and expectations, although they did not always turn out to be correct:
Planning for longer trips away from the workstation was not always done with only one meeting in mind, but took into account anticipated activities as well.
For example, a CFE told us that sometimes when he packs his laptop and smartphone for a meeting at a customer's premises, the laptop is not carried because he is planning to use it at the meeting, rather, because he is going home after the meeting and wants to use his laptop there.
So by having this carrythrough device, he saves a trip back to the office.
Now, although the targeted use situation is at home, the laptop becomes a part of the device configuration in the meeting and can be put to use if a need arises, increasing the probability of having the right data and applications at hand.
We observed that workers have elaborate practices not only related to packing but also to handling the devices when working with them.
They took advantage of the fact that setting up a device is not an atomic operation, but entails many subtasks, and can be left halfway undone.
For example, at the beginning of meetings, some workers took a device out of its case, but did not switch it on, unlock the keypad, or log in--they just left it on the table partially set up.
The rationale behind this "partial setup" is that if a situation emerges in which the device is needed, it can be started with a smaller setup overhead because part of the work is already done.
Moreover, if the device is not needed, returning it to its case  is quicker than with a full setup.
Courtesy might be another benefit: setting up only partially better allows for greeting, talking to, and exchanging business cards with those arriving at the meeting.
We also noticed the reverse: workers started to disconnect and shut down a device many minutes in advance of the end of a meeting, especially if they were in a hurry to the next meeting.
While this saves time from Steps 5 and 1, this can only be done if the devices will no longer be needed during that session.
This "partial termination" is largely a compromise, saving time from Step 5, while decreasing the risk of having to do a full setup should the device yet be needed.
However, it entails having fewer digital resources ready at hand during the brief, informal meetings that occur when the formal part of the meeting is over.
Interestingly, although our informants regarded quick setup overhead as an important criterion for choosing a device, they did not talk at all about "termination overhead," although they clearly had practical workarounds to cope with it.
Finally, we observed a habit that combines the best aspects of partial setup and partial termination: the use of a laptop as a tray in short-distance mobility.
For this, a user does not pack all devices "properly" into a briefcase, rather just piles all his cables and phones on the top of the laptop, appropri-
The ongoing ubiquitous computing revolution is not centrally planned, but happens in increments built on top of each other.
It is therefore unlikely that the problem of multiple devices will disappear in the near future.
Consequently, academic HCI needs to refocus from the humancomputer interface to "a system of people, practices, values, and technologies in a particular local environment" .
We need new concepts to talk about human-computers interaction and humans-computers interaction.
This paper reports observations of the use of multiple devices in extremely mobile and fast-paced work.
The data shows that workers can agilely transfer their work across devices several times a day--and at times at less than fiveminute intervals.
By switching from one device to another, an individual can adapt to changing resource deprivations, thus enhancing efficiency, multitasking, security, privacy, and ergonomics.
In teamwork, on the other hand, workers with many devices can shift between coordination and actual work, as well as between lighter and more dataintensive working modes.
In this way they can avoid the trap of having only a mobile phone as a poorly equipped "proxy" for a PC .
To achieve all this, the workers employed several elaborate strategies.
The ways in which our informants managed these demands were strikingly idiosyncratic, largely because much of the ability to plan the use of devices relies on preknowledge of the various resources available in the course of their work.
When planning the day, workers have to anticipate personal, social, work-related, and technological constraints on the use of devices.
Conversely, careful planning of the use of devices assumes careful reflection and planning of the work itself.
However, partly due to the uncertainties of mobile work and partly because of the strategies they have chosen, the workers sometimes found themselves unable to construct adequate plans and had to situationally revise their initial strategy or revert to just-in-case solutions.
Breakdowns and repairs in the execution of strategies made clear the fact that multi-device management encompasses both digital  and physical action .
When a poor strategy was adopted, it often resulted in extraneous work.
Conservative strategies, while saving cognitive effort, led to extraneous manual work elsewhere.
In contrast, by adopting synchronization habits, workers can avoid much of the manual handling of devices with the cost of having to synchronize, which at times requires careful cognitive effort.
Understandably, some try to avoid these complex management schemes altogether and prefer to use only one device.
The emphasized role of physical effort and its intimate relationship to digital activities such as synchronization distinguishes multi-device-based information work from PCbased information work.
The time needed to manipulate devices, their shapes and sizes and the way they can be packed together, as well as their different physical affordances  all affect multidevice management.
The material properties of devices and connectivity affect multi-device management beyond previous expectations.
In pursuing a closer understanding of multi-device management, future research should examine whether the phenomena we observed in the lives of eleven people are generalizable, if they are comprehensive, what their interrelationships are, and whether users can be profiled according to more stable tendencies in their management strategies.
To conclude the paper constructively, we will discuss design opportunities in supporting a more fluent multi-device management.
Despite these challenges, much can be done on separate fronts.
The first opportunity lies in minimizing the various overheads and extraneous tasks.
Addressing these two points could eliminate a major source of interruptions and make flexibly using a variety of devices possible in fastpaced mobile work.
From this perspective, there are some worrisome development trends.
For example, that accessories are proprietary implies having to carry and manage them as well.
Also, the overuse of security measures  can interfere with flexible migration.
The second opportunity lies in the difficulty of planning the use of devices.
The inability to predict what resources will be available in a forthcoming situation forms a major problem in this respect .
Our listing of benefits provides a starting point for understanding which resources and constraints are important.
For example, noting the availability of wireless network coverage  in a room reservation system could help pre-mobility planning.
Thirdly, at times it was apparent that communication applications are not designed with migration in mind.
For example, due to the smartphone's email program not propagating information about which device messages were read with, one EXE could not remember if they had been properly dealt with.
The "read flag" should have been different after reading with the smartphone.
This exemplifies a more general shortcoming: the "inability of migrated information to recreate its context" .
Though this seems more like a challenge for infrastructures propagating metadata, a challenge for designers is to design "histories" and "trajectories" of how data was modified and used in different devices.
Another example concerns visualizations of document versions as they are distributed across devices, not only on a server as in current version management systems.
The synchronization strategies that we reported indicate that such visualizations could differentiate between not only copies of data, but also views  and masters, and versions  and variations .
Fourthly, the ability of devices temporarily to use the resources of other co-present devices could be better leveraged.
For example, while the workers used their smartphone's GPRS connectivity on the laptop, they could not use the better interface of the laptop for editing an SMS or a document in the smartphone.
The fifth opportunity does not lie in addressing any particular problem but in augmenting the routines users have .
For example, using the laptop as a tray is based on appropriating the physical properties  of devices, which could be improved by industrial designers.
Designers could also systematically think of unsanctioned ways to leave setup halfway undone and roll it back.
More opportunities for synchronization could also be provided: perhaps locally distributed synchronization points to quickly synchronize predefined devices.
We thank Outi Vuorio of Nokia Business Infrastructure for inviting and generously supporting this research.
Esko Kurvinen, Tancred Lindholm, Petri Mannonen, Miikka Miettinen, Ken Rimey, and Sakari Tamminen provided important comments.
Part of this work is based on Lauri Sumari's Master's Thesis at the Helsinki University of Technology, entitled "Interacting with Multiple Devices in Mobile Work."
Antti Oulasvirta's work was supported by the Academy of Finland project ContextCues.
