Insights gained through a study show that back-of-band input increases accuracy and task completion rates for smaller on-screen targets.
We probe the design space of Wristband.io with three applications.
Smartwatches are characterized by their small size designed for wearability, discretion, and mobile interactions.
Most of the interactivity, however, is limited to the size of the display, introducing issues such as screen occlusion and limited information density.
Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the Owner/Author.
Copyright is held by the owner/author.
People increasingly use smartwatches as yet another device to interact with applications, information, and services.
However, the small size of smartwatches and the properties of the touchscreen introduce several fundamental issues.
Because of the limited size of the touchscreen on the watch, problems such as screen occlusion  and fat-finger problem make it difficult or even impossible to select small targets .
More generally, the input and output on a smartwatch is confined to a small area on the top of the armband, only using about 20% of the physical real estate.
Extending the input and output space of the watch across the entire available watchband can mitigate these problems and open up new design spaces for interaction with smartwatches.
In this paper, we introduce Wristband.io , a smartwatch with an interactive band that provides  back-of-band input allowing for precise target selection while leveraging the entire screen for visual feedback,  an ambient notification system providing off-screen feedback , and  a set of tangible programmable buttons on the wristband, allowing for eyes-free input .
The contribution of this work is  a smartwatch prototype that extends interaction across the entire watchband and  a preliminary evaluation of user interaction with the back-of-band touchpad, demonstrating that back-of-band interaction provides a reliable solution for precise target acquisition, at the cost of slower task-completion time and increased user frustration.
Speaking to one's watch might not be suited for quiet spaces or not possible in noisy and crowded places.
Eye tracking requires visual attention, which might be impossible, for example when driving a car.
Other projects have explored using a screen that can be twisted, panned or clicked , around-the-bezel interaction , or haptic feedback .
These approaches focus on expanding the interaction space of the existing display area while only little attention is given on using the entire watchband.
This watchband space was explored in Watchit  and in Funk et al.
These approaches demonstrate the feasibility of using the wristband for input, but have not explored tangible input or back-of-device interactions.
Several techniques to overcome screen occlusion and fat-finger problem exist, e.g.
A display is "ambient" if it is aesthetic and on the periphery of the user's visual attention .
A watch's wristband has been used as an ambient display for group chats  and fluid intake reminder .
Design implications for presenting information on wrist-worn LED displays have been presented .
We extend this work by integrating a low-resolution ambient display providing feedback and a notification mechanism.
Our work resembles Facet  and Watchit  in its scope: enlarging the interaction space with multipurpose techniques located on the wristband.
Wristband.io's combination of ambient display, tangible buttons and back-of-device interaction creates a novel interaction space.
Several projects have expanded smartwatch input beyond touch and voice.
However, these solutions are dependent on the environment.
Most existing smartwatches provide both input and output through its display while ignoring the real estate of the watchband.
However, these wristbands are a large empty area with high visibility to the user in many everyday positions of the arm, e.g., when typing on a computer, reading a sheet of paper, carrying a drink, or riding a bike.
Wristband.io  leverages this unused space by enabling new interactions:  back-ofband touch input,  a low resolution ambient notification system, and  a set of programmable tangible buttons.
Back-of-band Interactions Although direct touch input is an easy-to-use interaction with interfaces on the watch, the finger touch occludes the display, limiting visual feedback, information density, and interface component sizes of smartwatch applications.
We propose to include secondary touch input via a back-of-wristband touchpad , enabling users to select targets with higher precision while not occluding the display.
The touchpad is designed as an implementation of the back-of-device technique , placed diametrically opposite to the screen on the wristband.
When touched, a cross appears on the smartwatch's screen, indicating the current cursor position.
It allows to relatively move the cursor across an X-Y plane.
A single tap triggers a touch input on the smartwatch.
This secondary input space complements the existing touch input on the screen, allowing users to choose the input space , depending on target size, application, or purpose.
Additionally, both input spaces can be combined, allowing simultaneous use of touchscreen and back-of-band touchpad.
Ambient Notification Display We include RGB LEDs as a low-resolution ambient display on the inside of the wristband .
This off-screen display provides an output space when the screen is turned off and allows users to glance at information, even when the display is not within eyesight .
Through their location in the user's visual periphery, the LEDs position provide a quick-access output channel, creating an aesthetic low-resolution notification system that does not increase mental load and visual clutter.
The notification display can be configured by the user via a smartphone application, allowing to customize triggers that change color and brightness of the LEDs.
Tangible Buttons for Eyes-Free Interaction Wristband.io includes programmable tangible buttons to allow for eyes-free input .
Each button is placed directly underneath one LED of the ambient display, granting visual and haptic guidance when pressing the button, as well as a one-to-one mapping between output  and input .
Each button can be reconfigured to define actions or provide shortcuts to frequently used functions.
Implementation Wristband.io extends the interactions of a Sony Smartwatch 3 SWR50.
Using a curved perfboard, mini push-buttons  are attached to the wristband, covered with fabric.
An Ergo Mini Touchpad is placed on the wristband.
LEDs, buttons, and touchpad are controlled via a battery-powered RFduino, connected to an Android smartphone, acting as proxy for the communication between watch and Wristband.io.
Based on a pilot study, cursor speed was set to half the speed of the finger movement.
We conducted a user study to evaluate the efficiency of the new dual input method.
We used a 2x5 withinsubject experimental design, with two factors:  interaction technique , consisting in absolute pointing on the screen; "back-of-band touchpad" , which controls a cursor and  target size .
A combination of FS and BT was tested at the end of the study, where users could alternate between techniques.
We used 8 positions per target, as shown in Figure 4B.
All, except one, were regular touchscreen users and three had prior smartwatch experience.
Participants were asked to perform simple selection tasks, using the three interaction techniques.
Each experiment was composed of 120 trials  and lasted ~35 minutes.
Latin square counterbalancing of target sizes was used to account for transfer effects.
Each user performed the same order of target sizes for every technique.
Half of the participants started with FS, the other half with BT, always finishing with the "both technique".
A training phase for each interaction technique was given, and participants were reminded when to use which technique.
Upon successful selection, the application logged the selection time and the number of failed attempts  and a new target appeared.
If the interaction technique included the touchpad , the cursor was positioned at the center of the screen before each trial.
An upper limit of 10 false clicks was set, after which a failed trial was recorded and the trials continued.
Results Most participants felt comfortable using Wristband.io, only P10 felt that "the touchpad would be better on the front or on the side of the touchscreen,  like not being able to see it".
Participants were overall satisfied with the cursor speed , however for targets 0.75mm, some participants felt that the cursor was too slow and they had to "swipe several times to get to the target" .
On the contrary, P2 felt that the cursor was too fast, especially when using the `both technique', as "starting closer to the target, speed was not needed".
Out of 1200 trials , 8 were discarded because of technical issues.
Participants found selecting bigger targets easy using the touchscreen.
As anticipated, the average success rate  for FS drops for targets <3mm and the number of false clicks increases.
Note: in this case, average false selections are likely underestimated, as the number of attempts was limited to 10.
Using BT, all participants managed to select all targets and smaller targets could be easier acquired, except for P8 who was not a regular touchscreen user.
However, despite the higher success rate for small targets, some users felt that using the touchpad was time consuming and required more concentration.
The completion time for FT uses only the data of successful trials.
However, for the 0.75mm condition this comprises of only 19% of these trials.
In this situation, we observed that most users would try to aim correctly for the first touch of the first positions and then frenetically click on the screen to quickly get through the 80 clicks.
If a target was correctly acquired, the completion time was under ~6s, which is the maximum time participants needed to perform 10 fast clicks.
When allowed to use both techniques, users mostly used the touchscreen for targets 3mm, and mostly switched to the touchpad for size <3mm.
They rarely combined the front and back inputs to acquire a single target .
When they did so, they would either move the cursor closer to the target with the touchscreen then use the touchpad, or make several attempts at clicking on the target with the touchscreen, then, upon failure, switch to the touchpad.
P1 indicated that he "liked the mixed technique.
They are configurable via a smartwatch application; colored LEDs make them easier to remember.
Application 2: Wristband Unlock A smartwatch is a wearable device that is usually not taken off or shared, making it a good candidate to allow owners to unlock their smartphone.
Android phones already allow people to select Bluetooth devices that will unlock the phone when in close proximity, this poses a risk: wearing a smartwatch and leaving the phone near but out of sight, will unlock it and anybody nearby can use it.
Wristband Unlock mitigates this problem by requiring a deliberate user action to unlock the smartphone .
The buttons act as a password keypad; buttons can be pressed simultaneously allowing more complex passwords.
Colored LEDs make it easier to remember the code.
To demonstrate functionality and use of Wristband.io we describe three example applications.
Application 1: Wristband Express Smartwatch users get lost in the overview of applications, spending 39.8 seconds searching for an app  .
Wristband Express , allows to use buttons as shortcuts to applications and settings,
The physical buttons and low resolution ambient notification system allows to show and interact with information in the periphery of users without the need to turn on the display of the watch.
The programmable tangible buttons allow users to define actions, events or functionality to the specific input buttons.
Since the buttons are integrated in the LED of the ambient display, the color of the light can be used semantically to visualize input possibilities or provide off-screen feedback on user input.
Using three example applications, we demonstrated how Wristband.io can be used to build novel applications and support existing watch interface elements.
Our study demonstrated that back-of-band interaction can be reliably used to interact with interface elements that are smaller than one millimeter, enabling user interfaces with smaller targets and higher number of targets on the screen.
However, the accuracy using the touchpad comes at the cost of higher completion times and increased user frustration.
A target size of 3mm was the threshold that caused users to switch from FS to BT, suggesting that for elements <3mm, the touchscreen becomes ineffective.
For the touchpad, most people were somewhat satisfied for targets >3mm, although all preferred using the touchscreen.
Future designs of applications using back-of-band touchpads should carefully consider the tradeoffs and benefits of small interface components on smartwatches, as decreased user satisfaction, and increased task completion time need to be weighed against increased information density.
Future work includes building an embedded and smaller version of Wristband.io.
This will allow us to explore more complex application examples that combine the three interaction techniques we added, and build crossdevice scenarios where the interactive band is used to control and share information with a secondary display.
We have evaluated the efficiency of the back-of-band input method.
However, while we explore Wristband.io's design space through example applications, we still have to formally study the interaction with the ambient notification display and the programmable physical buttons.
Conducting in-the-wild studies will allow to gain insights about the use and applicability of Wristband.io's design for everyday life.
Brian Amento, Will Hill, and Loren Terveen.
The sound of one hand: a wrist-mounted bioacoustic fingertip gesture interface.
In CHI'02 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 724-725.
Back-ofdevice interaction allows creating very small touch devices.
In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 1923- 1932.
An interaction system for watch computers using tactile guidance and bidirectional segmented strokes.
Retrieved June 24, 2016 from http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpls/abs_all.jsp?arnumb er=1364698 Sebastian Boring, David Ledo, Xiang'Anthony' Chen, Nicolai Marquardt, Anthony Tang, and Saul Greenberg.
The fat thumb: using the thumb's contact size for single-handed mobile interaction.
In Proceedings of the 14th international conference on Human-computer interaction with mobile devices and services, 39- 48.
SUS-A quick and dirty usability scale.
In Usability Evaluation In Industry.
Augusto Esteves, Eduardo Velloso, Andreas Bulling, and Hans Gellersen.
Daniel Vogel and Patrick Baudisch.
Shift: a technique for operating pen-based interfaces using touch.
In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems, 657-666.
Daniel Vogel and Patrick Baudisch.
Shift: a technique for operating pen-based interfaces using touch.
In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems, 657-666.
Amanda Williams, Shelly Farnham, and Scott Counts.
Exploring wearable ambient displays for social awareness.
