Readers face many obstacles on today's Web, including distracting content competing for the user's attention and other factors interfering with comfortable reading.
On today's primarily English-language Web, non-native readers encounter even more problems, even if they have some fluency in English.
In this paper, we focus on the presentation of content and propose a new transformation method, Jenga Format, to enhance web page readability.
To evaluate the Jenga Format, we conducted a user study on 30 Asian users with moderate English fluency and the results indicated that the proposed transformation method improved reading comprehension without negatively affecting reading speed.
We also describe Froggy, a Firefox extension which implements the Jenga format.
We defined Web page readability as a combination of reading comprehension, reading speed and user satisfaction.
In terms of reading comprehension, dictionary, thesaurus, and translation support were already provided by many existing online tools and browser add-ons.
This paper focuses instead on the presentation of content to enhance reading comprehension and user satisfaction for non-native readers.
This is similar to the work of Walker et al.
We conducted a user study with 30 Asian users to investigate the effect of these transformations on web page reading.
The results of the user study indicated that the transformation enhanced reading comprehension for these users, as well as making the web pages feel easier to read.
In the rest of the paper, we discuss related work and explain the motivation and reasons of the proposed transformation.
The detailed user study procedure and the results are also presented and discussed.
To allow more users to experience the proposed transformation, we introduce a new Firefox extension, Froggy, which not only implements the studied transformation method, but also introduces new ideas for readability improvement such as  automatically detecting and deemphasizing distracting elements and  summarizing content by making key sentences stand out.
Evaluation of these additional techniques is left for future work.
Readers face many obstacles on today's Web.
On today's primarily English-language Web, non-native readers  encounter even more problems, even if they have some fluency in English.
Problems include unfamiliar vocabulary, complicated grammatical structure, and long, crowded, or otherwise intimidating content display.
Distracting content, such as ads, animations, logos, videos, and photographs, is constantly competing for the user's attention.
Poor color contrast, tiny fonts, and unreadable font faces interfere with comfortable reading .
Some web sites are better, but many are worse.
All of these problems hinder non-native readers from reading the content fluently.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
There has been much work in online reading focusing on new interaction techniques  to support practices observed in fluent readers , such as annotation, clipping, skimming, fast navigation, and obtaining overviews.
Some work has studied the effect of presentation changes like fonts  and hyperlink appearance  on reading speed and comprehension.
Other work considers users with reading limitations, including children learning to read , users with visual impairments and/or motor impairments , users with dyslexia or other learning disabilities , and older adults with reduced eyesight .
Our paper aims at a different population, non-native readers.
In hypertext reading, there are some studies investigating factors related to the web page reading.
But, if the subjects exposed to extensive reading, they can achieve significant faster reading speed and higher score in reading comprehension .
On the other hand, Dyson's studies showed that the overall comprehension will be reduced when reading fast, and a medium line length  supports effective reading at normal or fast speed .
In electronic documents, Hornbaek et al.
The study indicates that different visualization user interfaces might be helpful in different conditions.
For example, the fisheye interface is more appropriate for tasks that understanding the detail of the document is not the subjects' main purpose.
In paper document reading, Keshavarz et al.
However, it is not clear if the study could also be applicable to online reading.
William's work provides another idea to enhance the comprehension by adding different symbols to recognize the textual cohesive ties on the document, such as arrow, rectangle, dot line, line etc.
One of our paper prototype transformations was inspired by William's work.
There are some tools for end-users to adjust web pages for readability enhancement, such as browser commands that change the font size, and browser extensions that remove or recolor sections of a page .
But these tools need manual actions, such as pressing a hot key, on the specific content or region.
In addition, too many options on the user interface of the tool will reduce the user's intention to use it when reading web pages.
Some studies investigate how to segment web pages on the semantic level  or extract content structure from web pages , but none of them focus on readability enhancement on the user interface level.
Different with other approaches, Walker et al.
Our transformation is similar to VSTF, but our transformation focuses on sentence separation and spacing in selected paragraph, which provides simpler implementation, better reading comprehension and better user satisfaction for reading web pages.
Conventionally, most web pages display the content in traditional paragraph format , which we call Standard Format .
Although this format is good at packing text content in limited space and readers are familiar with it, the standard format has some disadvantages.
For example, readers may jump back to wrong line when they finish reading a line and continue to the next line.
Because the text is dense, it is easy to miss the main idea when reading a long article.
It is especially difficult for non-native readers to read and understand lengthy paragraphs because they may need to identify syntactic structures  or mentally translate the content to their native language.
Researchers have proposed alternatives to the standard format.
A notable method is visual-syntactic text formatting  , which replaces the block-shaped text of the standard format with a cascading pattern to help readers identify grammatical structure and increase reading comprehension.
Figure 3 shows an example of using Clip Read software to read the content in VSTF format.
The study conducted by Walker et al.
We conducted an iterative paper prototype study to understand what kind of transformation on the content makes reading easier for native and non-native users.
28 users joined this study.
In this study, we had a paper prototype to display the content in 7 different formats, including 1 standard format and 6 different transformation formats.
Figure 1 illustrates 3 examples of paragraph transformations as paper prototypes.
One advantage of this transformation is that it highlights the paragraph in yellow, helping the reader focus on it even if they are reading a long and crowded article.
In addition, because each sentence is identified separately, the sentences are easier to follow in sequence.
However, motivated by further observation, we developed another enhancement to the above transformation.
Although sentence separation is helpful to reading, it forces the reader to move their eyes to the left margin every time they finish reading a sentence, which interrupts the continuity of reading in the paragraph.
To solve this, we designed a new transformation method, Jenga Format , which inserts space between sentences without changing their shape .
The format is named Jenga because the gaps between interlocking sentences are reminiscent of the Jenga puzzle game.
Based on the two factors we found from the paper prototypes, we designed a new transformation approach, which divides a paragraph into sentences and inserts whitespace between them, using the ideas of sentence separation and sentence spacing we found above.
When the user clicks on a specific paragraph of a web page, the indicated paragraph will be converted into sentences which are all separated and aligned to the left automatically.
The study has three conditions, the different transformation methods: Standard Format , Visual-Syntactic Text Formatting  and Jenga Format .
In order to have a sampling from the population of Asians living in the Boston area, the subject recruitment was based on posting flyers and sending emails to different schools in Boston Area to look for Asian users, who have been lived in U.S. less than 5 years and whose first language are not English.
We looked for users who are able to read English web pages, defined as those whose TOEFL score is higher than 500 out of 677.
The user study was a within-subject study, conducted one participant at a time.
The laboratory setting was a quiet environment with a single laptop and a mouse, which is fairly similar to reading at home or in office environment.
The content of the study are six web pages.
Three of them were selected from a technical web site  and the other three were selected from a business web site .
The study procedure was automated by using Chickenfoot  script and it works as the following.
The user spent 2 to 3 hours to read six web pages sequentially, and there was a 5 minute break after reading two web pages.
The 2-3 hours spent on the study included not only reading web pages but also obtaining informed consent, describing the procedure, answering questionnaires, and an after-study interview.
Users spent an average of 10.81 minutes reading each web page, and there was 21.63 minutes of reading between breaks on average.
The users were informed that they did not have any time limit to read the web pages, but we recorded the reading time for the analysis.
Each web page had a corresponding questionnaire page, which showed up when user clicked "Done Reading" button at the end of the page.
When the user jumped to the questionnaire page to answer questions, he or she could not go back to the original web page to look for answers.
For comparison purpose in the user study, the background color and the click to expand and collapse were also added to the content transformed to VSTF.
The first part contains questions testing comprehension of each web page and the second part contains questions related to reader's subjective feeling .
The comprehension part of the questionnaire had 5 single selection questions.
Each question had 5 options and the types of questions were similar to Dyson and Haselgrove's , including Main Idea, Structure, Main Factual and Incidental.
In addition, we added a new type of question, Reasoning, to increase the difficulty.
However, in the questionnaire, we didn't add type information before each question to tell users.
The subjective part of the questionnaire had 2 questions, which were similar to Walker et al.
In each test round, the web pages were presented in a random order, and two continuing pages used the same transformation method, which was also selected in a random order.
The transformation methods selected in a random order is used to eliminate the concern that fatigue might affect the performance of reading.
In order to observe the user's reading behavior and ask questions related to the observation, the study was not conducted on the Web.
The study was observed by an experimenter sitting beside the user, but the experimenter only observed and took notes without answering questions related to the content.
After the whole test, a face-to-face interview was made to collect additional feedback from the users.
Analysis of all users' nationality.
Analysis of all users' major.
We have following hypotheses and hope to find the answers from this user study.
We expect the transformation of content presentation to slow down reading speed, because it might not be the format readers are familiar with.
For non-native readers, the transformation of content presentation will provide greater personal satisfaction when reading web pages.
Compared with standard content presentation, the transformation will enhance web page reading comprehension.
There were 30 users joining our study: 14 males and 16 females.
All the users were Asians whose first languages are not English.
On average, the users were 25.2 years old and spent 3.2 years in U.S. On average, users spent 13.1 years to learn English, and more than 85% of the users have moderate English fluency.
Table 1 to 4 are the analyses of all users' English language background, education, nationality and major.
The results of the user study are illustrated in Figure 7 to Figure 11.
Figure 11 shows the average reading speed of all users and Figure 12 illustrates the average comprehension score on the web pages.
Figure 13 shows the average comprehension score per unit time.
Figure 14 and 15 are the results of subjective questions rated by all the users.
In addition, there is also a significant difference on the first subjective question, i.e.
How easy was it to read this web page?
A post-hoc Tukey test gives an honest significant difference between VSTF and SF on reading speed and also gives an honest significant difference of JF over both SF and VSTF on reading comprehension .
In addition, it gives an honest significant difference of JF over SF  and of VSTF over SF  on the first subjective question.
We use one-way ANOVA analysis to our data and find that there is a significant difference between SF, VSTF and JF on comprehension per unit time .
A post-hoc Tukey test gives an honest significant difference of JF over VSTF and of SF over VSTF on comprehension per unit time .
However, there is no honest significant difference of JF over SF on comprehension per unit time.
We think part of the reason is that the slightly increase of the reading time of using JF balances the comprehension score.
When observing the user study, we also noticed some interesting behaviors many users did for their reading.
For example, some users always move the mouse cursor to the position of the sentence they were reading at.
Some users used the mouse to highlight the whole paragraph when reading in original format .
The most repeated behavior we observed is that many users read lengthy paragraphs repeatedly.
There were many interesting comments from the users when we interviewed them after the study.
For example, many users mentioned that SF format is too crowded and hard to read, especially on a lengthy page.
In addition, the SF format felt very uncomfortable to their eyes and brain.
However, for the VSTF format, there were conflicting opinions.
Some users liked its segmentation of the sentences and color scheme to the subject and verb, but others complained about its frequent segmentation of the sentence.
In the observation, although we noticed that repeat reading to paragraphs or the whole article was a common behavior, it was not specifically happening more on any transformation.
For JF format, there are more positive comments.
For example, one subject said "I think it would be helpful for readers to understand the meaning of the article.
Also, readers can easily find what the article emphasizes."
Another subject said "When I see a sentence, I can roughly know the meaning.
Then, when I read each word, I can know it more what it wants to explain.
I can see each sentence clearly."
However, one subject said "It helps to separate the content.
But I don't like the format because it seems like to make the sentence longer," and another subject said " hard to connect the previous sentence.
Maybe that is because I get used to the normal format."
Based on the results of the user study, we can answer parts of the questions we propose in the previous section.
The transformation of content presentation enhances the web page readability to the Asian readers.
JF transformation is better than SF and VSTF transformations in reading comprehension.
Compared with SF format, reading JF transformation content does not negatively affect the reading speed of Asian users, but reading with VSTF transformation slower the reading speed.
In general, JF transformation makes the web page reading easier than SF format.
The Daily You  and AdEater  use machine learning techniques to remove Web advertisement, but they face the same problems as mentioned above.
When the Clean Page button is toggled on, Froggy changes the current page to reduce distracting page components to make the page cleaner, such as large images, animations, and Flash .
Unlike Adblocker, which typically remove offending images, Froggy reduces them in the size and dims them out, so that the user can still recognize them.
When Clean Page button is toggled off, the images return to their original size and appearance.
This decision was motivated by users who mentioned that some advertisements might be useful to them and they don't want to delete them completely.
To apply these findings, we designed a tool to support these presentation transformations in a web browser.
Froggy is a Firefox extension that we built to demonstrate these ideas.
Froggy adds a toolbar  to the browser for interactively controlling the content transformation.
Froggy implements the Jenga transformation method we developed and verified in the previous sections.
It also adds several new techniques for web page readability enhancement that were inspired and motivated by our interviews with users mentioned in user study section.
Among these are:  Reducing Distractions: automatically detecting and deemphasizing distracting elements;  Emphasizing Key Sentences: summarizing content by making key sentences stand out; and  Expanding Paragraphs: breaking paragraphs into sentence chunks separated by whitespace.
We conducted a face-to-face interview with 14 users on web behavior survey.
One of our questions was: "What actions do you want to perform to the web sites you visit frequently?"
Delete Content and Shrink Content were two desired actions.
The content means unnecessary distractions, including static, embedded, animated and popup advertisements.
However, some users preferred to minimize unnecessary distractions or make them less salient rather than to remove them because users mentioned that the web sites have financial incentives to display them.
To eliminate advertisements on web pages, there are some available add-ons for Firefox browser, such as Adblocker and Adblock Plus.
After applying the ad blocking, however, you might also risk losing information you might be interested in.
If you want to recover eliminated content, you need to change the settings and reload the page.
It is not easy to hide and show advertisements.
Although Firefox browser offers image blocking, this feature is not widely used for some reasons.
Where Clean Page transforms image components, the Jenga Format button transforms the text itself.
In Jenga Format, Froggy summarizes the page by emphasizing the main sentence of every paragraph and shrinking the font size of other sentences .
This mode also allows paragraphs to be individually expanded by clicking on them, which will be explained in the next section.
The Font slider on the toolbar can adjust the font size of secondary sentences.
When the user drags the Font Slider to its smallest value, all the secondary sentences actually disappear, so a lengthy article can be shortened to only a few topic sentences.
This is similar to the fisheye interface in Hornbaek et al.
However, the design of the Font slider provides more interactive adjustment to the content and gives readers more flexibility.
When Jenga Format is enabled, Froggy extracts paragraphs from the current viewing page by using Document Object Methods .
Then, it applies regular expressions to separate the sentences of each paragraph, and adds new HTML elements around the main sentence and secondary sentences of each paragraph.
These new elements allow the font size and positions of the sentences to be controlled independently by the Font slider and Space slider work.
Currently, we assume that the first sentence of each paragraph is the main sentence.
If the content is well written, the first sentence of each paragraph is generally the main sentence, which is taught as a basic rule in reading and writing skills.
Therefore, we are investigating and integrating salient topic sentence selection and text summarization, such as , from natural language processing to enhance the main sentence selection on web pages.
Froggy uses the JF transformation.
When the Jenga Format button is checked, the user can click on any paragraph to transform it into JF.
With the Space slider set to minimum space, Jenga Format looks the same as the familiar standard format.
The Clean Page algorithm of Froggy operates in two phases: content classification and content transformation.
In content classification phase, we use rule-based methods to parse the DOM tree and identify possible distracting page components, such as static ads, animated content and large content images.
Then, different attributes are added to nodes for next phase parsing.
There are three directions in our future work.
First, we plan to deploy another user study to investigate if our Firefox extension, Froggy, helps non-native readers in their daily reading on the Web.
Although this work was driven by the needs of non-native readers, we also want to know if the techniques we propose could improve the experience for native readers as well.
Second, we plan to extend the functionality of Froggy to integrate salient topic sentence selection algorithm and text summarization techniques from natural language processing to enhance main sentence selection on web pages.
Third, we plan to investigate skimming techniques, which are common to experienced readers, but uncommon to non-native readers.
After the study, we hope to implement parts of these techniques to Froggy to allow non-native readers have the same skimming techniques as the experienced readers.
We thank all the participants' help and reviewers' valuable suggestions.
This work is supported in part by Quanta Computer as part of the TParty project.
Any opinions, findings, conclusions or recommendations expressed in this publication are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the sponsor.
A diary study of work-related reading: design implications for digital reading devices.
Back, M. and Szymanski, M. H. The AirBook: forcefree interaction with dynamic text in an assistive reading device.
In CHI '01 Extended Abstracts, pp.
Bell, T. Extensive Reading: Speed and Comprehension.
Bernard, M., Liao, C. H., and Mills, M. The effects of font type and size on the legibility and reading time of online text by older adults.
CHI '01 Extended Abstracts, pp.
Bolin, M., Webber, M., Rha, P., Wilson, T. and Miller, R. Automation and Customization of Rendered Web Pages.
Boyarski, D., Neuwirth, C., Forlizzi, J., and Regli, S. H. A study of fonts designed for screen display.
Dynamic presentation of document content for rapid on-line skimming.
In AAAI Spring 1998 Symposium on Intelligent Text Summarization, 1998.
Extracting Content Structure for Web Pages based on Visual Representation.
In The Fifth Asia Pacific Web Conference , pp.
Chen, N., Guimbretiere, F., Dixon, M., Lewis, C., and Agrawala, M. Navigation techniques for dual-display ebook readers.
CHI '02 Extended Abstracts, pp.
Dillon, A., Kleinman, L., Choi, G. O., and Bias, R. Visual search and reading tasks using ClearType and regular displays: two experiments.
We found that when users try to read information on the Web, they suffer from unnecessary distractions and web page readability issues.
For non-native users, a lengthy web page makes reading more difficult.
In this paper, we tried to solve these problems from two directions: distraction elimination and content transformation.
Based on our paper prototype studies, we found two important factors, sentence separation and sentence spacing, affecting reading.
In the user studies, we focused on investigating the effect of transformations to web pages for web page readability enhancement.
We designed a user study to verify our assumption: the transformation of the web page content can enhance the reading comprehension to the users, especially to Asian non-native users.
There were 30 Asian users participating in our user study, and the study showed promising results that JF transformation we proposed in this paper can enhance the web page reading comprehension to Asian users.
Another advantage of the transformations we proposed is that the reading speed does not have a significant difference compared with the original reading, i.e.
To share the benefit of the new transformation method with larger audience, we designed a tool to integrate the transformation method we verified in the user study section and extend its functionalities to include two more new techniques, which have not been evaluated, for web page readability enhancement.
