Our analysis suggests such differences can be due to a number of factors, including a person's intent, page content, and site structure.
The log data enables us to characterize the differences between revisitation patterns, but it is difficult to deduce revisitation intent without a more detailed survey or observational data.
For example, someone may revisit a Web page frequently during a short interval of time because they are monitoring changing content contained in the page, or they may do so because they are using the site as a hub to navigate to linked pages.
For this reason, we supplemented the log data with a survey in which we asked participants to describe their reasons for revisiting specific pages.
By combining revisitation patterns and survey data, we find four main patterns of revisitation that are characterized by various factors including usage, content, structure, and intent.
This analysis can enable Web sites, Web browsers, and search engines to better support revisitation, and we discuss the design implications of our findings.
Our work examines Web revisitation patterns.
Everybody revisits Web pages, but their reasons for doing so can differ depending on the particular Web page, their topic of interest, and their intent.
To characterize how people revisit Web content, we analyzed five weeks of Web interaction logs of over 612,000 users.
We supplemented these findings by a survey intended to identify the intent behind the observed revisitation.
Our analysis reveals four primary revisitation patterns, each with unique behavioral, content, and structural characteristics.
Through our analysis we illustrate how understanding revisitation patterns can enable Web sites to provide improved navigation, Web browsers to predict users' destinations, and search engines to better support fast, fresh, and effective finding and re-finding.
Revisiting Web pages is common, but an individual's reasons for returning to different pages can be diverse.
For example, a person may revisit a shopping site's homepage every couple of weeks to check for sales.
That same person may also revisit the site's listing of fantasy books many times in just a few minutes while trying to find a new book.
To better understand Web page revisitation, we analyzed the interaction logs of a large number of opt-in users over a period of five weeks.
The logs contained a history of all of the Web page visits made by more than 612,000 users.
Thanks to the large quantity of data, it was possible for us to explore the revisitation patterns for specific Web pages along a number of dimensions not previously feasible.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Early research aimed at understanding general Web navigation and surfing behavior first reported a large amount of re-access of information .
To better understand and quantify this phenomenon, subsequent studies were designed to specifically address revisitation behavior.
These studies come primarily in two main flavors : * Log studies, where browsing patterns are monitored either through proxies or instrumented browsers .
Survey/interview studies, in which a questionnaire or interview is constructed to understand specific behaviors .
Studies of revisitation have demonstrated that 50%  to 80%  of all Web surfing behavior involves pages that users have previously visited.
While many revisitations occur shortly after a page's first visit , a significant number occur after a considerable amount of time has elapsed .
Two significant outcomes of earlier efforts have been the creation of taxonomies of browsing behavior in relationship to revisitation  and suggestions for improving the design of Web browsers , search engines , and personal information management systems .
Usage information Bin # of unique visitors Time between visits # of visits per visitor Patterns Revisitation curve Session Previous URL visited Accessed via search?
We collected Web page visitation information by analyzing the logs collected from opt-in users of the Windows Live Toolbar.
The toolbar provides augmented search features and reports anonymized usage behavior to a central server.
Our analysis makes use of data from a sample of 612,000 users for a five week period starting August 1, 2006.
The five week period is sufficient to capture a wide variety of revisitation patterns, although we may seasonal or yearly patterns.
However, as part of a different study of data from May and June of 2007, we took the opportunity to validate our findings and identified the same general patterns described below.
Taxonomies in this space have sought to define revisitation in terms of user intent, goals, or strategies .
New browser designs have concentrated on better back buttons , history or bookmarks , and monitoring and notification features .
The work we present here distinguishes itself from previous studies in a number of significant ways.
First, to our knowledge, this is by far the largest study of Web revisitation behavior.
While other studies have observed at most a few hundred participants in their population, the cohort in our work exceeds 612,000 people.
Second, while other studies have pursued the longitudinal tracking of a small number of individuals in their complete, unbounded, interactions with the Web, we attempt to capture the interaction of hundreds of thousands of people with a specific set of Web pages.
By broadly sampling pages and people we can begin to understand the characteristics of a page that are associated with specific revisitation behaviors.
A novel aspect of our methodology is that we are able to find diverse Web pages that are accessed in many different ways.
With a small user population it is difficult to find Web pages that are not considered "popular" but are nonetheless visited sufficiently for statistical analysis.
That is, the likelihood of two people in a small population both visiting anything but very popular pages is low.
With the large user population in our study we are able to find multiple access patterns for all but the most unpopular pages.
By understanding the variety of revisitation patterns we can provide design insights to better support the range of observed behaviors.
Users were identified by an anonymized ID associated with each toolbar.
As is the case with large-scale log analyses, if more than one person uses the same computer, they will have the same ID.
However, we believe that, with the exception of some very popular URLs, revisits will be user specific.
To simplify the discussion we refer to a toolbar instance as a "user."
For simplicity, we restricted our sample to data gathered from English speaking users in the United States.
We also filtered to eliminate users for which there was limited data.
Only users for which we had data for over 7 days were considered.
In order to eliminate the "long-tail" of nonrepresentative instances, users' activities were characterized on a number of dimensions including: total number of URLs visited, unique URLs visited, number of URLs revisited, and number of URLs visited per day.
The lowest ten percent of users in any of these dimensions were removed from the study population.
Finally, users in the top one percent were also excluded .
The result of this filtering, for the time period of the study is over 612,000 valid users.
Because we were interested not only in pages with different popularity but pages with different revisitation patterns we defined a number of attributes for each page which we then used to systematically sample pages for further analysis.
Per-user revisits for a page represents the median number of times a user will revisit that page.
Figure 1a shows a scatter plot of pages along these three dimensions, as well as histograms for each of the three criteria individually .
A  scatter plot of pages  along the three dimensions of interest.
1b-d are the histograms for per-user visit, unique visitors, and inter-arrival time respectively .
The 55k pages were sampled from these distributions.
To sample broadly from this space without over-selecting from this "long-tail" we applied a pseudoexponential binning to find thresholds for the unique-visitor  and per-user revisit criteria.
The specific thresholds are noted as vertical lines in Figure 1.
As illustrated in Figure 1a, we defined four bins for the unique-visitor criteria, five for the per-user revisit criteria, and six for the inter-arrival time criteria .
Each URL was annotated with these three bin numbers, and we sampled from this space.
Some oversampling of popular pages was added by explicitly including the top 5000 most visited pages.
We crawled the pages to ensure that they were still publicly available , and removed from further analysis those that were not.
The interaction logs allow us to observe what people did, and led us to categorize revisitation in a way that emphasizes observable behaviors.
However, the logs do not tell us why people behaved the way we observed.
For this reason we conducted a complimentary user survey to gather information about user intent.
In addition to helping us better understand revisitation patterns, the results of the user study also serve to relate our behavioral observations to previous taxonomies of revisitation that focus on intent .
Twenty volunteers participated in the study .
Participants were employees of Microsoft in a range of roles 
Each participant installed software to log Web page visits, which they used for one to two months.
We recorded visits only for the 55,000 URLs in our log study as well as a random subset from the user's cache and Web history.
At the end of the logging period, participants were asked to complete a survey to gather greater detail about ten of the Web pages they had revisited during the observation period.
In contrast, visits in the second row are spread out which shifts the peak of the revisitation to the right .
Note that the number of visits in each example is the same.
That is, the same number of visits per user can result in very different revisitation curves.
Revisitation curves are generated first by calculating all inter-arrival times between consecutive pairs of revisits.
Deltas, in minutes, are computed for all users revisiting a specific URL .
Because binning by minute results in very sparse data for slow revisits, 16 exponential bins were used to smooth the histograms and to provide a finer grained resolution than the six bins used in URL sampling.
Some manual tuning of the bin boundaries was used to generate more descriptive timescales.
Because histograms are count based, URLs that had many more visitors or more revisits per visitor had higher counts.
This centroid is depicted in Figure 2 .
This bottom curve shows the normalized histogram using the raw  data.
The periodicity in the figure corresponds to a 24 hour cycle and is likely due to the daily patterns of Internet usage.
If a person has a "usual" time for Web surfing, this kind of periodic behavior will be seen in revisitation curves .
The top portion of the figure shows the smoother centroid curve that is obtained by summing over all points in each of the 16 intervisit bins, which are shown as vertical lines.
To complete the normalization, for each URL the unnormalized bins in each revisitation curve were divided by the corresponding count in the centroid.
For each Web page in the survey, participants were asked whether they remembered visiting and revisiting the page.
If they remembered the page, they were asked to indicate their intent when visiting from a list of options .
If they recalled visiting the page more than once, they were further asked to describe how often they visited the page, and whether they visited it at regular intervals.
The content of a Web page and its URL can also contain clues as to why the page was revisited.
A custom crawler collected content information by downloading and indexing each Web page.
Each page was crawled every hour for a month to examine the changes in page content over time.
Although the times of the crawls do not correspond exactly with the revisitation observed in the logs, the crawled content is likely similar.
We classified each Web page into topical categories using standard techniques .
The topical categories used are similar to those found in the first two levels of the Open Directory .
Additionally, a second classifier identified various generic genres including sites for children, mail, pornography, etc.
To compare and evaluate revisitation behavior for different URLs we introduce the concept of a revisitation curve.
A revisitation curve is a normalized histogram of inter-visit  times for all users visiting a specific Web page, and characterizes the page's revisitation pattern.
Table 2 illustrates the relationship between page visits and revisitation curves.
For each row, four page visits are represented as four tall bars along a time line.
The revisitation curve is a histogram of the inter-visit times.
The x-axis represents the inter-visit time interval, and the yaxis represents a count of the number of visits to the page separated by that interval.
The specific density of visits determines the shape of the revisitation curve.
For every bin, i:  revisit-curveurl = counturl / centroid Roughly speaking, the normalized revisitation curve for each URL represents the percentage over, or under, revisits to that URL compared to the average revisit pattern.
Though there are a number of other ways to normalize this type of data 
Examples of revisitation curves for two specific URLs are: *  http://www.amazon.com/ has a revisit curve that peaks towards the right, indicating that most revisits occur after a longer time period .
As shown in Table 3, we further ordered, named, and manually grouped the clusters based on general trends into four groups: fast, medium, slow, and hybrid.
Many revisitation patterns fell at the extremes.
Five clusters represented primarily fast revisitation patterns, where people revisited the member Web pages many times over a short interval but rarely revisited over longer intervals.
On the other hand, four clusters represented slow revisitation patterns, with people revisiting the member pages mostly at intervals of a week or more.
Between these two extremes are two groups of clusters.
One is a hybrid combination of fast and slow revisitations, and displays a bimodal revisitation pattern.
The other type consists of two medium clusters comprised of URLs that are revisited primarily at intervals between an hour and a day.
The clusters in this group are less peaked and show more variability in revisitation intervals than the fast or slow groups.
The self-reported revisitation reinforces the selection of our grouping criteria as patterns from the surveys were fairly consistent, not only with the participant's observed page interactions, but with patterns in the aggregate log data.
Participants tended to report hourly or daily visits to pages that were clustered as fast or medium-term revisitation, and weekly, monthly or longer revisits those pages with slow revisitation patterns.
The self-reported regularity of access decreased as the visitation interval increased.
Participants reported visiting early and medium pages at regular intervals, and slow pages at irregular intervals.
In our discussion of the clusters, we focus primarily on large trends between these groups of clusters.
Where appropriate, we also discuss details of the specific clusters.
We consider each revisitation curve to be a signature of user behavior in accessing a given Web page.
Given our representation of behavior it is natural to ask about the range of different curves.
In order to group these curves we apply a clustering algorithm to the 55,000 curves to group those that have similar shape and magnitude.
Specifically, we use repeated-bisection clustering  with a cosine similarity metric and the ratio of intra- to extra- cluster similarity as the objective function.
In practice we find that clusters are fairly stable regardless of the specific clustering or similarity metric.
Using the properties described in Table 1, we characterized the pages that fell into each cluster group.
Our findings were further supplemented by a manual examination of the Web pages closest to each cluster's centroid.
A summary of our findings can be found in Table 4.
Unless noted otherwise, all results are significant as measured using ANOVA/Kruskal-Wallis with post hoc tests, or 2-tests as appropriate.
In most cases, a two-tailed significance level of p < .0017 was used.
This represents a .01 experimentwise error rate using a Bonferroni correction for six dependent pair-wise tests.
All differences in Table 4 are significant except for four pair-wise comparisons--the medium and hybrid groups do not differ in the unique visitors or URL length ; the fast and hybrid groups do not differ in % domain .com; and the slow and hybrid groups do not differ in % domain .edu.
For tests involving terms or topics, 2-tests were used and the significance levels of individual tests were corrected to preserve an experiment-wise error rate of .01.
Shopping & Reference Web sites: We found that not only specific Web pages but entire Web sites may display an over-representation of URLs in the fast group.
For example, pages belonging to Wikipedia and the Internet Movie Database  appeared more often in this group .
We may hypothesize that certain information needs, such as specific encyclopedia details, are localized temporally.
User satisfying such needs may revisit frequently for the current information need, but do not generally return again for an extended period of time.
Auto refresh: Another reason for frequent fast revisits was that pages were auto-refreshing.
For example, CNN's homepage causes a browser refresh every 30 minutes, Fox New's homepage every 10, Bloomberg every 5, and Sports Illustrated refreshes game scores every 60 seconds.
In particular, pages in clusters F3  and F4 , with peaks at five and ten minutes respectively, may be pages where much of the revisitation occurs from autorefresh.
Both clusters display an over-representation of the terms "meta refresh" and "window.location" corresponding to the HTML and Javascript reload mechanisms.
Further supporting this hypothesis is the fact that the visited page immediately preceding pages in these clusters are exactly the same 29% of the time, compared with 12% of the time for pages in the medium group and 10% of the time for pages in the slow group.
Thirty eight percent of the URLs in F1  were categorized as Porn .
Pages in the fast group were also likely to contain words like "xxx", "sex", "photo", and "free" in the URLs and the text of the pages.
For example, a person may start at a list of all products, such as a table of blouses, visit an individual product description pages and then rapidly return to the original page to explore more options.
As evidence of this "shopping page" behavior, fast pages were more likely than pages in other groups to contain the words, "buy", "catalog", or "shop" in the URL, and to belong to shopping-related categories.
The two most popular categories for this group  are Home & Garden and Clothes & Accessories, both of which are comprised mostly of shopping pages.
We hypothesized that visits to hub-and-spoke pages would be particularly likely to be preceded by a visit to a page in the same domain, and we found that this was indeed the case.
Seventy seven percent of all revisits in the fast group were from the same domain.
This is significantly more than the percent of visits from the same domain to pages in the medium  or slow  groups.
Additionally, the fast group had the highest number of links on the page pointing back at pages in the same site .
Pages that fell in the medium-term revisitation group were visited hourly  or daily .
Pages revisited hourly  appeared to be portals, Web mail, and chat, as evidenced by keywords in the URL and topic classification.
Pages in M2 were bank pages , news pages, and sports pages.
Popular homepages: Pages in the medium group were among the most easily recognizable, with many being very popular.
The URLs were significantly shorter at a mean of 38.3 characters  and a mean directory depth of 2.4  indicating that they were more likely to be top level homepages.
There were many more unique visitors to these Web sites than to others, with a mean number of 254.3 visitors, compared with 40 for the fast group and 75 for the slow group.
Additionally, we find medium rate revisits for URLs on games Web sites such as Yahoo Games  and Gamesville .
Browser homepages: According to the survey data, most browser homepages fell in this group, with none falling in the fast group, and few in the slow group.
This is consistent with the fact that portals and search engines, both frequently used as browser homepages, appear in the medium group.
This is likely due to the timescale of human-to-human communication.
That is, the turnaround in communication between two individuals through a Web mediated system appears to be more on the hourly or daily basis than significantly faster or slower.
The width of the revisitation curve for this group indicates that there is considerable variability  in revisitation intervals.
Survey respondents further indicated that "communication" was a reason to access a number of Web pages in this group.
The high representation of educational pages may reflect the fact that student populations are particularly likely to reaccess Web content at daily or weekly periods.
These pages were not used in a hub-and-spoke manner like the pages in the fast group, but were perhaps used to get to such pages.
Weekend activity: Cluster S2  exhibits a peak at a week.
We hypothesize much of the activity in this cluster is related to weekend activity.
For example, the page http://www.fetenet.com, which is close to the cluster's centroid, contains event listings.
The Movies category is the most distinguishing category for this cluster, followed by the Religion category, both of which further suggest weekend activity.
The URLs are also longer in the slow group than the medium group, which suggests that direct access typing the URL was less likely for these pages.
Interestingly, many pages for children's Web sites are over-represented in the slow group.
This includes pages for the Cartoon Network , the Barbie Web site , Nickelodeon  and Disney .
This finding may be due to limited availability of Internet access for children who may only have access at certain times of the day or days of the week.
Additionally, many Web sites are tied to TV programs which have weekly periodicities.
Children's Web sites also display hybrid behavior which appears to be due to multiple functions of the Web site, which we describe in more detail in the next section.
Entertainment & Hobbies: Hybrid behavior is likely observed in situations when an activity requires hub-andspoke movement around the page, but the activity itself is somewhat infrequent.
For example certain shopping related pages such as shopping carts exist in this group.
The difference between auction related pages, such as eBay, and other shopping destinations might be the requirement of monitoring ever-changing auctions, successive bids, and long-term interest in collectibles.
URLs in the hybrid group bore similarities to several other groups, as can be seen in Table 4.
Much of the navigation behavior was similar to what was observed for the fast group , but the hybrid pages appeared to be of higher quality and receive more long-term revisitations.
Like the medium group, hybrid pages had short URLs and a large number of unique visitors .
Whereas the pages occurring in medium group indicate a fairly constant need, hybrid interactions reflect a rarer need that nonetheless requires many page revisits for the individual need to be met.
For example, a page such as Automart's homepage  provides a front end interface to search for new sales listings, in this case for cars.
A user may visit the page, search for updated or new listings and check many listings in any given visit.
The homepages for various classifieds listing service, such as local Craig's List homepages, fall into this group as well.
Both hybrid and medium group's pages display a higher than expected number of "login" in the text indicating both types are transactional or personalized in some way.
According to the survey participants, the amount of meaningful change they expected to the page decreased as the revisitation interval increased.
Visits to hybrid pages were particularly likely to be to find new information .
Hybrid pages also displayed the greatest number of changes in content.
A hybrid behavior might be a mechanism for "catching-up" with changed content.
Because of large scale sampling of URL data we are able to also look at how pages within a Web site are distributed across groups.
This analysis generates confirmation of the findings described above.
As mentioned earlier, there is an over-representation of URLs for shopping and reference Web sites in the fast group .
An interesting characteristic of such sites is that while a vast majority of the pages inside the website were in the fast group, their top-level homepages  fell into the slow group.
The homepage visits probably represent the occasional need people have for the type of information , while the deeper pages that fall in the fast group probably represent individual's behavior when satisfying the need.
This suggests that while some Web pages themselves may fall into fast or slow groups, the Web sites may display hybrid or slow behavior.
In general, we find that Web sites that serve a single consistent role tend to be present in only one group.
Those that serve multiple roles have URLs that fall more equally into all groups.
For example, EsMas, www.esmas.com, a Spanish language portal and media site that provides shopping, classifieds, news, galleries, and many other features has a fairly even split across groups .
For repeat searches, there is a tension between displaying new results and preserving previously viewed results .
It may be particularly important for search engines to provide consistent results for queries that return many slow and hybrid pages, since these searches are likely to be used to re-find pages found a long time ago.
Though consistency can be achieved by keeping the results displayed static, it may be better achieved through personalization where the results an individual is likely to revisit are emphasized.
The revisitation patterns of pages returned for a query can tell the search engine something about the searcher's information need.
Depending on the particular task or distribution of results, the search engine could include pages that had consistent or diverse revisitation patterns.
For example, if a query returns results that are generally in the fast group, this could indicate that the user is looking for something new and may be particularly responsive to the suggestion of relevant content.
On the other hand, if the results are primarily in the medium or slow revisit groups, the user may be more likely to have a specific intent and not respond to suggestions.
Content that is somewhat orthogonal to the user's objective may be most helpful in these cases by appealing to different interests.
Search engines may also benefit by taking into account users revisitation behaviors when crawling the Web.
Assuming changes to page content are correlated with people's aggregate revisitation patterns, the revisitation patterns could indicate the optimal rate for re-crawling and re-indexing different Web sites.
Previous studies of the revisitation patterns of individual users have led to numerous browser enhancements .
In one study, Cockburn et al.
Given the results presented here, we believe there may be value in providing awareness of, and grouping by, a broader range of revisitation patterns.
For example, users may want to quickly sort previously visited pages into groups corresponding to a working stack , a frequent stack , and a searchable stack .
Several history mechanisms have tried to predict whether people will access a Web page based on overall measures of last access time and frequency of access.
It may be possible to better predict the future utility of a URL by taking into account the page's revisitation pattern.
For example, if a page is visited weekly and the user has not visited it in almost seven days, it is very likely to be revisited soon.
On the other hand, a page the user visits daily but that was just visited is unlikely to be visited in the immediate future.
More accurate predictions of the future utility of a Web page can be used in many ways.
The color of the page's URL could change to indicate increased potential interest, or the address bar's completion drop-down list could favor URLs that are likely to be accessed.
Alternatively, such pages could be proactively recommended and the content pre-fetched  for efficiency in browsing or indexing.
In order for a Web browser to take advantage of revisitation patterns for a page or site, aggregate visitation data could be made available by the site itself.
If this is not feasible, it may be possible to predict the page's revisitation pattern by classifying it using non-behavioral features like text and link structure.
Initial explorations indicate this approach is promising.
Personalized revisitation patterns could further be combined with aggregate observations or predictions.
Just as search engines may want to make it easy to find slow and hybrid pages, Web site designers may want to ensure that such pages are easy to find.
This could be done by creating appropriate keyword lists for indexing, minimizing page change and movement, and providing navigational shortcuts from common search landing pages.
Modeling users in terms of revisitation behavior might allow a Web site designer to apply our results in the design of their site.
By taking into account the four potential revisitation styles, in conjunction with the site design and content, information architects can understand and simulate user behavior with their Web sites.
This may make it possible for designers to understand potential interaction patterns even before the Web site is launched, and to evaluate a site's success in meeting the design objectives.
Finally, we believe there are opportunities for Web site designers to better support monitoring activities.
For example, some Web sites create a list of "what's new" to aid in repeat visitors' discovery of new content.
Greenberg, S. and A. Cockburn, Getting back to back: Alternate behaviors for a Web browser's back button.
In Proceedings of the 5th Annual Human Factors and the Web Conference, 1999.
Herder, E. Characterizations of user Web revisit behavior.
In Proceedings of Workshop on Adaptivity and User Modeling in Interactive Systems, 2005.
Kaasten, S. and S. Greenberg.
Designing an integrated bookmark / history system for Web browsing.
Western Computer Graphics Symposium, 2000.
Our paper has presented an exploration of the diverse ways that people revisit Web pages and the reasons behind their actions.
Our work, which is based on the largest study to date of Web visitation logs coupled with user surveys and Web content analysis, has allowed us to develop a unique view of people's revisitation behaviors.
By analyzing tens of thousands of Web sites we have been able to identify 12 different types of revisitation behavior corresponding to four groups that are orthogonal to previous work.
Our analysis of these groups in various contexts has led us to define a set of design implications for client applications, Websites, and search engines.
Looking forward, we hope to refine and test the designs we have described above, and better characterize the impact of document change on revisitation.
As can be seen in Table 4, the amount of change to a Web page's content that we observed varied greatly as a function of the group to which the page belonged.
We believe that revisitation patterns and intent are likely to correlate with meaningful change.
For example, hybrid pages were particularly likely to change, and survey participants indicated they were particularly interested in new content from these pages.
We also believe that a study over longer periods may lead to interesting new insights about seasonal effects and periodicities.
An exploration of Web-based monitoring: Implications for design.
Kellar, M., Watters, C., and Shepherd, M. A goal-based classification of Web information tasks.
Milic-Frayling, N., Jones, R., Rodden, K., Smyth, G., Blackwell, A., and Sommerer, R. Smartback: Supporting users in back navigation.
A taxonomic analysis of what World Wide Web activities significantly impact people's decisions and actions.
Obendorf, Hartmut, H, Weinreich, E. Herder, and M. Mayer.
Web page revisitation revisited: Implications of a long-term click-stream study of browser usage.
Open Directory Project, www.dmoz.org, retrieved Jan. 2008.
Sanderson, M. and S. T. Dumais.
Examining repetition in user search behavior.
Sebastiani, F. Machine learning in automated text categorization.
How knowledge workers use the Web.
Takano, H. and T. Winograd.
Dynamic bookmarks for the WWW.
Tauscher, L. and S. Greenberg.
How people revisit Web pages: Empirical findings and implications for the design of history systems.
The Re:Search Engine: Simultaneous support for finding and re-finding.
Information reretrieval: repeat queries in Yahoo's logs.
Investigating behavioral variability in Web search.
