Follower count is important to Twitter users: it can indicate popularity and prestige.
Yet, holistically, little is understood about what factors - like social behavior, message content, and network structure - lead to more followers.
Such information could help technologists design and build tools that help users grow their audiences.
In this paper, we study 507 Twitter users and a half-million of their tweets over 15 months.
Marrying a longitudinal approach with a negative binomial auto-regression model, we find that variables for message content, social behavior, and network structure should be given equal consideration when predicting link formations on Twitter.
To our knowledge, this is the first longitudinal study of follow predictors, and the first to show that the relative contributions of social behavior and message content are just as impactful as factors related to social network structure for predicting growth of online social networks.
We conclude with practical and theoretical implications for designing social media technologies.
We also assessed numerous attributes specific to the content of users' tweets, such as: propensity to express positive versus negative sentiment ; topical focus ; proportions of tweets with "meformer" content versus informational content ; frequency of others "retweeting" a user's content ; linguistic sophistication  of tweets; and hashtag usage.
Finally, we evaluated the impact of users' evolving social network structure, collecting snapshots of their friends and followers every three months for fifteen months.
With this, we can evaluate the effects of network status, reciprocity , and common network neighbors.
Our variables were selected from prominent theoretical constructs bridging social science, linguistics, computer mediated communications, and network theory.
This paper compares the relative contributions of factors from each perspective for predicting link formations in online social networks.
We take a temporal perspective and develop a model that accounts for social behavior, message content, and network elements at several intervals for over a year.
We use an auto-regressive, negative binomial regression model to explore the changes in users' follower counts over time.
We find that message content significantly impacts follower growth.
For example, in contrast to , we find that expressing negative sentiment has an adverse effect on follower gain, whereas expressing positive sentiment helps to facilitate it.
Similarly, we show that informational content attracts new followers with a relative impact that is roughly thirty times higher than the impact of "meformer" content, which deters growth.
We also find that behavioral choices can also dramatically affect follower growth.
For example, choosing to complete one's profile and choosing directed communication strategies over broadcast strategies significantly stimulates follower growth over time.
Finally, we show that even simple measures of topology and structure are useful predictors of evolutionary network growth.
Comparing across multiple variables related to message content, social behavior, and network structure allows us to interpret their relative effect on follower growth from different theoretical perspectives.
We believe this is the first paper of its kind to compare the impact of all these factors together within a single longitudinal study.
The temporal nature of the longitudinal method is crucial because it allows us to suggest causal relationships between these factors and network growth on Twitter.
Followers are Twitter's most basic currency.
Building an audience of followers can create access to a network of social ties, resources, and influence.
Yet, little is understood about how to grow such an audience.
This paper examines multiple factors that affect tie formation and dissolution over time on the social media service Twitter.
We collected behavioral, content, and network data approximately every three months for fifteen months.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Next, we consider related work showing how social behavior, message content, and network structure relate to follower growth.
Our study draws from this prior work in deciding which variables to include in our analysis, and contributes new results to this body of literature by considering these variables temporally, and in conjunction with one another.
For convenience and organizational purposes, we group our variables into three categories: social behaviors , message content , and social network structure.
These categories are intended to be neither mutually exclusive nor exhaustive.
However, we specifically call attention to content variables because they seem to be underrepresented in much of the related literature on follower growth dynamics .
In , the authors explore the relationship between profile structure  and number of friends on Facebook.
Based on a static snapshot of the social network at a large university, the authors found that the act of populating profile fields was strongly correlated with the number of friendship links.
Compared to users without profile elements, users who had entered profile content had about two to three times as many friends.
Based on this prior literature as well as our own intuition, we anticipate similar effects in our longitudinal data regarding network growth on Twitter.
Assuming that people will be more likely to follow those who include identity cues in their profile , we expect that the more these elements are included, the more successful one will be in growing an audience.
Our study tests these assumptions.
Social capital refers to "the actual or potential resources which are linked to a durable network of more or less institutionalized relationships of mutual acquaintance or recognition" .
It is your relative social "worth ," resulting from your position in a social network: i.e., the number and kind of the ties you maintain, your relative access to resources desired by those in your network, as well as your level of access to the resources your network ties possess .
In prior work, researchers distinguished between three kinds of social behavior that affect social capital in the social networking site, Facebook:  directed communications with specific, target individuals;  broadcast communications, which are not targeted at anyone in particular; and  passive consumption of content .
Because personalized messages are more likely to contain content that strengthens social relationships , it has been suggested that directed communications are useful for maintaining existing ties and for encouraging the growth of new ones.
Indeed, previous research found that, when compared to broadcast communications and passive consumption, personalized one-on-one communication strategies have a measurably greater impact on self-reported social capital of Facebook users .
Other research suggests that informal personal conversation is a major reason for using a social media like Twitter , even for work and enterprise purposes .
However, the volume of messages and the rate at which they are transmitted  are both correlated with unfollowing on Twitter .
Here, we test whether these behaviors help to grow followers on Twitter.
Sentiment analysis refers to the computational treatment of opinion, sentiment, and subjectivity in text .
Previous research found significant correlations between the number of followers of a Twitter user and that user's tendency to express emotions like joy and sadness  or positive versus negative sentiments  in their tweets.
However, the authors in  acknowledge that an important limitation of the study was the static nature of the correlation analysis.
In particular, we note the following passage from the paper:
Although not explicitly stated, this same limitation also applies to .
We build on their prior work and extend it by studying changes in audiences over time.
By relying on time-dependent regression analysis of longitudinal data to identify the relative effects of sentiment expression on follower gain, we are able to address the limitation noted above.
This is conceptually similar to the approach used by  to characterize the relative effects of various factors on predicting Twitter adoption among young adults.
Exploring dynamics over time gives us a stronger case for causality.
We also build on the approach in both  and  by extending our analysis beyond the LIWC2007 text analysis package to automatically classify positive and negative sentiment.
LIWC  is a widely used and validated dictionary-based coding system often used to characterize texts by counting the frequency of more than 4,400 words in over 60 categories.
However, LIWC does not include many features that are important for sentiment analysis of tweets.
For example, our study also includes the 408 words in LIWC categories for Positive Emotion and Negative Emotion, plus an additional ~2,200 words with positive or negative senti-
These additional characteristics are known to be important features of sentiment analysis for microblogs like Twitter .
Also, some words are bound to connote more extreme sentiment than oth ers .
Thus, in addition to simply counting occurrences of positive or negative words , we also assess the directional magnitude  of the sentiment for each word, associating human coded valence scores ranging from -5 to +5 for each word in our dictionary.
Such measures reflect ego-level network attributes that affect the decision of others to follow the user.
On the other hand,  shows that follower counts alone do not fully explain interest in following.
In other words, popularity, in and of itself, does not beget popularity.
Dyadic properties such as reciprocity and mutuality also play key roles in the process of tie formation and dissolution .
The principle of homophily asserts that similarity engenders stronger potential for interpersonal connections.
In the selection of social relationships, people tend to form ties to others who are like them - a finding that has been one of the most pervasive empirical regularities of modern social science .
Sharing interests with another person is one form of similarity .
A Twitter user who discusses a wide range of topics may appeal to a broader audience, therefore attracting more followers - a notion that, according to , is supported by the economic theory of network externalities .
In , the authors describe how initial topical focus affected users' ability to attract followers.
However, the users in  self-identified as providers of politically oriented tweets, and it is unknown whether the findings from  will hold for a more heterogeneous sample of Twitter users.
Our study addresses this question.
In addition to dyadic structural properties, we also consider triads .
Specifically, we are interested in the concepts of structural balance and triadic closure.
For example, consider the case where three people form an undirected network.
If A is friends with X, and X is friends with B, then according to Heider's theory of cogn itive balance, the triad is "balanced" when A is friends with B, but "unbalanced" when A is not friends with B .
As the number of common neighbors  between A and B increases, the likelihood of the A-B tie being formed also increases .
This principle of structural proximity is known as triadic closure .
Measuring the occurrences of common network neighbors is useful for link predictions in real life social networks  as well as online social networks .
We explore the extent to which these network structures impact follower gain as compared to message content and social behavior.
In , the authors highlight the dual nature of Twitter as both a social network and as a news/information medium.
Also,  suggests two basic categorizations of Twitter users as Informers  versus "Meformers" .
Meformers were reported to have almost three times fewer followers than Informers.
The authors note that "the direction of the causal relationship between information sharing behavior and extended social activity is not clear" .
We explore whether this type of message content affects growing a social media audience over time.
Making causal claims with observational data can be problematic.
It is impossible to absolutely rule out every possible "third factor" that might account for some portion of an association between an independent variable and its effect on the dependent variable.
We try to mitigate this problem by accounting for as many "third factors" as is feasible.
Longitudinal studies are still correlational research, but these correlations have greater power because we have time-dependent, repeat observations.
In other words, when input A is consistently and reliably observed preceding outcome B for the exact same group of individuals time after time, then we have greater confidence in suggesting a causal relationship between A and B.
Preferential attachment, or the phenomenon whereby new network members prefer to make a connection to popular existing members, is a common property of real life social networks  and is useful for predicting the formation of new connections .
The number of followers a person maintains has been shown to reduce the likelihood that the person will be unfollowed in the future , meaning popular people often remain popular.
We collected data from 507 active Twitter users who collectively provided us with a corpus of 522,368 tweets spanning the 15 months between August 2010 and October 2011.
In addition to the tweets, we also have snapshots of friends and followers taken at periodic intervals .
We were interested in discovering the relationship between the factors discussed above within each three-month period and the subsequent changes in follower counts at the end of that period.
The subset selected for inclusion in this study consisted of those accounts that met the following four criteria when sampled approximately every three months: 1.
Tweet in English, as determined by inspecting the users' profiles for the designated language via Tweepy2, a Twitter API library for Python, as well as Python's Natural Language Tool Kit3  for language detection on the users' 20 most recent tweets.
This filter is necessary for our linguistic predictors , although it may restrict the generalizability of our results.
Have Twitter accounts that are at least 30 days old at the time of the first collection period, and are therefore not new to the service.
This was done to avoid the potential confounding effects of users who have just joined and are likely building up their followership based on existing friends and acquaintances .
Follow at least fifteen other "friends" and have at least five followers.
This removes a large portion of unengaged or novice users, and is close to Twitter's own definition of an "active user"4,5.
Tweet at least twenty times within each time period .
This removes the confounding effects of inactive accounts.
Profile cues of "trustworthiness" of Twitter identity:  the length, in characters, of the user's self-defined profile description,  whether the user has indicated a personal URL in their profile, and  whether the user has indicated their location.
We collected data about whether the user had a personal profile image or the default egg image, but there was insufficient variation in the data to use this variable .
Positive  sentiment intensity rate: ratio of the sum of the valence intensity of positive  language used in tweets to the total number of tweets in a period.
In a separate formative evaluation involving a small subset of tweets from the corpus , our custom sentiment analysis engine performed quite well.
The correlation coefficient between our sentiment analysis engine and ratings from three human judges was high ; better than the Pattern.en sentiment analysis engine6 .
The correlation among human judges was r = 0.851.
Informational content index: the ratio of tweets containing either a URL, "RT", "MT", "HT" or "via" to total number of tweets in the period.
Meformer content index: the ratio of tweets containing any of the 24 self-referencing pronouns identified in LIWC  to total number of tweets in the period.
Topic focus: following , this is the average cosine similarity  for every unique paired combination of a user's tweets in a given time period.
User tweets retweeted ratio: the total number of times a user's tweets were retweeted, relative to the total number of tweets produced by the user in the period.
Hashtag usage ratio: the total number of hashtags used in a period relative to the total number of tweets in the period.
TReDIX: the "Tweet Reading Difficulty Index" is a mea sure developed by the authors to capture the linguistic sophistication of a set of tweets.
TReDIX is a ratio of the total count of long words appearing in tweets within a time period relative to the number of tweets in the period.
Tweets in period: the total number of tweets produced by a user in a three-month time period.
Peak tweets per hour : for a given threemonth time period, the maximum rate of tweets per hour.
Directed communications index: captures replies and mentions, as well as consideration for the social signal sent when the person "favorites" someone else's tweet, calculated as "@" count plus favorites count divided by the total number of tweets in a period.
Broadcast communication index: the ratio of tweets with no "@" at all in the tweet to total number of tweets in a period.
In-link reciprocity rate: the number of followers that the user is also following relative to the total number of followers in the user's social network at the end of each period.
Attention-status ratio: ratio of followers  to following , calculated based on the user's existing social network at the end of each period.
Age of account: the age of a user's Twitter account  at the end of a time period, to control for the likely differences between older, more established accounts and newer, developing accounts.
We include the number of followers as a control to account for popularity-based preferential attachments.
Change in followers : change in follower count at the end of time period t-1 , is a lagged variable used to control for second order follower growth dynamics for the dependent variable in the time-dependent auto-regressive model.
This addresses the issue of possible preferential attachment for rising or falling "stars" , and helps mitigate concerns related to lack of independence among repeated observations.
We test the predictive power of these variables by incorporating auto-regression into a negative binomial regression model.
Negative binomial regression is used for modeling count variables, and is well-suited to modeling dependent variables of count data which are ill-dispersed  and do not have an excessive number of zeros , as is the case with our data set.
Autoregressive models attempt to predict an output of a system based on previous observations , which allows us to mitigate concerns associated with lack of independence for repeated measures by incorporating a lagged variable into our model.
In the present study, we use auto-regression to account for the overall slope of follower gain heading into a given time period.
Change in follower growth at the end of time period t0 is therefore conditioned upon the change in follower growth at the end of t-1 .
After removing tweets from the first time period interval  and the second time period , we have 507 unique active Twitter users who collectively provided 1,836 instances of follower growth across the remaining four time periods of our analysis.
Table 1 shows descriptive statistics  for the response variable  as well as seventeen of the twenty-two predictor and control variables.
For space reasons, we omit user profile data from the table, and instead provide the following summary: the majority of users had URLs listed in their profile , most listed their location , and the average profile description was 85 characters long.
The density plots in Table 1 show some skewness  and generally high kurtosis  for many of the variables.
This makes the median a better measure of central tendency than the mean for many of the variables, and the density plots reveal the distributions for each variable.
Most users tweetd between 131-364 times in three months , usually with bursts of no more than eight tweets within a single hour.
The Broadcast Communication Index shows the proportion of tweets that are not directed to any specific person.
Most people use broadcast communication strategies for about 30%-60% of their messages .
Proportionally, most people tweet about twice as much positive and neutral content as negative content, with an average of 106 tweets identified as positive , and 51 tweets labeled as negative.
In terms of intensity of positive or negative language, most people are generally about three times more positive than they are negative in their tweets .
The proportion of users' tweets identified as "meformer" content was nearly normally di stributed - users talk about themselves in 41% of their messages, on average.
Informational content accounted for 24% of messages.
This closely resembles the results from .
The mean and median of topical focus  indicate that in general, people post a fairly diverse range of content.
The ratios of retweets  and hashtag usage  to total number of tweets in a period are moderate for the majority of users - retweets comprised about 12% of users' messages, and hashtags were used in about 26% of tweets.
The Tweet Reading Difficulty Index  is evenly distributed, with most people using moderately sophisticated language - about 2.36 long words per tweet, on average.
On the original RIX scale, an index of 2.4 is equivalent to a seventh grade reading level .
Table 1: Descriptive statistics for the dependent variable  and seventeen of the twenty-two predictor and control variables.
The x-axes of the density plots represent the measured value of the variable, and the y-axis indicates the density of users observed at a particular value.
For example, one can interpret the table to indicate that most users grew their Twitter audience at a rate of about 12 to 106 new followers  every 3 months.
The density plot indicates that most users fell within this range.
The density plots indicate that few users fell outside these ranges, but those that exceeded the range did so by a large margin.
In general, users reciprocally follow-back about a quarter of their followers .
The density plot for attention-status ratio  shows a very tight distribution around the range 0.895 to 1.9, indicating that many people have similar numbers of in-degree connections  as out-degree connections .
About 2K-50K overlapping network neighbors are typical, though some users with very large networks have over two orders of magnitude more.
We now turn to the core of our results: how well do these variables predict follower growth over time and by how much?
The overall significance of the negative binomial auto-regressive model is very high , meaning the model is very well-suited to characterizing the effects of the described variables on follower growth over time.
This is important in order to have confidence when interpreting the regression coefficients of the model components , which are depicted in Table 2.
The unstandardized b coefficients in Table 2 are useful in that they can be directly interpreted according to the native units of each predictor: for each one unit change in the predictor variable, the log count of the response variable is expected to change by the respective b coefficient .
While this is valuable for a broad range of prediction and forecasting purposes, we are also interested in comparing the relative impact of each predictor; we therefore report the standardize beta  coefficients .
As expected, these controls absorb comparatively large portions of the variance .
We are interested in how much our other variables contribute above and beyond these controls.
Among the behavioral and social interaction variables, the Broadcast Communications Index , the burstiness measure , and all three of the profile elements  each emerge as significant predictors of follower growth.
The moderately strong negative effect of BroadcastComms  suggests that having too many undirected messages will hinder audience growth.
Interestingly, the Directed Communications Index  was not significant in the model.
Apparently, in the presence of all the other variables, the significance of social interactions using @replies and @mentions is muted, at least in terms of its effect on attracting new followers.
Message content variables are evenly distributed along the rank ordered list of predictors .
Of the 17  variables depicted, expressing negative sentiments in tweets is the second most harmful factor to growing a Twitter audience.
Interestingly, overuse of hashtags in message content  will also significantly reduce follower gain.
On the other hand, producing or passing along informational content is among the top predictors, having a significant positive effect on follower growth rates .
Also, having content that is "retweet worthy" is a very good indicator that a user will gain followers .
Using more sophisticated language in messages also has a moderately strong relative effect on attracting and retaining followers .
Network oriented variables are also evenly distributed along the ranked list in Figure 1.
Reciprocity, status, and network overlap were each significant in the model, even in the presence of the variables controlling for network size and user popularity.
Figure 1: Standardized beta coefficients  show the relative effect sizes that each input variable has on follower growth.
Green bars indicate positive effects on follower gain, and red bars indicate negative effects .
The mean and median of topical focus  for our heterogeneous group is roughly an order of magnitude less than those same measures from a more homogenous group of politically-oriented tweeters described in , but like , we also find that topically focused users tend to attract more followers.
Twitter users are likely driven by homophily , where they seek out content and users who are similar to themselves.
Finally, we found that the Tweet Reading Difficulty Index  has a positive impact on audience growth.
Walther's Social Information Processing  theory suggests that people rely on linguistic cues like spelling and vocabulary to compensate for the lack of traditional contextual cues available in face-to-face settings .
Twitter users apparently seek out well-written content over poorly written content when deciding whether to follow another user.
Our first major finding is that message content significantly impacts audience growth.
Six of our eight content variables  were found to be significant predictors of audience growth.
We find that expressing negative sentiment has an adverse effect on follower gain.
This is a contrast to , where social sharing of negative emotions correlates to higher numbers of followers.
However,  studied a static snapshot of existing network ties.
Our longitudinal data suggest that sentiment expression may have different  effects on the formation of new ties over time.
This might be because Twitter is a medium dominated by very weak social ties , and negative sentiment from strangers may be unpleasant or uncomfortable for a potential new follower to see.
For existing ties, on the other hand, negative expressions such as the sharing of a death, poor health, bad news, or a state of unhappiness, can trigger opportunities to build bonding social capital between stronger ties who want to seek and provide emotional support .
Or, as  put it, "gift giving where users directly exchange digital `gifts' in terms of emotional messages".
We also found that informational content attracts followers with an effect that is roughly thirty times higher than the effect of "meformer" content, which deters growth.
We think this is due to the prevalence of weak ties on Twitter , and that informativeness  is a more palatable alternative to meforming among such networks.
Kollock  describes information as a public good that anyone can consume and share.
Retweeted content is another such digital public good that provides both attribution--and thus, motivation--to the original author as well as informational content for the community.
Our second major finding is that social behavioral choices can dramatically affect network growth.
Similar to previous research that showed positive effects of profile completeness for static Facebook networks , we find similar results for evolving Twitter networks.
Signaling theory suggests that choosing to complete user profile elements helps persuade other users one's authenticity and trustworthiness, making them more likely to become followers .
Profile content provides at minimum conventional signals of identity , but the nature of profiles on social network sites makes these signals somewhat more reliable due to social accountability .
Regardless, users who do take the time to give profile information have the opportunity to emphasize the characteristics that they think will present them in the best light without necessarily being deceptive .
Others can use this profile information to form impressions prior to deciding whether to pursue or continue a connection .
Consistent with previous research studying existing Facebook networks , we find that directed communications have a positive effect on follower growth for Twitter.
Unlike  however, we note a very strong negative effect of broadcast communication techniques during the process of network formation.
Such undirected messages are a relatively novel feature of social media; our results suggest that relying on such communication techniques will significantly suppress growth.
Our third finding is that variables related to network structure are useful predictors of audience growth.
This finding is not necessarily surprising, given the emphasis on such factors in much of the related literature .
Indeed, while our results indicate that even simplistic calculations of network structure can prove to be quite powerful, we stress that such factors should not necessarily be privileged over message content or social behavior measures.
Our findings also have theoretical  implications.
Our variables were selected from prominent theoretical perspectives bridging social science theory , and network theory .
We also consider behavioral aspects of computer mediated communications  and message content .
Few social media studies have attempted to report on relative impacts of such diverse variables.
Compared to how much is known about each theory, very little is known about how they relate to one another.
Our research compares their relative contributions to predicting link formations in online social networks.
This was a significant undertaking, but more work should be done to understand the relative effects of different variables--as well as different theoretical perspectives and methodological approaches--on study outcomes.
A vital prerequisite to building social capital of any kind  is that a connecting tie must exist between individuals.
The practical implication of this fundamental antecedent to social capital motivates the selection of our dependent variable.
The number of followers you have is arguably the most important status symbol on Twitter.
Rapid follower growth may be an early indication of a rising star, or an emerging leader, within the network.
A rapid gain in followers intuitively implies that people like what you're posting and want more of the same.
Thus, social capital is a necessary  precursor to the notion of interpersonal influence in social networks  - an attribute of interest to strategic communicators, marketers, advertisers, job seekers, activist groups and any entity or organization wishing to disseminate specific messages in a timely manner.
Additionally, many users are simply interested in knowing their own relative degrees of popularity or social networking "clout".
Sites like HootSuite.com and SocialFlow.com offer web services oriented towards helping its users capture and retain the attention of social media audiences.
Companies like these can directly leverage our results to build tools that that make recruiting and retaining network members easier and more effective.
For example, in conjunction with a validated tie-strength model , the results of our study suggest that social media technology developers can help users retain existing followers by actively promoting negative sentiment content to strong ties, and experiment with demoting it with weak ties.
We have been as thorough as we can within the page limit.
However, other variables could explain some of our results.
For example, a person's real-world celebrity status, or other exogenous factors like being publicly mentioned in mass communications 
Secondly, we do not segment our Twitter sample into types of users or types of uses, although , , and  suggest ways in which categories for specific user and uses may illuminate the processes of attracting network members.
Thirdly, this is a quantitative study based on observations with calculated latent measures from those observations.
Our approach is useful for describing what happens, but without a corresponding qualitative approach, we can only speculate on why.
Future work could explore why certain variables predict follower growth more than others.
Finally, Twitter is one site.
We don't know if the results presented here translate into other sites.
We believe this is the first longitudinal study of audience growth on Twitter to combine such a diverse set of theory inspired variables.
For the first time, we explore the relative effects of social behavior, message content, and network structure on follow behavior and show which of these has more power than the others.
Though these results are specific to Twitter and a particular dataset, we think they are important for the following reasons.
First, multiple snapshots can help us begin to offer casual explanations for audience growth.
Second, comparisons across many variables inspired by different theoretical perspectives allow us to interpret relative effects of each.
Third, the impact of message content and social behavior are comparative to network structure, which suggests future work should take caution in privileging any one perspective over another.
