The aim of the current paper is to integrate a theory of visual attention with information foraging theory to forge an understanding of results from a detailed study of eye movements and interactions with the Hyperbolic Tree visualization .
Although the theory is in the early stages of development, it could eventually be useful in providing an integrated approach to understanding visual and cognitive search during interactions with highly visual interfaces to content, such as the World Wide Web or information visualizations.
Eye tracking studies of the Hyperbolic Tree browser  suggest that visual search in focus+context displays is highly affected by information scent .
When users detected a strong information scent, they were able to reach their goal faster with the Hyperbolic Tree browser than with a conventional browser.
When users detected a weak scent or no scent, users exhibited less efficient search of areas with a high density of visual items.
In order to interpret these results we present an integration of the CODE Theory of Visual Attention  with information foraging theory.
Development of the CTVA-foraging theory could lead to deeper analysis of interaction with visual displays of content, such as the World Wide Web or information visualizations.
Research on information visualization is aimed at amplifying human cognition.
Some of these visualization techniques aim to place more information into the span of human attention.
If a user can attend to more information per unit time, then information processing capacity is increased, thereby amplifying cognition.
This guiding principle is explicitly stated as the principle of reducing the cost structure of information .
To minimize the cost structure of information many information visualizations attempt to place more relevant information onto a single display.
Human visual search, however, is a complicated system that reacts in complicated ways to the number, density, kinds, and distribution of elements in the visual field .
The Hyperbolic Tree browser  is an example of a focus+context technique.
Focus+Context visualizations  are one class of information visualization that attempt to maximize the use of display resources for presentation of information.
The theme of such visualizations is to provide an overview of all the data  while a user simultaneously processes some specific subset.
The Hyperbolic Tree is used to display large hierarchical tree structures.
As can be seen in Figure 1, more display space is assigned to one part of the hierarchy  than others .
A series of eye tracking experiments reported recently by Pirolli, Card, and Van Der Wege  required users to find information in tree structures in the Hyperbolic Tree browser and a more conventional browser .
The convential browser used a twodimensional tree layout that required users to scroll to expose parts of the tree, or to click on nodes to expand them.
Of interest here are the data for simple retrieval tasks like "Find the Ebola Virus node", which required that users navigate through the hierarchy until they found a node labeled "Ebola."
For each task  survey participants were asked to identify the tree node labels most likely to be along the path to the target node .
Tasks were then scored by the proportion of survey participants who identified the "correct" labels along the path to the target node in the tree structure used in the experiment.
High scent tasks were ones in which many users correctly identified the tree node labels along the path to the target.
Low scent tasks were ones in which few users correctly identified the tree node labels along the path to the target.
In previous research on information foraging theory  we developed a computational cognitive model to predict information scent: the strength of local cues, such as text labels, in providing an indication of the utility or relevance of a navigational path leading to some distal information source .
For instance, the text summaries associated with links on WWW pages often provide information scent for other pages that are some navigational distance away.
People use such cues to assess and choose which link to follow.
A trail of information scent across WWW pages should eventually lead to the desired target source of information.
The labels on the nodes in the Hyperbolic Tree in Figure 1 provide similar information scent cues.
Users follow the node labels to some target node in tree.
Ideally, high information scent should lead users through the tree structure to the desired information.
The computational cognitive model of information scent uses spreading activation  to predict how cues on displays provide information scent relative to particular user goals.
Spreading activation models are also used to explain priming effects and recognition effects in memory research, and so our information scent models have some commonality with those psychological models.
We do not, however, want to equate the general notion of information scent with the particular spreading activation model.
Rather, the general notion of information scent is intended to encompass the psychological phenomena associated with perceived strength of information utility or relevance based on perceptual cues  during information search.
Models other than spreading activation may eventually provide better accounts for such phenomena.
Rather than use a computational model to predict scent scores, Pirolli et al.
In the eye tracking studies of the Hyperbolic Tree browser , users of the Hyperbolic Tree searched more tree nodes and were 38% faster than users of the Explorer.2 However, the performance of the Hyperbolic users was found to be highly modulated by information scent.
Figure 2 shows the effect of information scent on performance times and learning  with the Hyperbolic Tree and Explorer.
More detailed analysis suggested that when users detected a weak information scent or no scent, they were less efficient in visually searching the areas of the Hyperbolic display that have a higher density of visual items .
On low scent tasks, where the tree labels provided low amounts of information scent, users of the Hyperbolic Tree dispersed their visual search over more nodes in the tree structure than users of the Explorer.
On high scent tasks, where the tree labels provided high amounts of information scent , users of both the Hyperbolic Tree and the Explorer dispersed their visual attention over narrower regions of the tree.
Figure 3 shows that users visited more nodes in the tree with the Hyperbolic browser.
Low scent tasks caused them to increase the number of nodes visited much more than was the case for the Explorer.
Users of the Hyperbolic appear to be more adversely affected by low information scent tasks than users of the Explorer.
In low scent tasks, the Hyperbolic users engage in more costly visual search.
It is important to note, however, that Hyperbolic Tree users search the tree structure at a faster rate, even though they may be looking at more nodes than the Explorer users.
This accounts for the superior performance times of Hyperbolic users in the high scent tasks.
Length of eye movements in the dense context area of the Hyperbolic Tree.
Figure 4 illustrates this result.
We calculated the radial distance from the center of the Hyperbolic Tree display out to every fixation in the Pirolli et al.
The Context area was defined as fixations that occurred 0.8 of the radial distance from the center to the border.
We then selected fixation-tofixation movements that terminated in this peripheral Context area.
The high scent task fixation movements were longer than the low scent movements by about a 25% .
Closer inspection of the eye tracking data suggested that visual search in the dense, peripheral, context area of Hyperbolic Tree display varied with information scent .
It appeared, that on low scent tasks Hyperbolic users scanned the dense areas of the display with very short distances between eye fixations.
On high scent tasks it appeared that users scanned with longer distances between fixations.
This lead us to hypothesize that the effective area of visual attention changes with density and information scent.
This effective area, sometimes known as the attentional spotlight, is the display area surrounding an eye fixation that receives attention and gets processed by higher-level cognitive systems.
Our interpretation of the Pirolli et al.
This lead us to seek out a theory of visual attention appropriate for these findings.
The theory we present below integrates a visual attention theory with our notion of information scent.
As we will discuss, the theory not only suggests that the spotlight of attention should vary with density and information scent, but also that the visual search process itself will vary from linear search of visual items, to hierarchical search, to parallel search.
The human foveal gaze is a hierarchical processing system that has evolved to serve the conflicting needs for high spatial resolution  and wide aperature , under the constraints of limited channel capacity .
It couples sensors that have low resolution and a wide field of view, with sensors that have high resolution but narrow field of view.
Visual search of Example A seems to require serial processing of each character, whereas the target just seems to "pop out" from Example B. Pop-out effects are sometimes called pre-attentive.
Pop-out occurs when the target and distractors may be visually discriminated on the basis of what have become known as preattentive features, such as color.
On the other hand, attentive visual search for a target occurs at a rate that is affected by the number of distractor items.
Subjectively, there is no "pop-out" effect in attentive search.
One standard explanation for this finding  is that "pop-out effects" result from parallel processing of visual items, whereas attentive search requires serial processing of items.
If we think of the foveal gaze system as scanning the world for a series of sensory images, we must additionally conceive of the visual attention system as searching and selecting information from each of these images using a varying spotlight aperture.
The size of the spotlight may be affected by task and information characteristics or by controlled zooming.
Visual search may proceed in a manner that is greatly affected by background  information, or targets may pop out from the visual field.
Visual attention is a limited mental resource that selects incoming sensory information for additional cognitive processing.
Many find the attentional spotlight metaphor useful: to think of visual attention as a spotlight that shines on the visual sensory image provided from the eye.
The area covered by the spotlight defines the sensory information that receives further processing.
The attentional spotlight introduces new complexities to visual processing because the shape and size of the spotlight varies with a number of factors .
Drury and Clement  had participants find a target letter in displays that also contained background distractor letters.
Drury and Clement  found decreases both in the size of the attentional spotlight and in the efficiency of visual search as display density increased.
Information visualizations that aim for maximizing the amount of information on a display, such as focus + context techniques, detail+overview techniques, and tree maps typically increase the density of displays which under many circumstances evokes a narrower spotlight of attention.
Schematic depiction of a typical eye fixation sequence observed by Zelinsky et al.
The size of the spotlight is somewhat under cognitive control and can be set to a wide aperture with low fidelity processing or narrow aperture for high fidelity processing.
Zelinsky, Rao, Hayhoe, and Ballard  had participants search for "natural" objects  that were arrayed in a semicircle around the periphery of a display.
This is shown schematically in Figure 5.
It appears that people used a binary search strategy that began with a broad low-resolution spotlight zooming to a narrow high-resolution spotlight.
A popular paradigm for studying visual search manipulates display and task factors that modulate the effects of background distractors on visual search for a target.
We propose that information scent changes the attentional spotlight and affects whether the visual search process is linear, hierarchical, or parallel.
Figure 6 is a simplified schematic representation of our hypothesis about the interaction among display density, information scent, and the size of the attentional spotlight.
When the information scent of all items is roughly the same, then the attentional spotlight will be affected by the density of items.
When information scent of some nodes is high then they will popout from the display and the attentional spotlight will seem to be unaffected by density.
Next we link together a formal psychological theory of visual attention with the theory of information scent in order to address these interactions.
The CODE Theory of Visual Attention  provides an integrated mathematical model for predicting the interaction among density, pop-out effects, and the size of the attentional spotlight, as well as the relationship of controlled narrowing of the attentional spotlight to its resolution and parsing of the visual field.
The visual displays in Figure 7 were constructed so that they have a sparse side  and a dense side .
Assume that a person is seeking the target X and the O's are distractors, in Figure 7a.
CTVA assumes that features associated with each target  are represented as a smear over visual space, or more specifically, as a density function over visual space.
Figure 8 presents the density smear for the target X on the sparse side of Figure 7a.
The degree of spread of the smear is a parameter of the CTVA model.
One way of interpreting this smear is to imagine that there is some uncertainty concerning the features.
One may also adopt a neural activation metaphor and imagine that feature detectors associated with the location of an item have high activation and the level of activation diminishes for detectors associated with increasingly distant locations.
CTVA assumes that feature smears from the targets combine  to form a feature surface called the CODE surface.
Figure 9 is such a surface for Figure 7.
Figure 10 shows the relationship between the CODE surface and the underlying feature smears that it combines.
A point on the item smears represents the probability density of sampling features associated with a single particular item.
It is assumed that a top-down controlled process defines perceptual groups .
This is achieved by applying a threshold to the CODE surface.
CTVA assumes that when a threshold is applied it defines objects .
These object areas can be selected for further processing.
This means that the features from the feature smears for visual items within the object area are sampled and passed on to higher level cognitive processes.
This is illustrated in Figure 10.
A medium level of threshold has been applied and this defines three above-threshold regions surrounding the three peaks in Figure 10.
If the central region is selected, then the feature smears under that region are sampled.
Sampling would mostly catch the smear associated with the X target, but it would also include the tails of the smears for the two flanking O distractors.
Items within the same above-threshold region belong to the same object.
Figure 11 shows CODE surfaces for the display in Figure 7a with three levels of threshold.
The areas of the CODE surface that lie above the threshold have been removed in Figure 11.
The resulting plateaus in Figure 11 define visual objects.
In Figure 11a a low threshold defines two blob objects.
In Figure 11b, a medium threshold separates the objects on the sparse side of the display, but those on the dense side of the display remain a blob.
In Figure 11c, a high threshold separates the objects on the right side of the display.
The plateaus  in Figure 11 define the size and area of the attentional spotlight.
One can also see in Figure 11 that a zoom effect can be achieved by increasing the threshold.
Low thresholds yield a small number of blob objects and high thresholds yield larger numbers of more discriminated objects.
The above-threshold region of the CODE surface defines the size and shape of the attentional spotlight.
The spotlight can have different sizes and shapes because of different thresholds, but these sizes and shapes are constrained by the topography of the CODE surface.
Figure 9 shows the ratio of target features to distractor features  sampled at the different levels of threshold.
Two things are evident in Figure 9:  there is increasing signal/noise as the threshold increases and the spotlight narrows  and  there is decreasing signal/noise as the density of items goes from sparse to dense.
As the sensory features are sampled under the attentional spotlight they provide perceptual evidence for conceptual categories.
One way to think of this is to imagine that the incoming sampled features are activating many concepts in parallel and the different concepts are in a race to be identified as evident in the display.
The rate, , at which the selection  of a concept, r, for item s occurs is,
Imagine that a user has been asked to find the node "Yogurt" in the display in Figure 7b, and that there are very small amounts of scent from the words "natural" and "viruses".
Figure 13 is a an example plot of the rates  for each of the words in the display being categorized as "relevant", assuming the CODE surface in Figure 9.
For each side, the attentional spotlight has selected the central target.
The threshold is set to high  for the dense side and medium  for the sparse side.
Figure 13 shows that density affects the rates of processing the items.
Using this simplified representation of the Hyperbolic Tree display items, we generated the CODE surface in Figure 16a, which can also be displayed as the contour graph in Figure 16b.
CODE surface and CODE contour map.
It is apparent in Figure 16 that the density of items in the context area of the Hyperbolic Tree greatly affects the topology of the CODE surface.
When a low threshold is applied, as in Figure 17a, the items in the central focus area can be distinguished, but the context items are grouped together into blob objects.
A higher threshold begins to isolate some of the context items, as in Figure 17b, including the hypothetical target item.
High v. low scent processing rates on a dense display Figure 14 shows the effects of increasing the information scent on dense side of the display.
Imagine that the task is "Find Ebola virus."
For the central targets on the dense and sparse sides of the display  = .9 scent for "Ebola virus" from the and  = .1 for "irrelevant."
Figure 14 shows a kind of pop-out effect where the rate of processing the item "virus" has been greatly increased relative to the other items.
In general there is a multiplicative interaction between information scent and density Equation 1: density decreases the size of the attentional spotlight which decreases c, but this can be compensated by increases in scent .
Under conditions of high information scent, the target should exhibit a pop-out effect, similar to that in Figure 14.
It will seem as if the user has performed a parallel search of all the items on the display.
Under medium information scent CTVA suggests that user must zoom from low thresholds to high, just as the progression from Figure 17a to 17b suggests.
That is, the user can set a low threshold, determine which blob to focus attention on, then progressively higher thresholds to resolve the blob into finer-grained objects.
This is consistent with hierarchical zoom-lens strategy found by Zelinsky et al.
Visual information foraging with the Hyperbolic Tree browser is affected by information scent and visual density.
Under conditions of weak information scent, users engage in more costly visual search of the dense area of the visual display.
To address these findings, we integrated the CODE Theory of Visual Attention  with information foraging theory.
This coupling occurs by identifying the notion of information scent with the CTVA parameter for strength of perceptual evidence.
CTVA provides a way of identifying the hierarchical groupings of visual elements on a display.
Information scent can then be used to determine whether those objects can be searched at low cost with wide spotlight  or high cost with small spotlight .
Here we have provided a qualitative analysis of display density, information scent, and visual search.
Future work will concentrate on the development of dynamic models of visual search over time and quantitative predictions.
Although we have focused on the analysis of the Hyperbolic Tree, these results should generalize to other content displays, such as the layout of Web Pages which have been found to be affected by interactions among density, grouping, and information scent of items.
Mackinlay, and B. Schneiderman, Information visualization: Using vision to think.
Clement, The effect of area, density, and number of background characters on visual search.
Atlanta, GA: Association for Computing Machinery.
Laying out and visualizing large trees using a hyperbolic space.
Logan, G.D., The CODE theory of visual attention.
Pirolli, P. Computational models of information scentfollowing in a very large browsable text collection.
Atlanta, GA: Association for Computing Machinery.
Card, and M.M.Van Der Wege.
The effect of information scent on searching information visualizations of large tree structures.
Resnikoff, H.L., The illusion of reality.
Ware, C., Information visualization: Perception for design.
Wolfe, J.M., What can 1 million trials tell us about visual search?
Zelinsky, G.J., et al., Eye movements reveal the spatiotemproal dynamics of visual search.
