Nonparametric data from multi-factor experiments arise often in human-computer interaction .
Examples may include error counts, Likert responses, and preference tallies.
But because multiple factors are involved, common nonparametric tests  are inadequate, as they are unable to examine interaction effects.
While some statistical techniques exist to handle such data, these techniques are not widely available and are complex.
To address these concerns, we present the Aligned Rank Transform  for nonparametric factorial data analysis in HCI.
The ART relies on a preprocessing step that "aligns" data before applying averaged ranks, after which point common ANOVA procedures can be used, making the ART accessible to anyone familiar with the F-test.
Unlike most articles on the ART, which only address two factors, we generalize the ART to N factors.
We also provide ARTool and ARTweb, desktop and Web-based programs for aligning and ranking data.
Our re-examination of some published HCI results exhibits advantages of the ART.
Can perform factorial parametric analyses, but cannot perform nonparametric analyses.
Can perform nonparametric analyses, but cannot handle repeated measures or analyze multiple factors or interactions.
Can perform nonparametric analyses and handle repeated measures, but cannot analyze multiple factors or interactions.
Can perform factorial nonparametric analyses, but cannot handle repeated measures.
Can perform factorial nonparametric analyses and handle repeated measures, but are not widely available and are complex.
Can perform factorial nonparametric analyses and handle repeated measures, but requires different mathematics and software modules for each type of experiment design.
Can perform factorial nonparametric analyses and handle repeated measures.
Requires only an ANOVA after data alignment and ranking, provided for by ARTool or ARTweb.
Studies in human-computer interaction  often generate nonparametric data from multiple independent variables.
Examples of such data may include error counts, Likert responses, or preference tallies.
Often complicating this picture are correlated data arising from repeated measures.
Two analysis approaches for data like these appear regularly in the HCI literature.
The first simply uses a parametric F-test, which risks violating ANOVA assumptions and inflating Type I error rates.
The second uses common one-way nonparametric tests , foregoing the examination of interaction effects.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
A remedy to the paucity of nonparametric factorial analyses would be a procedure that retains the familiarity and interpretability of the familiar parametric F-test.
We present just such an analysis called the Aligned Rank Transform .
The ART relies on an alignment and ranking step before using F-tests.
We offer two equivalent tools to do the alignment and ranking, one for the desktop  and one on the Web .
A useful page from statistics consulting at UCLA for choosing the right statistical test has a conspicuous omission marked with "???
Similarly, another useful page giving the rationale for myriad statistical tests fails to describe any nonparametric factorial analysis for repeated measures data.
We describe the ART and contribute:  its generalization from two factors to N factors,  the ARTool and ARTweb programs for easy alignment and ranking, and  a reexamination of some published HCI data.
Rank transformations have appeared in statistics for years .
Conover and Iman's  Rank Transform  applies ranks, averaged in the case of ties, over a data set, and then uses the parametric F-test on the ranks, resulting in a nonparametric factorial procedure.
However, it was subsequently discovered that this process produces inaccurate results for interaction effects , making the RT method unsuitable for factorial designs.
The Aligned Rank Transform   corrects this problem, providing accurate nonparametric treatment for both main and interaction effects .
It relies on a preprocessing step that first "aligns" the data for each effect  before assigning ranks, averaged in the case of ties.
Data alignment is an established process in statistics  by which effects are estimated as marginal means and then "stripped" from the response variable so that all effects but one are removed.
Let's consider an example: In a two-factor experiment with effects A, B, and A*B, and response Y, testing for the significance of effect A means first stripping from Y estimates of effects B and A*B, leaving only a possible effect of A behind.
This alignment results in YA, whose values are then ranked, producing YA.
Lastly, a fullfactorial ANOVA is run with YA as the response and model terms A, B, and A*B, but importantly, only the effect of A is examined in the ANOVA table; B and A*B are ignored.
This process is then repeated for the effects of B and A*B, i.e., on aligned ranks YB and YA*B, respectively.
Thus, to use the ART, responses Y from a study must be aligned and ranked for each effect of interest.
This is a tedious process to do by hand, but ARTool or ARTweb make it easy.
Compute estimated effects for all main and interaction effects.
Let Ai B j be the mean response Yij for rows where factor A is at level i and factor B is at level j.
Let  be the grand mean of Y over all rows.
We present the ART procedure in five steps: Step 1.
The cell mean is the mean for Y's "cell," i.e., the average of all responses whose factors' levels match that of the Y response for which we're computing the residual.
Assign averaged ranks to a column of aligned observations Y to create Y.
The smallest Y receives rank 1, the next smallest Y receives rank 2, and so on until the largest of r values receives rank r. In the case of a tie among k values, the average rank is the sum of ranks divided by k. Step 5.
Perform a full-factorial ANOVA on Y.
All main and interaction effects should be included in the model, but only the result corresponding to the effect for which Y was aligned as Y should be considered.
A fixed-effects ANOVA or a mixed-effects model analysis of variance can be used, the latter being useful for repeated measures .2 Also, post hoc comparisons can be used; however, comparisons should be made only within effects for which the data was aligned.
Because ARTool reproduces an N-factor table's original columns, ARTool's output contains  + 2 columns.
ARTool is implemented in C# using the .NET 2.0 framework.
Its Web-based equivalent is ARTweb, a Java program that runs in a Web browser.
ART users have two opportunities for ensuring correctness.
First, every column of aligned responses Y should sum to zero; ARTool and ARTweb verify this for the user.
Second, a full-factorial ANOVA performed on the aligned  responses Y should show all effects stripped out  except for the effect for which the data were aligned.
The ability to check one's results is why ARTool and ARTweb produce not only ranked columns Y, but also aligned columns Y.
In this section, we briefly re-examine some published HCI data.
Because the ART procedure has been vetted in the statistics literature, our purpose is to show its utility and relevance, not prove its correctness.
The first case shows how the approach can be used to provide interaction effects not available with Friedman tests.
The second case shows how the ART can be used to free analysts from the distributional assumptions of ANOVA.
The third case shows the nonparametric testing of repeated measures data.
For example, with two factors and their interaction, ARTool produces three aligned columns and three ranked columns, all in *.csv format.
In a study concerning adaptive menus, Findlater et al.
In their paper, the authors used two separate Friedman tests to find satisfaction differences across the three levels of Interface within each level of Accuracy.
The authors found no such differences, but commented on a possible interaction unexaminable by the Friedman test: "n the High accuracy condition the mean rating for Short-Onset was lowest, whereas in the Low accuracy condition it was highest"  .
Incidentally, because this was a 2x2 mixed design, Kaptein et al.
ARTool makes no assumptions about column names, level types or values, or row order.
ARTool does assume that data is in long-format , that the first column is the subject identifier , and that the last column is a numeric response .
All intervening columns are assumed to be factors .
Nonparametric analyses are useful when ANOVA assumptions may be violated.
In a 20-session longitudinal study comparing the OPTI and QWERTY stylus keyboards, MacKenzie & Zhang  used a parametric repeated measures ANOVA to analyze error rates for within-subjects factors Session  and Method , finding that OPTI had fewer errors but that both methods' errors increased over time.
However, no Session*Method interaction was reported.
Our reexamination of their data shows that under a parametric ANOVA, the interaction was marginal .
The researchers found that recognition errors were rare and highly skewed towards zero.
They therefore regarded errors as "rare events" and used Poisson regression , which can be appropriate for such data.
However, Poisson regression is a Generalized Linear Model  and cannot handle repeated measures .
However, they found no significant interactions.
By contrast, an  parametric mixed-effects model analysis of variance  gives the same significant main effects, but also a significant Recognizer*No.
More appropriately, using the ART reduces the skew in the data, gives the same significant main effects, and now gives both significant Recognizer*No.
In the above examples, the ART enabled the nonparametric testing of interactions, the avoidance of distributional assumptions, and the nonparametric testing of repeated measures.
But the ART has limitations.
For data exhibiting very high proportions of ties, the ART simply replaces those ties with tied ranks.
If data exhibits extreme skew , the ART, as with any rank-based transform, will reduce that skew, which may be undesirable if distributions are meaningful.
Lastly, alignment works best for completely randomized designs; it also works for other designs, but effects may not be entirely stripped out.
We have presented the Aligned Rank Transform for nonparametric analysis of factorial experiments using the familiar F-test.
The ART offers advantages over more complex methods in its simplicity and usability.
We offered the first generalized mathematics for an N-way ART and programs called ARTool and ARTweb to make alignment and ranking easy.
By providing three examples of published data re-examined using the ART, we exhibited its benefits.
It is our hope that researchers in HCI will find this convenient nonparametric method and our tool as useful as we have.
