VSD is "a theoretically grounded approach to the design of technology that accounts for human values in a principled and comprehensive manner throughout the design process" .
The word "value" here is defined broadly, as "what a person or group of people consider important in life".
Key features of VSD are a tripartite methodology, consisting of iteratively applied conceptual, empirical, and technical investigations; an emphasis on considering indirect as well as direct stakeholders ; and an interactional theory of the relationship between values and technology.
More recently, as VSD itself has matured, a number of critiques and suggestions for its evolution and further development have been published .
This essay is intended as a contribution toward that evolution.
The problem we engage is that, in our view, VSD as currently presented overclaims.
One aspect of this overclaiming is that VSD takes a number of stances that are broader and more sweeping than are necessary, or even warranted, for the work it is doing.
A second aspect is that there are a set of rhetorical moves in some of the writing about VSD that imply more authority on the part of the researcher than we believe is appropriate.
We suggest that unease about these claims has in turn inhibited the more widespread adoption and appropriation of this valuable theory and methodology.
Another goal of our essay is to bring VSD into further dialog with a set of other relevant theories and approaches in the CHI community.
Our suggested next steps concern the following four topics.
Questions of human values often arise in HCI research and practice.
Such questions can be difficult to address well, and a principled approach can clarify issues of both theory and practice.
One such approach is Value Sensitive Design , an established theory and method for addressing issues of values in a systematic and principled fashion in the design of information technology.
In this essay, we suggest however that the theory and at times the presentation of VSD overclaims in a number of key respects, with the result of inhibiting its more widespread adoption and appropriation.
We address these issues by suggesting four topics for next steps in the evolution of VSD:  tempering VSD's position on universal values;  contextualizing existing and future lists of values that are presented as heuristics for consideration;  strengthening the voice of the participants in publications describing VSD investigations; and  making clearer the voice of the researchers.
We propose new or altered approaches for VSD that address these issues of theory, voice, and reportage.
As the field of human computer interaction has matured, an increasing body of HCI research has concerned itself with human values.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Yet, as we discuss in more detail later, claims of universality for values are enormously problematic .
At the same time, a position of cultural relativism is problematic as well .
For this recommendation, avoiding overclaiming leads to a recommendation that VSD at the core should adopt a pluralistic  position: simply that it doesn't have the answer to the difficult and longstanding question of universality, and further that a range of views on this question by different researchers can be accommodated under the VSD rubric.
This pluralistic position would also help to clarify the question of whether VSD is a method that can be applied in principle to any set of values, vs. VSD as the methodological instantiation of a particular set of values .
A number of VSD papers have included lists of values, either as ones that may have a distinctive claim on resources in the design process, or as heuristics for suggesting values that might be implicated in a design.
We acknowledge the utility of heuristic lists .
However, we suggest that it would be better, when presenting such lists, to be explicit about the particular culture and viewpoint in which they were developed, rather than omitting this context and in the process making implicit claims about more universality than are warranted, or perhaps even intended.
The publications of VSD have sometimes privileged the voice of the researchers in presenting qualitative results, not only as interpreters  but also as reporters .
The participatory design tradition has demonstrated the value and fidelity of informants speaking for themselves through HCI publications .
We believe there is overclaiming of knowledge and authority in the substitution of the researcher's voice for the voice of the informants.
Participatory design also commits, in a substantive way, to co-design and sharing power between the researchers/designers and the users of the technology .
While we do not go so far as to recommend that this be a core commitment of VSD as well, we do suggest that this should be considered carefully in VSD projects, and that in some cases such power sharing should be an explicit goal of the project.
Questions of values in HCI seldom have single, definitive, "objective" answers .
As with our third suggestion, we see the overclaiming here as implying more authority and impartiality than is warranted, via the rhetorical move of using a disembodied voice, in areas in which the researcher's own culture and assumptions may limit exactly those qualities of authority and impartiality.
Allied disciplines  provide alternatives ways of reporting that appear convergent with the goals of VSD.
There is a long history of work on values and technology, including early work by Mumford , Weiner , Weizenbaum , and Winner .
Regarding theory and methods that specifically address human values in design, either in the context of HCI or of information technology more generally, some notable examples in addition to VSD are work by Flanagan and Nissenbaum  and Cockton .
We include numerous additional references in context in the discussion that follows.
We now discuss in more detail our four suggested next steps in evolving VSD's theory and methods.
Are there any values that are  universal for all humans, or are all values culturally or individually specific?
This question, in one form or another, has exercised people for millennia, ranging from prophets to religious thinkers to philosophers to social scientists to people simply wondering what it means to be human or what is the nature of right conduct.
VSD's position on this question has evolved over the years.
In an early paper on VSD, Friedman and Kahn  state: When analyzing moral variability, conceptualizations of morality that entail abstract characterizations of justice and welfare tend to highlight moral universals, whereas definitions that entail specific behaviors or rigid moral rules tend to highlight moral cross-cultural variation.
In our view, both questions  have merit, and a middle ground provides a more sensible and powerful approach for the HCI community: One that allows for an analysis of universal moral values, as well as allowing for these values to play out differently in a particular culture at a particular point in time.
In a later paper, Friedman et al.
Note that this is an empirical proposition, based on a large amount of psychological and anthropological data, not a philosophical one.
We also make this claim only for certain values, not all - there are clearly some values that are culture-specific.
There are huge problems with both the position that there are some values that are or should be universally held, as well as with the position that all values are either culturally or individually specific.
On the one hand, the belief that there are universal values  has on occasion led to the further belief that a particular group, culture, or religion is the keeper of those values, and needs to impose them on others - with sometimes tragic consequences.
Yet, if all values are culturally or individually specific, what gives one culture or group grounds to say that some practice of another culture  is wrong ?
One response is to make this an empirical, scientific issue rather than a theological or philosophical one.
In adopting this move, we still need to avoid the naturalistic fallacy , but this can be accomplished by qualifying prescriptive statements appropriately .
But a scientific approach to the issue of universal values is also problematic, given what we  view as past abuses, justified on "scientific" grounds.
Notorious examples come from the literature on forced sterilization in service of a claimed value of genetic purity  or a claimed value of reducing mental illness .
More recently, social programs such as Head Start  have been endangered by claims that intelligence is a genetically-determined trait , and that academic enrichment programs should be targeted at the children who have the generic capacity to learn - a claimed value of using scarce resources where they will do the most good.
See  for one of many critiques of this position.
But should such a position be one for the whole of VSD, i.e., one to which all VSD researchers must subscribe?
We suggest that VSD should take a more pluralistic position on this question of universal values, and simply say that this is a contested issue, to which VSD as such doesn't have the answer.
We use the word "pluralistic" rather than "agnostic" in this suggestion, to accommodate exactly this.
It should be possible for a researcher with a commitment to universal values - or with a commitment to all values being culturally constructed - to employ VSD.
In practice, though, we suspect that the answer to this question has little if any impact on most actual projects.
For example, even if there is some universally held value of privacy, the fact that "even while living in an igloo,  have conventions that ensure some forms of privacy; yet such forms of privacy are not maintained by separated rooms, as they are in most Western cultures"  would be unlikely to have an impact on the design of technology.
In other words, even if there is some universal aspect to the value of "privacy" , how this value plays out will be sufficiently different in the spectrum of human cultures that a universal design  that works for all cultures seems like a chimera.
We note several significant caveats regarding this recommendation.
First, universal values and universal design are distinct concepts, and indeed, as argued above, even if some values are universally held, this would not imply that universal designs were feasible.
And VSD theory, even as currently expressed, does not imply that universal design is a realizable goal .
Second, our reservations regarding the concept of universal values do not imply that we argue against cross-cultural studies that include looking carefully for commonalities as well as differences.
Quite the contrary: such studies become increasingly valuable as the global nature of the IT industry continues to develop and interfaces designed in one cultural context are used - and appropriated and molded - in another.
Finally, this is definitely not to say that the existence or not of universal values is an inappropriate topic for religion, philosophy, psychology, or anthropology, or that HCI researchers should not understand this thinking and research, perhaps deeply.
Again, we suggest that this issue is one that VSD as such simply doesn't need to take a position on, at least given our current understanding of the issue from philosophy and various social sciences.
Holding fast to VSD's position as described in  - or for that matter switching to a position of cultural construction of values - doesn't help advance the development and application of VSD.
Rather the opposite: disagreements or simply unease within the research community about the position VSD has taken on this question have, we would argue, significantly impeded its development and application.
In an early chapter, Friedman and Kahn  write: "We review and discuss 12 specific values with ethical import.
Some of these values have garnered individual chapters in this handbook.
But, by including these values here, we highlight their ethical status and thereby suggest that they have a distinctive claim on resources in the design process."
The chapter then goes on to list and discuss these values: Human Welfare, Ownership and Property, Privacy, Freedom From Bias, Universal Usability, Trust, Autonomy, Informed Consent, Accountability, Identity, Calmness, and Environmental Sustainability.
They are also careful to note that "this list is not comprehensive.
Perhaps no list could be, at least within the confines of a chapter.
Peacefulness, compassion, love, warmth, creativity, humor, originality, vision, friendship, cooperation, collaboration, community, purposefulness, devotion, diplomacy, kindness, musicality, harmony--the list of other possible values could get very long very fast."
In a subsequent paper , the list of specific values  is introduced as: "We stated earlier that while all values fall within its purview, Value Sensitive Design emphasizes values with ethical import... e present a list of frequently implicated values... intended as a heuristic for suggesting values that should be considered in the investigation - it is definitely not intended as a complete list of human values that might be implicated."
The evolution in VSD toward evocative heuristics rather than lists that call out a specific set of values has continued, with a notable example being Envisioning Cards .
Nevertheless, we find the presentation of the lists in both the 2003 and 2006 papers problematic: it would have been better to contextualize them by noting that these are typical values from a liberal and relatively privileged Western perspective , rather than implicitly claiming more universality by presenting them without such qualification.
We also note that the lists are in English, and use the English phrases for the concepts.
Translations will not be precise, and may well bring out different issues.
Indeed, this is noted in published VSD work, in particular a 2008 VSD crosscultural study on attitudes toward privacy in public spaces in the U.S. and Sweden .
That paper describes the difficulties of translating the word "privacy" into Swedish.
The Swedish translation that the researchers adopted  encompasses both controlling information flow  but also maintaining the quality  of that information .
A living theory and method will evolve, and a past description will not necessarily capture the current understanding.
Or it is often easy in retrospect to see how something could have been said better.
Nevertheless, an explicit qualification of the context and limitations of these early lists as suggested above would be useful.
However, we soften our own concern in three respects.
First, we note that the list of values as presented in a later paper  is introduced as "a heuristic for suggesting values that should be considered in the investigation" rather than as values that "have a distinctive claim on resources in the design process".
Second, one of the grounds for Le Dantec et al.
Here we disagree: in doing value sensitive design one can start with any one of the investigations; and indeed, there are published VSD investigations that start with each of the three.
For example, the early work on browser cookies and privacy  began with conceptual investigations, the Watcher and the Watched studies  began with empirical investigations, and the CodeCOOP work  began with technical investigations.
Third, we observe that VSD, as a living theory and method, will and ought to evolve over time , and so we don't want to make too much of a statement from a 2003 paper.
Should VSD as such have any heuristic lists of values that might arise in particular applications?
What about more evocative and less specific heuristics such as Envisioning Cards?
One position is that any lists, or even other kinds of heuristics, are harmful, in that they tend to bias the researcher or designer toward existing analyses and ways of thinking.
In our view, this position is rooted in a valid concern, but one that well-done empirical investigations help mitigate.
However, in any case, taking such a purist stance in all investigations would make VSD not a practical method in many situations, e.g., in an industrial setting with a tight schedule.
For example, when designing a new privacy options interface for a social media application, it seems unreasonable to tell the designers not to look at some careful VSD work on the privacy options tool for a different social media application, but to start from scratch.
More broadly, we think there is benefit in having heuristics and cues  to aid designers in considering values that may be at stake in a given system.
Certainly such lists of values or other tools should be contextualized with information about who wrote it, in what milieu, and for what purpose.
An essential activity in broadening VSD is to continue to build up collections of case studies, heuristics  that are particularly relevant for a broad range of cultures and contexts.
One omission  is labor concepts, such as solidarity and collective action, as well as some relational values .
In terms of other cultures, Alsheikh et al.
Finally, consider values in domains not typically seen in publications at CHI or CSCW, for example, military values.
There is published work in this area: Cummings  describes a VSD case study  of the hypothetical development of a command and control supervisory interface for a military cruise missile.
The conceptual analysis is built around the value of human welfare, which is already often seen in VSD work - but here drawing on different philosophical traditions, namely the theory of just war, and the principles of proportionality and of discrimination.
One can also imagine VSD analyses for military applications for direct use by combat soldiers or other warfighters that implicate additional values, such as courage, honor, discipline, loyalty, and accountability.
This domain does not fit comfortably in the usual values discussion in the HCI community - but  it makes sense to consider military systems from a VSD perspective and to design them well, so these philosophical traditions and values are certainly relevant .
A related question is whether VSD should itself substantively commit to certain values, for example, in the way that participatory design substantively commits to the values of participation and democracy, that collaborative ethnography commits to co-authorship as well as co-analysis with the affected population , or that action research commits to emancipatory goals .
If so, how are those values chosen and who does so?
Tempting as it is to include values we personally hold dear, we suggest that VSD commit to just those values that are essential to making VSD itself work: namely, pluralism or inclusivity , plus openness and transparency .
Regarding other values beyond these, we would underscore and build on the distinction among explicitly supported values, stakeholder values, and designer values .
These are respectively values that are explicitly supported and adopted in a given investigation or project, values that are important to some  stakeholders, and the designer or researcher's own personal values.
VSD project, they would make those PD values be explicitly supported values, drawing on PD methods as appropriate as well; and similarly for researchers wanting to adopt values and practices from the collaborative ethnography or action research traditions.
Researchers in the PD, collaborative ethnography, and action research traditions derive their values explicitly from their coresearchers , as well as those who have gone before them.
As experience is built up with VSD projects adopting a given set of explicitly supported values, the value and stakeholder analyses and guidance regarding methods can be shared and co-evolved.
We acknowledge that this is a less satisfactory situation for VSD, from the point of view of shared and co-constructed sets of community values, since those values would be not an integral part of VSD itself - but short of VSD substantively committing to a wider collection of values, it may be a useful approach.
A further elaboration of this idea would be for VSD researchers or practitioners to enact a form of democratic voicing, by creating a website for these lists.
In one of many possible designs, a researcher could contribute a list of values, and other people could comment on that list.
If a second person wanted to propose a variation, s/he could make a  copy of the list, and rewrite selected aspects.
Discussion comments might then be linked back to both lists.
In this proposal, VSD would support pluralistic values with pluralistic lists, and would provide an example of democratic methods by encouraging lively discussions about each list and its values.
There are two aspects to our third suggestion, which regards the voice of the participants.
The first aspect is a relatively contained one, regarding hearing directly the voices of the participants.
In presenting work about different users or stakeholders, many of the disciplines that meet in CHI and CSCW favor hearing the voices of the users or stakeholders.
For readers with a background in ethnography or cultural critique, this is a crucial point.
It is, in the influential essay by Alcoff, "the problem of speaking for others" .
When we interpose ourselves between an informant and an audience , there is the risk of unintentional ventriloquism - i.e., stating the researcher's own views as if those views had been articulated by the informants .
The common solution to this problem is to develop disciplines of data collection, analysis, and reporting that bring the informants' words to the reader with some assurance of directness and fidelity.
Judicious verbatim quotation, with good contextualization, is the most frequent response to this problem in HCI and CSCW.
The point is not to guard against some "hidden agenda" on the part of the researcher.
The second aspect of our suggestion is less well-worked out, and is indeed in many ways a direction for future research.
VSD originated in part in trying to apply participatory design in contexts for which PD methods at the time were ill-suited due, for example, to a lack of a clear organizational boundary, such as applying PD methods to browser design , or in today's world, Facebook.
However, in the process, some of PD's core commitments to co-design and sharing power were weakened, and instead power is back in the hands of the researchers.
In the decades since PD was first developed, it has evolved to include different stakeholder groups , as well as more situations with less clear organizational boundaries; and approaches to adapting it to such contexts have begun to emerge .
We suggest that the traditional PD commitments to co-design and power sharing be carefully considered in VSD projects as well, taking advantage of this newer work.
In some cases, it will be appropriate to make co-design and power sharing be explicitly supported values for the project.
At the same time, we should continue to investigate ways to support these values with more diverse stakeholder groups.
These considerations allow us to reframe some of the VSD critiques raised in .
We earlier disagreed with Le Dantec et al.
We would in fact also disagree with their claim that they started with an empirical investigation.
In their work with homeless people, we suggest that they actually started with a conceptual investigation, not an empirical one: namely, they analyzed the power relationships and decided that they should talk with the homeless people.
There is otherwise not an a priori reason to talk with homeless people, rather than service agency staff, police, business owners, or other stakeholders.1 But despite these two disagreements, at yet another level we believe the researchers got something very right: by giving voice to the homeless people, they foregrounded the values and concerns of a group that is otherwise often disempowered and silenced .
Deciding to talk with the homeless people doesn't come out of nowhere.
We would echo the importance of attending to power differentials, but re-frame this recommendation as being about giving voice to the participants in the VSD study rather than prescribing particular methods.
Our last recommendation for evolving VSD is also tied to voice, this time the voice of the researchers and designers.
Questions of values seldom have single, definitive, "objective" answers.
In many instances it may be useful for the reader if the researcher is more visible in the writing - what is his or her background, relation to the participants in the study, and perhaps even relevant personal values ?
This practice of self-disclosure is standard for example in writing ethnographies .
There are now examples of this in the VSD literature as well, and we suggest expanding the practice.
As an existing example, Alsheikh et al.
In this example, the researchers' experience allowed a better method of inquiry.
More broadly, there are claims that the perspective or "standpoint" of the researcher can become both a powerful tool of inquiry , and a set of limits on what the researcher is able to perceive and understand .
Applying this tradition to a VSD project to improve the safety of homeless young people, Woelfer et al.
We work from a design stance that seeks to both understand the situated context as well as to create meaningful change.
Another facet of this recommendation is connected with the aforementioned distinction among explicitly supported values, stakeholder values, and designer values.
If researchers make this distinction in a given project, it may well be useful for the reader to know what are the relevant personal values of the researchers or designers, as well as the values that are explicitly supported in that project and the relevant values of the key stakeholders, so that the reader can judge how well the different kinds of values are distinguished and treated in the work .
This kind of clarity is particularly important if there were value tensions or conflicts among values in these three groups.
Our earlier proposal for self-disclosure by authors is also important here, in the event that there might be values conflicts between authors and the people they are describing .
Similarly, knowing who is funding the work  may be important for the reader in evaluating the research.
A final facet involves subtle but arguably important changes in wording and emphasis, to make it clearer that there is a person or group taking the role of researcher, of working through a method, interviewing participants, analyzing data, and so on - avoiding the disembodied "view from nowhere" .
It is common in CHI and CSCW for the author to take the role of analyst and/or designer.
Indeed, part of the motivation of PD is to share the responsibility and power to design  as well as to interpret and to analyze .
We submit that questions of values and ethics would benefit from a similar sharing of responsibility and power - i.e., to perform an analysis of values and/or ethics .
This sharing could be particularly important in inter-cultural situations, in which disagreements about values may stem in part from disagreements about the "first principles" that underlie the ethical positions  .
Thus, a more contextualized VSD method would include a description of the ethical analyses of the people in the situation - acting as professional or "lay" ethicists.
Appropriate background and citations regarding the underlying ethical theory , may also be useful and important.
For example, in discussing a principled prioritization scheme for deciding where to put resources, Friedman et al.
We suggest that this leaves invisible exactly who invokes this check , and creates a subtle barrier, for example, to questioning how effective it was.
More words, indeed, but perhaps useful ones.
There are many methods for helping to make informants' voices heard.
In addition to ethnographic quotations , the PD tradition has developed storytelling methods that can easily be adapted to include discussions of values and ethics, such as storyboarding methods to explicate work , even in the absence of a common verbal language ; hypermedia for community storytelling ; community-produced photo-documentaries  and video-documentaries to change government policy  or for urban design  and to document human rights violations .
Collaborative ethnography goes further, insisting that the report of a project should be understandable and critiqued in advance by the people who are being described, and should optimally be co-authored with them .
Recent VSD work has begun to use video in the field ; we suggest that video and other user-created media can also contribute to reports from the field to other researchers.
Woelfer and Hendry were careful to avoid direct quotations from their informants in a VSD project, as part of a principled plan to protect their informants' privacy .
The preceding examples from participatory methodologies show how informants can knowingly create documents  that are intended as communications media to others.
The explicit "audiencing" of these documents removes issues of quotation-without-permission, and can help VSD informants become advocates for their own perspectives, including their own values, and  for the kinds of change that they want to bring about.
VSD addresses issues of values experienced in people's lives.
Like design issues, issues of values necessarily involve differences in perspectives, and often involve differences in power.
We are not suggesting that VSD adopt social change as a core value.
Rather, we again make use of the distinction among explicitly supported values, stakeholder values, and designer values: if social change is one of the explicitly supported values in a project, then strengthening VSD in this respect becomes an important consideration.
We summarize this other work, and the insights we have derived from it, in this section.
Practitioners of participatory design urged us to consider "users" as designers of their technology and of the work practices that may be reified in that technology .
Values are part of the background that participants bring to these collaborative settings.
We have proposed that methods from participatory design, collaborative ethnography, and action research be used to inform the methods of VSD.
We propose that VSD consider adapting those methods that foreground the needs, designs, and analyses of the "users" in participatory design, such as codesign, participant-led story-telling, drama, photodocumentary, and video-documentary .
An important topic for future research is to continue to investigate how to support participation and power-sharing in situations without clear organizational boundaries or groups of stakeholders.
Feminism provides additional lenses through which to consider questions of values and ethics .
Bardzell's recent analysis argued against "universal" statements and designs, and in favor of considerations of diversity of perspective, with a research focus on edge cases rather than on the relatively homogeneous middle of a population .
Feminist philosophies of science similarly advocate for the inclusion of diverse views, and for a form of "strong objectivity" in which each researcher's contribution cannot be evaluated for its claims until the researcher discloses her/his own position, perspective, and stakes in the work  .
HCI researchers in the post-colonialist domain can offer related critiques and insights .
Post-colonialism is in part a critique of power, and can be applied to HCI power relationships among analysts and "users".
We have proposed that, convergently with participatory design and with feminism, post-colonialism can help VSD to ask questions about "who is allowed to speak about whom?"
Similarly, some VSD projects are not only about reporting values issues and conundrums, but also about social activism.
VSD researchers and practitioners in this area may find work in action research to be useful here .
This work could also be helpful in articulating the relationship between these two seemingly-related fields.
In more pragmatic or "operational" terms, we also think that VSD could benefit from a more democratic approach to its own methodology.
VSD could use participatory technologies, such as social media, to build a rich and diverse set of resources.
We suggest that opening up the process to broader participation and sharing of power would be one useful step here - for example, VSD researchers could provide collaborative online tools to facilitate sharing, discussing, and refining research materials  among the growing community of VSD practitioners.
Forms of community-led VSD may emerge.
A heartfelt thanks to Batya Friedman, for her leadership in developing Value Sensitive Design and leading the way for the past two decades, for a series of in-depth discussions about the ideas presented here over several years, and for cheerfully offering feedback on this paper.
Many other members of the CHI and related communities have helped us develop these ideas over the years.
Janet Davis, Dave Hendry, Lisa Nathan, and Jill Woelfer, and the anonymous CHI referees provided useful feedback on drafts.
In the end, however, the authors bear sole responsibility for any errors or problems with these suggestions.
This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation under grant number CNS-0905384.
The Chicago Guide to Collaborative Ethnography, University of Chicago Press, 2005.
Values as lived experience: Evolving Value Sensitive Design in support of value discovery.
Leidner, D.E., and Kayworth, T. A Review of Culture in Information Systems Research: Toward a Theory of Information Technology Culture Conflict.
Millett, L., Friedman, B., and Felten, E. Cookies and web browser design: Toward realizing informed consent online.
Value tensions in design: The value sensitive design, development, and appropriation of a corporation's groupware system, Proc.
Muller, M. Ethnocritical heuristics for reflecting on work with users and other interested parties.
In M. Kyng and L. Mathiassen, Computers and Design in Context, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1997.
Muller, M.J., and Carey, K. Design as a minority discipline in a software company: Toward requirements for a community of practice.
Muller, M. Revisiting an ethnocritical approach to HCI: Verbal privilege and translation.
Muller, M. and Druin, A. Participatory design: The third space in HCI.
Mumford, L. Technics and Civilization.
University of Chicago Press, 2010.
Nathan, L.P., Friedman, B., Klasnja, P., Kane, S.K., and Miller, J.K. Envisioning systemic effects on persons and society throughout interactive system design.
Nathan, L.P., Lake, M., Gray, N.C, Nilsen, T., Utter, R.F., Utter, E.J., Ring, M., Kahn, Z., & Friedman, B. Multi-lifespan information system design: Investigating a new design approach in Rwanda, Proc.
Picturing commutes: Informant photography and urban design.
Pew, R.W., and Mavor, A.S. Human-system Integration in the System Development Process: A New Look, National Academies Press, 2007.
Piecowye, J. Habitus in transition?
CMC use and impacts among young women in the United Arab Emirates.
A theoretical agenda for feminist HCI.
To appear in Interacting with Computers.
An ethnorelative framework for information system design.
Fourteenth Americas Conference on Information Systems, Toronto, 2008.
Sanders, E. B.-N. Generative tools for co-designing.
Racial purity laws in the United States and Nazi Germany: The targeting process, Human Rights Quart.
Schuler, D. and Namioka, A.
Participatory Design: Principles and Practices.
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Hillsdale, NJ, USA, 1993.
Suchman, L., and Trigg, R. Understanding practice: Video as a medium for reflection and design.
PictureCARD: A storytelling tool for task analysis.
Wahlsten, D. The malleability of intelligence is not constrained by heredity, in Devlin, B., Feinberg, S.E., Resnick, D.P., & Roeber, K. , Intelligence, Genes, and Success: Scientists Respond to The Bell Curve.
Chinese village women as visual anthropologists: A participatory approach to reaching policymakers.
Weiner, N. The Human Use of Human Beings: Cybernetics and Society.
Computer Power and Human Reason: From Judgment to Calculation.
Winner, L. Do artifacts have politics?
Homeless young people's experiences with information systems: Life and work in a community technology center.
Improving the safety of homeless young people with mobile phones: Values, form and function.
Investigating religion and computing: A case for using standpoint theory in technology evaluation studies.
PhD dissertation, Georgia Institute of Technology, 2010.
