We developed an inquiry technique, which we called "paratype," based on experience prototyping and eventcontingent experience sampling, to survey people in reallife situations about ubiquitous computing  technology.
We used this tool to probe the opinions of the conversation partners of users of the Personal Audio Loop, a memory aid that can have a strong impact on their privacy.
We present the findings of this study and their implications, specifically the need to broaden public awareness of ubicomp applications and the unfitness of traditional data protection guidelines for tackling the privacy issues of many ubicomp applications.
We also point out benefits and methodological issues of paratypes and discuss why they are particularly fit for studying certain classes of mobile and ubicomp applications.
Second, evaluation must also occur in a "situated" setting in order to account for physical and social interactions, disruptions, variations in cognitive load, and other environmental factors that can profoundly affect the usability and usefulness of mobile applications .
Work in the HCI community has started to focus on in-thefield prototyping to address these challenges: the Experience Prototypes used by Buchenau and Suri  and Wizard-of-Oz techniques used in mobile settings  are aimed at evaluating mobile technologies within iterative development processes.
Unfortunately, these approaches base their evaluation on reproduced or simulated experiences with the aim of testing the technology, instead of measuring the experience with reference to specific instances of real life.
This lack of reference to actual experience represents a serious methodological flaw when probing some social domains.
Privacy represents one such domain.
Researchers have long recognized that people often take a deontological stance when artificially probed on opinions and preferences on privacy, both in reference to organizations  and in interpersonal relations.
Everyday behavior may differ from stated preferences for many reasons, including insufficient informational awareness , overriding primary goals , or carelessness , as pointed out by Acquisti and Groklags .
On the other hand, people have a very refined sense of privacy balance in interpersonal relations, as described by Altman , and may choose certain paths of behavior to avoid conflict or in response to overriding social goals.
It follows that abstract or purely self-reflective surveys may be insufficient for probing privacy concerns.
This observation applies in general to all those situations in which people may be unable or unwilling to explain their behavior abstractedly, from complex social constructions, as suggested by Goffman , to the formulation of procedural plans as noted by Suchman .
In addition, people may be unable to grasp immediately the effects of new technologies on their existing socio-technical practices.
Over the past several years, we have developed and evaluated several ubiquitous computing  applications, including many based on mobile platforms such as cell phones.
These applications present numerous challenges to effective user-centered design .
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
This article offers two contributions.
First, we present a user inquiry tool that we used to probe people's opinions on the privacy impact of an ubicomp technology with reference to real-life situations.
Second, we present the results of this study, which may have a broad impact on the debate on privacy in ubiquitous computing.
Below, we discuss the evaluation challenge that prompted us to develop this instrument.
Then, we describe the inquiry method, and present the results and their consequences on the design for privacy.
We finally reflect on the advantages and drawbacks of this inquiry technique.
Over the past two years, we have worked on a personal, portable, audio memory aid called the Personal Audio Loop, or PAL .
PAL was motivated by everyday conversational breakdowns experienced when people try to remember something that was just said--the topic of a conversation before an interruption, or a name or number heard in situations of high cognitive load such as at a conference or a party.
In the initial concept, the user would be able to replay, at any moment in time, sounds heard in the recent past, up to a defined maximum time span .
Audio older than this retention time is automatically deleted.
Figure 1 shows how PAL was implemented on the Motorola i730 phone.
PAL records whenever the phone is in the closed position and the user is not using the phone for telecommunication.
The recording can be replayed by the press of a button.
Initial interviews and a diary study showed that participants would find this tool very useful in many situations.
They reported that they would use it a few times a week for various purposes, the top three being to remember forgotten details of conversations, replaying conversations to their conversation partners, and recovering the topic of a conversation after an interruption.
Although study participants recognized the usefulness of PAL, they also raised concerns about this technology.
PAL runs continuously and unattended, and unnoticed by the user and potential conversation partners or bystanders.
The primary concerns related to the impact on the privacy of secondary stakeholders  and unrelated third parties .
Further concerns related to the social appropriateness of using the application, regarding both the immediate disruption of interpersonal interaction and long-term effect on social relationships.
After one short deployment of PAL, some participants reported on the reactions of secondary stakeholders to their using the application, noting that in many cases conversation partners would not object to the use of PAL after being briefed on its purpose and characteristics .
However, they also said that they avoided mentioning the presence of PAL in some situations, reportedly to avoid explaining its features time and again.
Participants seemingly adopted self-regulating boundary-setting towards their conversation partners' privacy, similar to what was described by Palen and Dourish .
Far from providing conclusive answers, these anecdotal observations raised further issues regarding contextualization and adjudication.
The question of contextualization is whether and how the social and technical environment affects the use of the application.
If different privacy requirements could be associated to specific circumstances , and at least part of these circumstances could be detected by a recognizable "context,"1 this could bring about significant design implications, as suggested by the work of Hong and Landay .
The issue of adjudication raises two questions.
The first question relates to whose interests should prevail.
The primary stakeholder  of the application may have a legitimate interest in using PAL, for example due to a memory dysfunction or simply because of cognitive stress imposed by his or her occupation.
This interest may be opposed to that of secondary stakeholders or third parties .
The second adjudication question relates to the proportion of individuals opposed to the application.
This is a classic issue in the ethical debate between utilitarianism and normativism in the context of privacy and technology .
Designers might not be in the position of deciding on these issues--they rest in the hands of courts and Data Protection Authorities , with the final judge being market acceptance.
However, designers should still consider these issues, at least to increase profitability and hedge liability.
In a previous article at this conference, we suggested performing these determinations borrowing judgment tools from the legal community .
Limitations of the prototypes prevented us from investigating these questions through a long-term deployment that may have provided strong qualitative and quantitative evidence.
However, we were wary of using a privacy survey, abstract from social practice, for the reasons discussed above.
So, we designed an event-contingent experience sampling procedure targeted at the conversation partners of PAL's user.
Wheeler and Rois define event-contingent sampling procedures as those initiated by the occurrence of a specific event, in this case a conversation .
The survey asked participants to suppose that the researcher has been using PAL, and probed their opinions and feelings about the operation of PAL in that specific conversation.
In this respect, this technique is similar to Critical Incident techniques developed in the context of workplace psychology .
This procedure allowed us to situate participant response in the experience the person just had, with a specific partner, conversation topic and location, supposedly reducing recall errors and hypothetical answers.
We call this experimental procedure a paratype: a simulation, or model, of interaction  with a technology which is evaluated alongside  real-world experience.
That the survey was administered by human proxies is not part of our definition of paratype.
The term paratype only refers to introducing simulated interaction with a certain technological artifact within a specific setting of real social action, and documenting the effects of this combination.
The proxy's role was only incidentally that of administering the survey--her main function was that of acting as "PAL's user" and as interaction counterpart of the participant.
In this sense, the proxy's role was to create the technological instance on which we wanted feedback, with the help of the description of the application and, if requested, a demonstration of the working device.
Event-contingent experience sampling was deemed a particularly suitable way of documenting participant feedback in this case.
The survey was composed of two parts, linked by a unique number .
The first part  was filled out by the investigator, with information about place, participants, and the activity being achieved with the conversation, as salient elements of the social setting .
The portion on the right was detached and given to the participant after the conversation between the proxy and the participant had occurred.
The participant was also given an IRB 2 consent notice at this point.
The survey was designed to be self-explanatory, and contained a description of PAL and a short questionnaire.
The description had been validated prior to the study to ensure that it would be pertinent and sufficient.
When possible, the investigator explained PAL verbally, and optionally showed the working application, if requested by the participant.
We chose not to operate PAL during the study on ethical grounds and to avoid contentious situations.
The participant was asked to fill out the survey immediately if possible, to increase recall accuracy.
The study was conducted by a group of individuals whom we called "proxies" as they acted as substitutes or probes for the researchers.
The proxies were two females and one male between the ages of 27 and 31, all HCI graduate students and researchers working at this institution, living alone or with their partner.
As the proxies went about their daily activity, they asked people older than 18, acquaintances as well as unknowns, at the end of their normal conversations, to read a description of PAL and to fill out an anonymous survey about the application.
The proxies were instructed to hand out the surveys only if the conversation exceeded 3-4 sentences--weeding out very short interactions such as "thank you" and "excuse me."
Also, we only submitted the survey once to the same individual to avoid respondent bias.
The survey was administered in various locations in the United States.
Figure 2 The survey form is divided in three parts, here shown after being reassembled.
The left side is filled out by the researcher.
The right side is given to the participant after the conversation.
It contains a description of the application and the survey.
The backside of the participant's portion is addressed to the researchers' lab, like a postcard.
The questionnaire included six questions on a 5-point scale, one multiple-choice question and, on the backside, a blank space for optional comments in addition to our lab's address and space for postage.
The questions included the following: * the importance of being informed about the application; * the importance of asking permission before using the application; * the time span for which the subject would allow the user to store the conversation; * the likelihood that the subject would ask the user to erase the recording; * the importance of asking for permission to copy and replay the conversation to others; and * an indication of the subjective "confidentiality" of the conversation.
The survey also included three anonymous demographic questions: age range , gender and occupation.
Of 45 distributed surveys, we received 41 usable responses.
This represents a very high response rate, possibly attributable to the personal contact the participant established during the conversation.
Only one person refused to accept the survey at all.
Most surveys were completed immediately, and 9 were mailed back to us afterwards.
24 respondents were in IT or research occupations .
The remaining respondents ranged across professions, including: teachers, designers, hairdressers, managers, attorneys and business owners.
Respondents spanned all age groups between 18 and 60 and over.
However, age distribution was biased towards the younger age groups , reflecting the age group of the proxies.
We did not observe strong correlation between the opinions expressed by participants and type of occupations .
We also did not observe strong influence of age and gender.
We did not plan to analyze the impact of the relationship between the proxy's and the respondents' genders or ages.
Both the proxy and the participant were asked to provide a measure of the sensitivity or confidentiality of the conversation they had just conducted.
The participant was asked to rate subjective "confidentiality" on a 5 option scale.
Proxies indicated whether the conversation was sensitive following precise guidelines given by data protection legislation  .3 We would like to stress the difference between confidentiality and sensitivity: we did not observe significant correlation between sensitivity and confidentiality as indicated by the proxies and the participants .
The desire to be informed does not necessarily imply that the participants would have likely asked to erase the recording after the fact.
There appears to be a "confidentiality threshold" in this respect: participants would have asked the user to erase the recording primarily in cases of elevated confidentiality.
In most cases of conversations of medium or low confidentiality, they would not have likely asked to delete the recording.
This is supported by the very strong correlation between confidentiality and likelihood of requesting deletion .
In fact, only 7 responses indicated 4 or 5 on this question, supporting anecdotal evidence gathered during the deployment and comments arising from formative evaluation .
Participants wanted to be informed that the recording is happening: 30 participants responded 4 or 5 on the respective question, with avg.
Participants wanted to be informed regardless of the sensitivity of the topic of the conversation as classified by the researcher and the place where it happened .
There was, however, a positive correlation between perceived confidentiality and this variable .
Again, there was positive correlation between perceived confidentiality and this variable .
There were relatively weak correlations of these two variables with confidentiality .
This suggests that there is a concern with what happens with the recording, regardless of its perceived confidentiality.
The interpretation is that copying the conversation onto other media or replaying it to others may cause the de-situation of the in-
Our original estimate of appropriate retention time was in the range of 10 minutes-1 hour.
That estimate attempted to minimize privacy risks while retaining application usefulness and usability, but these participants were comfortable with a much longer retention time.
This apparent contradiction may be explained by social dynamics that induce people to overlook incidents to avoid conflict or uncomfortable situations .
Participants also stated that they would allow the user of PAL to retain their conversations for much longer than we had expected.
Data retention time has served as a fundamental principle for the data protection community for years, and this has influenced the ubicomp security field.
Jiang et al., in their Approximate Information Flows framework, modulate information "persistency" to achieve privacy goals .
Unlimited data retention has also been identified by Palen and Dourish as one problem with pervasive information collection and aggregation .
These participants did not express their concerns and needs in terms of retention time; the focus was rather on misuse and social appropriateness.
This may be due to the fact that people are unable to express appropriate retention policies without reliable information on risk of misuse over time.
This suggests that both in talking with users and in designing ubicomp applications, analysts should focus on the purpose of use of the information rather than on its temporal retention.
Above we reported a lack of significant correlation between the determination that the conversation's topic was sensitive according to data protection guidelines and the confidentiality measure indicated by the participant.
The guidelines used to categorize sensitive conversations may not accurately reflect interpersonal dynamics.
The definition of sensitive information we used was based on the data protection community's description .
This definition may not be descriptive of the knowledge that is likely to be relevant in interpersonal dynamics, such as social "secrets"  or other topics of conversation that can significantly affect social relations if misused.
Furthermore, classic data protection guidelines are difficult to apply to many small collections of personal information , as opposed to large organizational data banks.
For example, the costly requirements imposed by legislation on these data banks 
One important conclusion is that the issues involved in the negotiation of privacy between individuals are different from those related to data protection.
If this is true, design guidelines  inspired by data protection principles or the Fair Information Practices   may not provide sufficient guidance for the design of technologies that increase the information sharing between individuals.
When Weiser spelled out the vision of ubicomp, he suggested that mature technologies fade out of the user's consciousness .
Likewise, informed consent dynamics will also have to become implicit.
Most interviewed participants desired being informed about the application when it was running and being able to consent to its use.
The tension here is that explicit informed consent may be so cumbersome as to make PAL unusable in its current format.
However, public knowledge and awareness of technology is an integral part of this changing picture.
Even a technology as disruptive from the privacy standpoint as camera phones has been widely adopted within the relatively short span of two years.
Today the public has evolved compensatory behaviors and norms , to make carrying camera phones in places such as public restrooms acceptable .
Informed consent procedures have become implicit, because the public is learning how camera phones are used and misused.
This observation suggests that designers and researchers should devote more attention to the adoption of ubicomp technologies.
Norman has written about the adoption of ubicomp  in The Invisible Computer, characterizing users in terms of their place in the adoption curve .
We suggest designers focus on predicting and influencing adoption patterns as part of the design process.
Similar to how Christensen et al.
This knowledge might improve our ability to influence public awareness and to identify emergent concerns, lessening the cultural stress that many indicate today as an acceptance challenge of ubicomp and facilitating the process of "shifting the technology to the background."
Participants expressed a desire to be informed and asked permission to use PAL.
Yet, in many cases, they reported not being likely to ask the user to erase the recording after the fact.
This assessment is hypothetical in nature and should be taken with caution.
If the situation probed with the questionnaire would have happened with PAL actually operating, outside of a study setting, the conversation part-
Selection bias on the probed situations may also represent a potential issue.
The protocol called for submitting the survey systematically to all qualifying interactions for a short period .
However, one proxy felt it was impractical to distribute the survey in some situations, for example, when trying on clothes in a shop or one time when she was in a hurry at the grocery store.
Moreover, the proxy did feel it was inappropriate to hand out surveys in some situations, or to some people, such as at a medical visit--social settings which are arguably very interesting from the standpoint of the research questions we investigated in this study.
The need for probing these situations depends on the intended context of use of the technology under investigation.
Research ethics and social appropriateness may suggest avoiding intrusive studies in sensitive situations  and to resort to more hypothetical means for probing behavior.
However, some parameters might be evaluated by extension.
In the PAL case, participants desired to be informed about the presence of the device, independent of the topic of the conversation or the place where it takes place--there is little reason why such a desire should not also apply to the delicate situations described above.
Clearly, the responses on deletion and retention cannot be generalized in the same way, being functions of the conversation's perceived confidentiality.
Certain countermeasures may decrease or control situation selection bias.
First, the researcher administering the survey could complete his side of the data, without handing out the survey to the conversation partner.
This would provide a statistic on the number of situations that were not probed, and the reason why this did not happen, thus allowing researchers to plan supplemental inquiry.
Second, administration of the experience sampling survey could be deferred to a more appropriate moment.
Researcher's notes could be used to help the participant recollect the situation, although there is a risk of introducing even more bias.
Ultimately, it may be difficult to justify serious infringement of social norms just for the sake of accurate behavioral research for product development.
This limitation should be worked around or accepted in many cases .
Unfortunately, we did not record statistics on situation selection bias by the proxies.
However, informal feedback from proxies suggests that our results portray a reasonably accurate generalization of the target population's reactions within the type of  situations probed.
We would strongly encourage anyone utilizing these inquiry techniques in the future to adopt at least one of the above two countermeasures to control this source of bias.
We believe that the experimental setup described above allowed us to gather observations that would have been difficult to obtain with a typical survey or in a laboratory setup.
For example, we could have used scenarios to evaluate PAL, asking people to read a short story of one instance of use of PAL and then answer to a survey.
Because paratypes combine event-contingent experience sampling with experience prototyping, they are especially useful for evaluating high-level or implicit interaction where reference to concrete instances of life is needed.
This is particularly important when we do not know how often these instances arise, or how to describe them 
The latter may occur when reference is sought to social relations, privacy, or personal preferences, or when considering situated action .
We claim that the procedure that we called paratype can be particularly useful for gathering early feedback on mobile and ubiquitous technologies, such as applications that collect information at unexpected times , that provide information when needed , or where interaction is embedded in unplanned social practice or everyday routine, such as home communication systems .
These applications may have high prototyping costs; probing salient aspects of the experience without the need of working artifacts may represent an efficient way of obtaining relevant information needed for design.
However, when using this kind of inquiry techniques, several issues must be considered, including potential sources of bias, study implementation cost and IRB compliance.
The demographics of the proxies are likely to influence the demographics of the respondents, in terms of age, socioeconomic class, education, etc.
In this study, the proxies' age, profession and social class are reflected in the respondents'.
Also, relative differences in age, gender and socioeconomic class between proxy and respondent could influence the results.
Administering a survey is decidedly less expensive than a deployment with a working prototype, which typically has high development, recruitment, and operational costs.
In fact, one of the reasons we chose not to deploy PAL in a long-term study was that we were unwilling to commit the resources required for product "hardening" and maintenance of the deployment.
However, this survey is not, by any means, a discount usability technique --it still required careful planning and its execution was more complex than a mass survey administered via email or by stopping people in a shopping mall.
Sample size is related to cost.
The number of responses might seem low compared to other privacy surveys such as the GVU WWW User Surveys  and Ackerman et al.
This number derives from the structure of the study.
We wanted to investigate initial reactions to the technology in real-life situations and we avoided submitting the survey twice to the same person.
The number of respondents was thus bounded by the number of significant social interactions with unique individuals that the proxies had within the timeframe devoted to the study .
This number is limited by the size of the interactive network of the proxy and is surprisingly low for many people, as studies of social relationships and frequency of communication indicate .
In effect, we traded quantity for increased authenticity and situatedness.
Demographic coverage may represent an issue if it does not match the intended population and must be controlled.
However, with appropriate coverage, a small number of respondents is not necessarily a limitation.
Even with 41 responses, we were able to produce relatively good statistics .
Higher collection costs per response  are the price to pay for presumably more accurate and salient responses.
HCI practitioners and researchers have long worked to probe the user's experience of a not yet existing artifact or technology.
Prototypes have often been used for this purpose: Houde and Hill point out that prototypes can reproduce the user interface of products, but also serve to probe their functional and experiential characteristics .
Buchenau and Suri describe the use of Experience Prototypes to evaluate the user experience of new products such as a digital camera .
They point out that role playing can be useful for understanding the social context in which a person will use a technology.
Our "paratype" can be viewed as a form of experience prototyping.
The difference between Buchanau and Suri's prototypes and our procedure is that they recreate and study simulated experiences .
Our procedure leverages reallife situations.
The conversations on which we seek feedback are real, as they would have happened independently of the survey.
In this sense, paratypes are situated in the real world, and explore interpersonal interactions, not unlike Cultural Probes.
Cultural Probes introduce foreign artifacts 
Paratypes introduce a foreign technology in real-life situations to understand the social practices that would arise from the presence of such technology.
Psychologists have long asked people to report on their experience in specific circumstances with the purpose of uncovering behavioral patterns.
Flanagan performed pioneering work analyzing statistical data on critical incidents to evaluate, among other things, individuals' proficiency at performing work tasks and reasons for success and failure .
This Critical Incident Technique was also used for analyzing human-machine interaction, using incident reports collected after the fact to improve aircraft instrument design.
The inquiry technique presented here attempts to generate a more accurate reproduction of stakeholders' interests by eliminating recall and selection bias.
More recently, Wheeler and Rois examined of the use of self-reported inquiry techniques within behaviorism, medicine, and industrial psychology .
They categorize these techniques in: interval-, signal- and event-contingent, depending on what initiates the self-report procedure.
Larson and Csikszentmihalyi were among the first to propose experience sampling as a quantitative self-reported inquiry technique  for social and psychological research.
We used a form of event-contingent experience sampling, fo-
The potential problems arising from the application of IRB requirements to social, behavioral and economic research are well known .
One practical problem we incurred was related to consent requirements set by our IRB.
Although we did not have to document participants' consent , we still had to provide them with an information notice.
Reading the one-and-a-half page notice disrupted the experience even further than the disruption caused by filling out the survey.
More concise consent notices would be helpful, though changing standard wording requires extensive collaboration with IRB officials.
Experience Sampling is becoming increasingly popular in HCI practice, often in association with diary studies.
Participants carried a Palm device that simulated at random times location requests from friends, family and colleagues.
For example, the device would simulate a person asking for the participant's location when the participant felt that the person would have not done so in reality.
The event-contingent nature of our study makes the responses presumably more salient.
Our paratype was based on a paper survey.
An interesting question would be if more sophisticated setups would be feasible, such as providing realistic prototypes to support the experience, either functioning or through Wizard-of-Oz.
In addition to the ethical questions discussed above, it is necessary to consider whether increasing prototype realism is necessary to probe user opinions, and whether it is costeffective to do so.
The nature of ubicomp technology may help in this case, because PAL operates in the background and is invisible to the conversation partner, so no real artifact is needed.
Furthermore, Wizard-of-Oz setups may be difficult to apply to ubicomp technologies in real-world settings.
They may thus be unfit to the unpredictable situations probed by the paratype.
These observations have broad consequences because they suggest that traditional privacy guidelines and quantitative privacy policies may not be appropriate or sufficient for the development of this kind of personal ubicomp applications and that designers should focus on the purpose of use of information and interpersonal dynamics instead.
We thank Shwetak Patel for writing the PAL application, Jens Groklags, Elaine Huang, Kris Nagel, Delphine Nain and Jay Summet and the CHI reviewers for their thoughtful comments and all study participants.
This work was supported in part by NSF ITR grant 0121661, the NSF GRFP, the MacArthur Foundation, Intel Corporation and Motorola Corporation.
This work is covered under IRB protocol H04153 at the Georgia Institute of Technology.
To understand the impact on privacy of a personal memory aid, we developed an inquiry protocol based on eventcontingent experience sampling and experience prototyping that we called "paratype."
Paratypes probe a technological experience in the real-life context where it happens.
We claim that paratypes may be particularly fit for studying a large class of mobile and ubicomp technologies where naturalistic authenticity is required and prototyping costs are high.
However, their use requires solving practical roadblocks related to the disruption in the flow of social interaction, sampling accuracy, and procedural requirements.
The study provided interesting results on participants' opinions on privacy.
Participants stated that awareness about PAL was important to allow "boundary-setting" to occur.
They were not concerned as much by retention time as with potential misuse of the recordings.
