Sentiment is a rich and important dimension of social interaction.
However, its presence in computer-mediated communication in corporate settings is not well understood.
This paper provides a preliminary study of people's expression of sentiment in email conversations in an organizational context.
The study reveals that sentiment levels evolve over time during the process of newcomers' socialization, that sentiment varies according to tie-strength with the recipient, and that sentiment patterns can be indicative of one's position in the corporate social network as well as job performance.
These findings shed light on the complex and dynamic nature of sentiment patterns, and would inspire further explorations and applications of sentiment analysis in organizations.
This short paper aims to investigate several basic aspects of sentiment expression patterns to shed light on the complex and dynamic nature of sentiment in computer mediated interactions in an organizational context.
By applying sentiment analysis to communication data within a large global company, we sought to answer the following: whether the level of sentiment expressed evolves over time; whether it depends on the strength of tie with the recipient of the communication; and whether it varies by individuals' status within the organization.
Each of these questions will be addressed in the Analysis section.
Understanding social interaction in computer-supported collaborative systems is crucial in order to better design tools and systems to support communication and collaboration in groups.
A wealth of literature has attempted to do so from a variety of angles: studying, e.g., the intensity of social relationships in social networking sites  , social exchange activities in online communities , and new members' socialization in SNS , online groups , and organizations .
Recently, sentiment analysis has added another dimension to the study of online interactions.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Our empirical study resides in a global company devoted to information technologies and consulting, with over 400,000 employees across more than 200 countries.
In particular, we use a dataset of 15 million email conversations of 8,592 volunteer employees who agreed to share their outgoing messages when signing up for an Intranet service.
They were recruited via snowball sampling, by allowing existing users to invite their contacts to join the service.
As a result, users in our pool are scatted throughout the corporation's different divisions and countries.
A prior study based on the same dataset compared the network characteristics and job roles of the sampled users to the rest of the firm and found minimal differences between the two distributions .
Each log entry of the communication records specifies the sender and receiver, a timestamp, the subject, and the content of the body of the message.
To preserve privacy, the email addresses of users are hashed and the content is transformed into a vector of term frequencies.
In order to focus on social interaction patterns, we eliminated spam and mass email announcements .
We also collected financial performance data for a subset of employees , all of whom are dedicated business consultants and thus are comparable to each other in terms of job role and performance metrics.
These consultants generate revenue by logging "billable hours" and  found the ability to generate revenue is an appropriate measure for productivity.
It is important to note that our data does not capture a myriad of factors affecting sentiment expression: the individuals' personality, conversation topics, or global time-varying factors such as the financial performance of the company.
Therefore each of the measured factors: tenure with the company, strength of tie, and organizational status, can be expected to individually account for at most a very small fraction of the observed variance in sentiment expression.
We therefore examine whether people change the polarity and amount of sentiment they express as they gain more experience in the company.
We assess the sentiment level expressed by an employee in their email messages for each month since they first appeared in our dataset.
Employees are encouraged to keep all emails, which are automatically archived by the corporate email system.
These records are included in our dataset upon the agreement of the volunteers.
Even if some individual emails have been deleted, we expect this to have limited effect on the measurement of aggregate sentiment level.
In addition, we confine our analysis to the most recent three years, to minimize the occurrence of missing data, and to draw from a sample of employees who had been hired relatively recently and exposed to similar developments within the company.
The resulting dataset contains email records of 2586 users who joined since 2007 and had been with the company for at least 12 months.
Figure 1 presents how the sentiment levels for new employees evolve in each of the four dimensions.
A possible explanation is that newcomers are more tentative in expression of sentiment, but gradually become somewhat more comfortable in voicing their opinion.
Comfort level may also increase within individual relationships.
We therefore examine whether sentiment level changes over time as one continues to communicate with the same contact.
We selected user-contact pairs that had exchanged more than 50 messages and computed the sentiment level for each batch of 10 sequential messages.
We employ a commonly used method for evaluating sentiment, based on frequency of occurrence of words in text based on a subjectivity lexicon .
Thus we measure sentiment-level for each user along each of the four dimensions separately, from strongly positive to strongly negative.
However, by extracting aggregate patterns over many conversations, we can capture the degree to which an individual tends to express each kind of sentiment.
Since our subjectivity lexicon contains only English terms, we confine our analysis to emails written in English.
We further limit the analysis to the 50% of employees who are in the US, as well as 2491 additional employees from Canada, the United Kingdom, and India, retaining nearly 80% of our sample.
This restriction minimizes language issues, such as switching to another language to communicate different types of information.
Finally, we conduct correlation and regression tests to explore patterns in expression of each polarity and intensity of sentiment separately1.
Prior work  found that tie strength is reflected in the type and frequency of interaction in online settings.
We thus further analyze whether the strength of a tie relates to the expression of sentiment in this organizational context.
We define tie-strength by the ranked position of a contact in terms of communication frequency.
Thus tie-strength is defined relative to communication with one's remaining social contacts.
In order to obtain enough observations in terms of both size of the social network and number of conversations, we only include the 3590 users who communicated with more than 100 contacts and sent more than 4000 messages.
Please note this is also necessary since our relative tie-strength definition would only make sense when social networks are comparable in size.
In particular, we group employee's contacts into three sets: 1~10th, 11~40th, >40th, which correspond to weak, moderate, and strong ties in their social networks.
Figure 2 shows how frequently people express different sentiment levels to a tie of a specified strength.
Sentiment levels are normalized for each individual's basic sentiment profile.
Except for the weak-positive dimension, there are significant differences between different conversation pairs of different tie-strength .
In general, people tend to be more negative when conversing along strong ties and more positive when communicating with infrequent contacts.
The number of contacts and sentiment levels were computed within a 6-month period, and we confirmed that the results are consistent when the start and duration of the observation period is varied.
For the 4114 users included in our observation period , the mean of the network size is 138 and median is 98.
With the exception of the strong-negative dimension, there are weak correlations between the number of contacts and the level of sentiment expressed.
Since network size and the length of time with the company are correlated , we ran regression of sentiment_level over both variables and found that the network size variable shows a consistent relationship with sentiment, even controlling for length of time in the company.
In order to better observe the pattern, we divided employees into three equal-sized groups, according to the size of their social networks: small, medium, and large.
As shown in Figure 3, the trend is generally consistent with the correlation pattern: people who maintain larger social networks tend to be more positive and less negative than those with smaller social networks.
Prior work has found that social network size is not significantly correlated with one's performance in an organization, but having strong connections to authorities is positively associated with revenue .
We further examine whether sentiment is correlated to job performance within the company.
As explained, we confine this analysis to 549 individuals in our sample who reside within the business consultant group, who have the same job role, and who are evaluated using the same metric: the amount of yearly revenue they generate for the company.
In particular, this measure naturally combines two dimensions of a business consultant's performance: value of a unit working hour  and productivity .
For simplified illustration, we divided the sample into high,
Finally, sentiment expression differs according to one's social position in the organization.
In particular, people with larger social networks tend to be more positive while less negative.
Higher-performers tend to express more sentiment in their messages.
Although it is difficult to identify the casual relationship between sentiment and these status variables, we tend to believe that they form some mutual reinforcement dynamics.
This kind of association should be worth mentioning in employee training.
In addition, giving users feedback on how their sentiment expression compares to others' of similar position and tenure with the company should help users be aware of and adjust their sentiment expression.
In fact, there is a positive correlation between performance  and expression of weak-positive sentiment , which may suggest positive reinforcement between performance and sentiment.
In this paper we presented a preliminary exploration of several basic aspects of sentiment expressed in CMC conversations in an organizational context.
The results suggest that sentiment expression depends on the individuals' tenure and performance in the company, as well as their relationships with others.
These dynamic and multifaceted characteristics of sentiment could have important implications for designing collaborative systems.
First, during the initial socializing process, newcomers adjust their sentiment levels.
Through their first year, they increase their use of strong sentiment words, both positive and negative.
In addition, between pairs of individuals who continue to communicate, sentiment is also increasingly expressed.
This implies that sentiment expression increases as employees become more comfortable with their environment and build stronger social bonds with other people.
This dynamic aspect of sentiment might suggest using sentiment as a dimension to assess newcomers' adjustment progress and status.
Moreover, some design features to support proper sentiment expression might be helpful to alleviate some newcomers' shyness in communication, for example, indicating others' sentiment levels might encourage newcomers to adapt to the norms within the participants' organizational context.
Within one's social network, people tend to use positive sentiment words when communicating with infrequent contacts and express negative sentiment more frequently to their strong-tie contacts.
This might indicate a higher comfort level in expressing negative thoughts in close relationships, while putting up a positive front to those one does not know well.
But when email messages are forwarded, the strength of tie context may be lost.
Talk to Me: Foundations for Successful Individual-Group Interactions in Online Communities.
Feed me: motivating newcomer contribution in social network sites.
Chan, D. and Schmitt, N., Interindividual differences in intraindividual changes in proactivity during organizational entry: A latent growth modeling approach to understanding newcomer adaptation.
Characterizing debate performance via aggregated twitter sentiment.
Gilbert, E. and Karahalios, K. Predicting tie strength with social media.
Mishne, G. and Rijke, M.d., Predicting movie sales from blogger sentiment, in AAAI 2006 Spring Symposium on Computational Approaches to Analysing Weblogs .
Sentiment Classification using Machine Learning Techniques.
Wilson, T., Wiebe, J., and Hoffmann, P. Recognizing Contextual Polarity in Phrase-Level Sentiment Analysis.
Wu, L., Lin, C.-Y., Aral, S., and Brynjolfsson, E., Value of Social Network -- A Large-Scale Analysis on Network Structure Impact to Financial Revenue of Information Technology Consultants.
Yang, J., Ackerman, M., and Adamic, L. Virtual Gifts and Guanxi: Supporting Social Exchange in a Chinese Online Community.
