Pike, Matthew F. and Maior, Horia A. and Porcheron, Martin and Sharples, Sarah C. and Wilson, Max L.  Measuring the effect of Think Aloud Protocols on workload using fNIRS.
In: Proceedings of the 32nd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 26 April - 01 May 2014, Toronto, Canada.
Access from the University of Nottingham repository: http://eprints.nottingham.ac.uk/31323/1/TAP-preprint.pdf Copyright and reuse: The Nottingham ePrints service makes this work by researchers of the University of Nottingham available open access under the following conditions.
This article is made available under the University of Nottingham End User licence and may be reused according to the conditions of the licence.
For more details see: http://eprints.nottingham.ac.uk/end_user_agreement.pdf A note on versions: The version presented here may differ from the published version or from the version of record.
If you wish to cite this item you are advised to consult the publisher's version.
Please see the repository url above for details on accessing the published version and note that access may require a subscription.
The Think Aloud Protocol  is a verbalisation technique widely employed in HCI user studies to give insight into user experience, yet little work has explored the impact that TAPs have on participants during user studies.
This paper utilises a brain sensing technique, fNIRS, to observe the eect that TAPs have on participants.
Functional Near-Infrared Spectroscopy  is a brain sensing technology that oers the potential to provide continuous, detailed insight into brain activity, enabling an objective view of cognitive processes during complex tasks.
Participants were asked to perform a mathematical task under 4 conditions: nonsense verbalisations, passive concurrent think aloud protocol, invasive concurrent think aloud protocol, and a baseline of silence.
Subjective ratings and performance measures were collected during the study.
Our results provide a novel view into the eect that dierent forms of verbalisation have on workload during tasks.
Further, the results provide a means for estimating the eect of spoken artefacts when measuring workload, which is another step towards our goal of proactively involving fNIRS analysis in ecologically valid user studies.
Consequently, TAPs may aect performance in tasks, and also measures of workload during studies.
To analyse the potential impact that a TAP may have on an individual, we use a direct measure through the brain monitoring technology Functional Near-InfraRed Spectroscopy .
While some brain sensing techniques like functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging  require minimal or no movement from users, fNIRS can be used while seated naturally at a computer .
Further, because fNIRS measures blood oxygenation and deoxygenation rather than electrical signals like Electroencephalography , fNIRS permits more natural movements associated with using a computer without being subject to significant artefacts in the data.
In the context of HCI, TAP is typically used as an evaluation method to elicit insights into participants thoughts and strategies during usability and user studies.
TAP, however, has also been used in other settings, such as cognitive psychology and social sciences , to understand phenomena such as user mental models, expertise, and problem solving.
As well as being a core part of user studies, verbalisations are also closely related with Working Memory, as both the interpretation of words in the task and the integration of thoughts involve the phonological loop .
Consequently, to integrate fNIRS measurement within a typical user study that might involve a TAP, we have to be aware of how one will aect the other.
There are various forms of TAP, including retrospective, which occurs after a task has been completed, and concurrent, which occurs during a task.
Of concurrent forms of TAPs, there is both invasive, which involves directly questioning participants, and passive, which simply encourages participants to maintain verbalisations about their thoughts and actions.
Because fNIRS measurements are taken during tasks, this paper focuses on concurrent TAPs.
Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Copyright is held by the owner/author.
Publication rights licensed to ACM.
We then present the results of the study, discuss the findings in terms of what we can learn about the impact of TAP on mental workload in general, and recommendations for using fNIRS measurements in an HCI user study.
Ericsson and Simon's seminal work on verbal reporting of participants thought process is the most cited amongst Think Aloud Protocols .
Prior to this work, little consideration was made to the type of verbalisation produced by participants under study conditions .
In their original discussion of TAP, Ericsson and Simon  distinguish between 3 distinct levels at which verbalisations occur.
Levels 1 and 2 are described as being valid representations of a participant's mental state, since they are verbalising information stored in short term memory and are representative of the participant's current state.
Level 3 requires access to long term memory and influences what would otherwise be their typical state.
Ericsson and Simon's version  of the protocol is strictly non-intrusive, and researchers implementing the protocol are restricted to simply using the verbal prompt -"Keep talking"- to avoid influencing the participant, and ensuring that the reported data relates solely to the task.
To distinguish between other forms, we refer to this type of TAP as Passive  for the remainder of this paper.
In practice, however, it has been shown that many researchers incorrectly implement or misreport the TAP they are using .
Many practitioners of TAP prefer to question participants at level 3 to obtain coherent, actionable utterances relating to the system under evaluation, rather than inferring results from level 1 and 2 utterances.
Researchers have attempted to formalise this level of questioning .
We characterise these approaches under the umbrella term Invasive TAP .
With ITAP, researchers are free to probe the user's mental model, but Ericsson and Simon would disregard the findings at these levels stating that they have been influenced.
Under ITAP, a practitioner is able to prompt the participant with more probing questions - "Why did you do X?
Additionally, Baddeley describes the concept of Longterm memory , which represents a dierent storage location to working memory.
LTM is unlimited in space and is responsible for storing information that is no longer in working memory.
We can relate a number of concepts described by Ericsson and Simon to the working memory model described by Baddeley.
For example, Ericsson and Simon note that verbalisations at level 1 and 2 occur within short term memory.
We can further characterise this with Ericsson and Simon stating that TAP will utilise the Phonological loop as it is verbal in nature.
Tasks under which the TAP is performed may also interact with other components of the working memory model.
Tasks involving imagery or mental rotation, for example, will utilise the visuo-spatial sketchpad since they are spatial, whereas verbalising occurs in the phonological loop.
For such tasks under TAP conditions the two concepts of the model will be activated, with the central executive mediating information flow between the two.
The episodic buer may also have a role under ITAP conditions, since the protocol will require access to memories that are not in the immediate short term memory.
We would not expect the Episodic buer to be utilised in the PTAP condition.
In addition to the WM model, we can also consider the Information Processing Model  and Multiple Resource Model  proposed by Wickens.
Wickens describes that necessary resources are limited and aims to illustrate how elements of the human information processing system such as attention, perception, memory, decision making and response selection interconnect.
We are interested in observing how and when these elements interconnect under TAPs.
Wickens describes three dierent `stages'  at which information is transformed: a perception stage, a processing or cognition stage, and a response stage.
The first stage involves perceiving information that is gathered by our senses and provide meaning and interpretation of what is being sensed.
This part of the information processing system takes place in WM and consists of a wide variety of mental activities.
We can observe that TAP will likely aect each of these elements since the protocol introduces additional sensory inputs, which require potential comprehension and will sometimes require a response .
Wickens also proposes the Multiple Resource Model , illustrated in Figure 2.
The elements of this model overlap with the needs and considerations of evaluating complex tasks which could be analysed and aected by the inclusion of a TAP.
He describes the aspects of cognition and the multiple resource theory in four dimensions: STAGES, MODALITIES, CODES and the VISUAL PROCESSING .
There are several brain sensing technologies available for research, including  fMRI, EEG, and fNIRS, which are summarised in Table 1.
Each of these technologies have dierent strengths and weaknesses, as discussed by Tan and Nijholt .
Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging  is a functional neuroimaging technique that associates detected changes in blood flow  to brain activity.
Participants are unable to interact directly with a system, but can respond to visual stimuli through the use of mirrors.
Electroencephalography  typically uses between 16 and 64 sensors on the scalp to detect varying electrical charge within the brain.
With the introduction of commercially available bluetooth EEG sensors, like the Emotiv1 , EEG has become an aordable option for brain sensing .
For evaluation, however, EEG data is susceptible to motion artefacts, and so producing averages for periods of interaction provides limited insight.
Pike et al  proposed, that EEG data was most valuable when combined visually with recorded TAP data, as statements of confusion, or pauses in verbalising ones actions, coincided with and were qualified by EEG data.
Recent research has shown that because blood-flow in the brain is less aected by body movement, fNIRS may be a more appropriate brain sensing technology for evaluation .
Because it takes several seconds for blood to flow to the brain , fNIRs has been largely discounted for real-time interaction with systems.
One of the key roles of the Multiple Resource Model is to demonstrate the hypothesised independence of modalities and use this to design tasks.
We know for example that the inclusion of TAP will introduce additional Auditory resource requirements, since the participant will hear their own verbalisations.
This in turn will require additional Perception from the participant and will draw on their Verbal coding resources and Vocal Verbal responses.
The Prefrontal Cortex  is the anterior part of the frontal lobes of the brain and is considered central to the function of WM, dealing with executive and attention processes .
Miller and Cohen defines the representations in the PFC as "attentional templates, retrieval cues, rules, or goals" , and many researchers agree that PFC function is one of Baddley's executive control .
Conversely, Rushworth reports that not all PFC subregions are essential for working memory .
The PFC is the region of the brain that we targeted during this study since there is significant evidence to support its role in WM .
In addition to the PFC, Brocas area is located within the frontal lobe and is linked with speech production .
The aim of this study was to investigate how verbalisation and TAPs aect cognition and the thought process during user study tasks.
We produced three research questions: * How can we identify the impact of TAPs on human cognition and mental workload using fNIRS?
To answer these research questions, a theoretical understanding of TAPs, human cognition, mental workload and the interconnection between these concepts is required.
Wickens' Multiple Resource Model  can describe the relationship between the available resources and task demands.
Therefore, TAPs might have an impact on all three stages  of the Multiple Resource Model.
According to the model, a TAP is a verbal/linguistic activity, therefore the codes of its cognition stage is Verbal.
Consequently, we chose a task  that was easy to verbalise and involves continuous use of the phonological loop, such that dierent verbalisation conditions would interact with the task.
Primarily, we wanted to compare the dierent concurrent TAPs against a baseline of not verbalising.
In order to check whether simply using your voice creates an artefact in the fNIRS data, as opposed to thinking and talking, we also included a second baseline of repeatedly verbalising the word `blah'.
Type of verbalisation, as primary independent variable, created four conditions: 1.
Task + Passive Concurrent TAP  4.
Task + Invasive Concurrent TAP  We designed a repeated measures, within-participants study to compare these conditions, where participants solved eight mathematical problems.
Conditions and tasks were counterbalanced using a Latin-square design.
HC.W - There will be a significant dierence in cognition between verbal conditions for low performing participants.
Depending on how well participants performed during the four conditions, we distinguished between high performing participants  and low performing participants  .
These groups were formed to investigate whether TAPs have a dierent impact on cognition relative to the participants grouping.
We had a number of hypothesis that we sought to investigate whilst conducting this study relative to performance, cognition, and participants' grouping based on mathematical performance : HP - There will be a significant dierence in performance between verbal conditions.
HC - There will be a significant dierence in cognition between verbal conditions.
HP and HC were drawn from Wickens 4D Multiple Resources Model .
Both TAP and mathematical tasks should primarily use verbal working memory in the modality, encoding, and processings dimensions.
Consequently, the demands imposed by various verbal conditions may aect the total workload element, and workload may then aect performance.
HC.S - There will be a significant dierence in cognition between verbal conditions for high performing participants.
In order to determine how TAPs aect the dierent stages of the Multiple Resources Model, the task had to be chosen carefully such that verbalisation could potentially interrupt the process.
The first criterion, therefore, was that the task should primarily use the phonological loop, and thus be a verbally oriented task.
Second, the task had to involve continuous use of the phonological loop, and so a simple and discrete memory task was not sufficient.
Third, the task had to be verbalisable for the TAPs, which also meant that a memory task was not su cient.
Fourth, the task also had to have various levels of di culty to enable control over the primary task mental demands; according to the resource vs demands model  harder tasks would increase demand and thus reducing participant's resources for engaging in the TAP.
Finally, performance on the task had to be measurable in order to determine the eect of verbalisations.
Based upon these five criteria, we decided on using a mathematics task.
Participants were provided with a set of six numbers and had to get as close as possible to a target final number.
60s to reach as close to the target number as possible, using four operators: addition, subtraction, multiplication and division.
36 versions of the task were created to be used across the four conditions, at various levels of di culty.
To classify their di culty, one researcher and two independent judges rated the di culty of each problem.
Di culty was judged in four categories: easy, quite easy, quite hard, and hard.
Inter-rater agreeability was confirmed with a Cohen's Kappa test, where the researcher achieved scores of 0.6419  with the first independent judge, and 0.8571  with the second.
This agreement was used to ensure that problem di culty was balanced between conditions.
The solutions provided by participants were recorded by the researcher on paper and later digitalised.
After each condition, participants completed a standard NASA TLX form to subjectively rate their mental workload during the task.
Each condition concluded with a thirty second rest period where the participants were asked to remain still, relax and empty their mind of thoughts.
The study was conducted in an o ce-like environment.
This was an important consideration as many brain based studies are conducted under strictly controlled lab settings.
The o ce environment provides a more naturalistic and ecologically valid setting.
Twenty participants  with an average age of 28.55 years were recruited to take part in the study.
Participants were recruited from the University of Nottingham, and included a mix of sta members and students from a range of disciplines.
All participants had normal or corrected vision and reported no history of head trauma or brain damage.
The study was approved by the school's ethics committee.
Participants provided informed consent, and were compensated with 15 in gift vouchers.
Participants were first introduced to the task that they would be completing during the study.
They were given two practice runs of the task  to familiarise themselves and reduce the impact of learning in their first condition.
Once comfortable with the requirements of the task, participants were fitted with the fNIRS brain imaging device, which was placed upon their forehead targeting the PFC.
At this point participants entered the recorded section of the study.
During this stage, participant input was captured, verbalisations were recorded via microphone, and brain data was captured on a separate, calibrated machine.
Participants partook in four conditions which were counterbalanced using a latin square rotation.
Each condition began with a tutorial and practice session.
The tutorial session was used to train the participant on how to verbalise according to the specific TAP being used in the particular condition.
The practice session would then serve as an opportunity to trial the technique prior to beginning the test itself and thus reducing the interference on the first task in each condition.
Each condition included eight of the tasks described above.
For each of the eight tasks in each condition, participants were given sixty seconds to attempt the problem.
All calculations were performed mentally; pen and paper was not provided.
After the sixty seconds had elapsed , participants were prompted to enter the number they had achieved during the calculation period.
We measured task performance according to distance from the target answer for each of the 36 problems across the four conditions.
Because the target varied, we used measured distance from the target as a percentage, which was subtracted from 100%.
100% represented the correct answer, 95% as being 5% from the target, and so on.
As the results tended towards the target, task accuracy was analysed.
To provide incentive to submit actual rather than ideal answers, we also measured whether participants could recall the solution to their answer.
We used the NASA-TLX questionnaire, a subjective workload assessment tool , based on the weighted average ratings of six subscales including, in order: Mental Demand, Physical Demand, Temporal Demand, Performance, Eort and Frustration.
Each participant was asked to self rate their mental workload using the NASATLX once after each condition.
We additionally investigated each of subscales independently.
The headband shaped device is a sixteen-channel transducer for continuous Near Infrared Spectroscopy .
The headband consists of four infrared  emitters operating on a range between 700 to 900 nm, and ten IR detectors.
The device is placed on the PFC targeting the Brodmann area 10 .
The tissue is radiated by the light sources and the detectors receive the light after the interaction with the tissue.
See Figure 4  for an illustration of how the headband is positioned, and to visualise the path that the light follows during operation.
Preprocessing was performed to transform raw data from the device into oxygenation values using the Modified Beer-Lambert law  .
We also applied filtering algorithms to remove high-frequency noise, physiological artefacts such as heartbeats and motion derived artefacts.
To perform this preprocessing step we used the Matlab Toolbox, NIRS-SPM .
We performed de-trending using a discrete cosine transform with a high frequency cut o of 128 seconds.
The baseline was removed, and low pass filtering was performed with a Gaussian filter with a width of 1 second.
We also considered the delay induced by the hemodynamic response  by omitting the first 10s of the trial when processing the data .
The Biopac fNIRS device used in this study provides 16 channels of brain data readings.
A channel is defined by the relationship between a source and detector pair as shown in Figure 4.
From the MBLL we receive Hb, HbO and TotalHb  values for each channel.
Measures were synthesised by combining specific channels averages to form a single measurement.
Channels 3,4,5,6 were used to represent the left side and channels 11,12,13,14 formed the right side in these measurements.
An overall measurement was produced by averaging the data from all 16 channels.
We began by checking for ordering eect.
A one way repeated measure ANOVA showed that participants performed significantly slower in the first condition they experienced, while average time to complete the subsequent conditions was even  = 2.816, p < 0.05.
An LSD post-hoc ANOVA test also showed that average scores also improved between the first condition they experienced and the last  = 2.271, p < 0.05.
Against hypothesis HP, our analysis showed no significant dierence in task accuracy between conditions.
We found no significant dierence in performance between any of the four conditions, however, under the TAP conditions, participant performance slightly improved.
There was also no dierence in the number of tasks correctly calculated in each condition.
We hypothesised that, ITAP under time pressure would cause performance to drop, but instead these results support the findings of McDonald et al.
When designing the study we placed a strong emphasis on automating the running of the study and collection of the associated data.
With the exception of the brain data, all other measures were collected from a single program.
We developed this program using PEBL: The Psychology Experiment Building Language .
The language provides a convenient set of features including accurate experiment timing and predefined psychology/study procedures such as demographic questionnaires.
Of particular relevance to this study was the pre-defined, computerised version of NASA-TLX.
A significant dierence was found in terms of time to complete tasks .
PTAP was not significantly dierent to B1 or B2.
This time dierence was likely created by the additional time required to explain decisions being made.
Participants were not asked to solve the tasks in the shortest amount of time, but were encouraged to get as close to the target answer as possible.
As such this metric is a measure of the participants natural behaviour under a given condition.
Against our own intuitions, each of these measures demonstrated higher demands for B2 compared to the other conditions .
The dierence between B2 and PTAP was only p = 0.075 and there was no significant dierence between ITAP and the other conditions.
This is to say that participants found the additional utterance of a nonsense word whilst solving the maths problems induced a greater physical demand than other conditions .
Correlations between performance scales from unweighted NASA-TLX and performance data were found.
This includes a negative Pearson correlation between NASATLX Performance scale and distance from target r = 252, n = 80, p = 0.024, indicating that participants were rating their performance as worse, when in fact it was better.
This possibly complements Peck's correlation assuming that when mental demands are high to the point of overload, performance decreases and therefore Hb follows.
This assumption ties well with the Limited Resource Model presented by Megaw .
There was also a strong positive Pearson correlation  between the fNIRS readings Hb left and Hb right.
Peck et al  found dierences in participants depending on their ability to analyse both pie and bar charts.
Similarly, we believed that mathematical propensity would aect an individuals performance under diering TAPs, with the assumption that high performers would better cope with TAPs, while lower performers would be impaired as a result of reduced resources .
Further supporting HC, our analysis found a significant dierence in brain region activation in both right and left inferior PFC during the experiment conditions.
As shown in Figure 7, OverallHbO were significantly higher during B2 compared to all other conditions .
We also noted an eect on the rest time at the end of each conditions: values at rest after B2 were significantly higher than values at rest after B1 .
Peck et al  found a negative correlation between fNIRS levels of Hb and the subjective ratings from NASA-TLX Mental Demands scale.
Tasks that created more mental eort were accompanied by lower levels of Hb.
The high performing group rated ITAP as being more mentally demanding  and requiring more mental eort  when compared against PTAP.
A Spearman negative correlation for the strong mathematicians between the NASA-TLX Mental Demands scale and the fNIRS Hb levels on the right side of the PFC  confirms Peck's  findings.
High performers also demonstrated a positive Spearman correlation between distance from target and fNIRS Hb on the left side of the PFC .
For the low performing group we observed an agreement between weighted NASA-TLX score and fNIRS overall Hb.
There was the same significant dierence from a Wilcoxon Sign Rank test in both NASA-TLX and fNIRS  between PTAP and ITAP.
Participants workload measured with both NASA-TLX and fNIRS is marginally higher in PTAP than ITAP.
This result is opposite to what was observed with the high performing group.
Activations in the left side of the prefrontal cortex are known to occur during semantic, relative to nonsemantic, tasks that relate or involve "the generation of words to semantic cues or the classification of words or pictures into semantic categories" .
Due to the physical placement of our fNIRS device on participants foreheads, we can discount the interaction between Broca's area and our results as it does not fall within the reach of our device.
Because fNIRS was sensitive to the B2 condition, we developed two premises  of the results: 1. fNIRS is particularly picking up the part of the brain that is activated during B2 and therefore the signal received by fNIRS is higher, or 2. fNIRS is picking up an indicator related to mental workload and that B2 induces more workload.
The reason behind this is the non-compatibility and noncomplementarity of B2 with the mathematical reasoning task, rather than the compatibility of verbalisation protocols from PTAP and ITAP with the mathematical reasoning task.
One way to distinguish between these two is to look at the participants performance data and subjective ratings  together with fNIRS.
If the first premise is true, you would not expect a dierence in mental workload  between the verbalisation conditions.
Additionally, you would not expect any relationship between performance or NASATLX data with fNIRS readings.
We found significant dierence between verbalisation conditions in NASA-TLX scores and we also found correlations between fNIRS data with both performance and NASA-TLX.
If fNIRS would pick up information related to language generation, you would expect significant dierence in fNIRS data between verbalisation conditions and the silent condition .
With this in mind, we propose that fNIRS is not an indicator of how many words you are saying, but is sensitive to mental workload and human cognition .
Using the fNIRS alone we were unable to identify the significant dierences we were expecting.
However we found the fNIRS data to be complementary to existing measures such as performance and NASA-TLX.
Considering the number of marginally significant results,
If generalisable, our findings suggest that for high performers PTAP is the more suitable protocol and that ITAP is better suited to low performers.
One possible explanation for this is that high performers have an existing procedural structure in which they operate, so interrupting this procedure  potentially interferes with their natural behaviour.
For low performers, however, such structure is not present and verbalising via PTAP is potentially troublesome, as they are being forced to verbalise a process that is absent or unnatural for them.
The introduction of carefully chosen prompts, however, may encourage non-experts to describe how they are struggling and provide useful insight into how researchers may help these types of users in the future.
In this study we looked at evaluating the cognitive impact of various TAPs using fNIRS as a novel measurement.
We found the device to be suitable ecologically for HCI style user study settings, with the device providing minimal distraction and interference.
After completing the study, we informally questioned the participants regarding their experience with wearing the fNIRS device.
No participant described feeling particularly uncomfortable during the study, some did however state that they began to experience some discomfort towards the end of the study.
We advise that studies utilising fNIRS should aim to keep sessions below 1 hour in a single sitting.
We believe that fNIRS is well suited to HCI evaluation and usability testing.
We believe that the inclusion of this novel new measurement complements existing evaluation measures such as NASA-TLX.
We must also note the potential negatives associated with this type of technology.
Studies have correlated the measurements to those observed with fMRI , specifically the BOLD signal.
Additionally, in the current state of technology, fNIRS can only be used to detect a level of workload , leaving a distinct lack of mapping between the readings recorded with fNIRS and the actual cognitive or emotional states.
For example, detecting frustration under a evaluation study would be a useful measure, but is not currently obtainable from fNIRS.
Another point of interest, that can possibly be considered a shortcoming of this study is the exclusion of performing the study task without wearing the fNIRS device.
Doing so would allow us to determine whether fNIRS aected performance or behaviour in anyway.
We did ask however, as a part of the informal post study interview, whether participants felt that they were influenced in some way by wearing the device; no one reported such an eect.
This does leave the potential for a follow up study to examine whether there was indeed an eect.
None of the nonsense verbalisations supported the task.
The findings about non-complementary language were hidden within the subjective, reflective, self-assessments included in NASA TLX; ratings had high variance, and results were only evident in some of the sub-scales.
Further, we saw no dierence in task performance between conditions.
The objective measure obtained from the fNIRS however, provides a clear indication of the participants' mental workload whilst completing the study tasks.
Our results make a positive step towards proactively using fNIRS as an evaluation tool within realistic HCI user studies.
One of our research questions was to investigate two think aloud protocols .
The study results should be seen as a positive indicator that both TAPs do not significantly aect or influence participants ability to solve the tasks presented in the study.
We used a high demand tasks and participants performance was not negatively aected in any way.
Contrarily, we observed a slight improvement in participants' performance under TAP conditions, confirming with McDonald  that using the TAPs during the task did not have a negative influence on participants' performance.
Reflecting on Wicken's Multiple Resource Model, using multiple resources that are complementary and compatible with the task in hand might have a positive impact on performance in the case of non multitask resource overload.
Between the four conditions, participants performed the worse in Condition B2 where they had to repeatedly say `Blah' during task solving.
This was due to a higher workload generated by the condition, sensed with both fNIRS and NASA TLX subjective scale.
The TAPs conditions diered when compared between the expertise level of participants.
The high performing group rated ITAP as being more mentally demanding requiring more mental eort when compared against PTAP.
This result was also confirmed with the fNIRS data.
Conversely for the low performing group, PTAP was the one that was more mentally demanding.
In order to achieve our aims, we compared nonsense verbalisations with dierent forms of concurrent TAP: passive and invasive.
One of our primary findings was that noncomplementary verbalisations, as opposed to complex verbalisations, created higher levels of mental workload.
In particular, nonsense verbalisations created higher mental workload, across measures, than Invasive TAP where participants discussed their mathematical problem solving options.
Consequently, we can conclude that the use of TAPs in user studies is fine as long as the discussion uses words relating to solving the task.
Ericsson, K. A., and Simon, H. A. Protocol analysis.
Fadiga, L., Craighero, L., and DAusilio, A. Broca's area in language, action, and music.
Gabrieli, J. D., Poldrack, R. A., and Desmond, J. E. The role of left prefrontal cortex in language and memory.
Hart, S. G., and Staveland, L. E. Development of nasa-tlx : Results of empirical and theoretical research.
Hertzum, M., Hansen, K. D., and Andersen, H. H. Scrutinising usability evaluation: does thinking aloud aect behaviour and mental workload?
Hirshfield, L. M., Solovey, E. T., Girouard, A., Kebinger, J., Jacob, R. J., Sassaroli, A., and Fantini, S. Brain measurement for usability testing and adaptive interfaces: an example of uncovering syntactic workload with functional near infrared spectroscopy.
Izzetoglu, M., Bunce, S. C., Izzetoglu, K., Onaral, B., and Pourrezaei, K. Functional brain imaging using near-infrared technology.
Kane, M. J., and Engle, R. W. The role of prefrontal cortex in working-memory capacity, executive attention, and general fluid intelligence: An individual-dierences perspective.
Landis, J. R., and Koch, G. G. The measurement of observer agreement for categorical data.
Using brain measurement to evaluate reality based interactions.
Challenges in the Evaluation of Usability and User Experience in Reality Based Interaction 5 , 19-20.
A novel HCI system based on real-time fmri using motor imagery interaction.
In Foundations of Augmented Cognition.
McDonald, S., Edwards, H. M., and Zhao, T. Exploring think-alouds in usability testing: an international survey.
McDonald, S., and Petrie, H. The eect of global instructions on think-aloud testing.
Megaw, T. The definition and measurement of mental workload.
Evaluation of human work, Eds.
