An experiment is described comparing three devices  in the performance of pointing and dragging tasks.
During pointing, movement times were shorter and error rates were lower than during dragging.
It is shown that Fitts' law can model both tasks, and that within devices the index of performance is higher when pointing than when dragging.
The stylus displayed a higher rate of information pmeessing than the mouse during pointing but not during dragging.
The trackball ranked third for both tasks,
This paper has two main contributions.
First, it shows that dragging is a variation of pointing, and consequently, that Fitts' law can be applied to it.
Second, it establishes that the performance of input devices in each of these two tasks should be considered in characterizing the humanfactors of devices.
We present an experiment comparing three devices  in both a pointing and a dragging task.
Each is modelled after Fitts' reciprocal tapping task .
While pointing tasks have been studied extensively , the same is not true for dragging, The present study addresses this imbalance.
It is driven by a belief that the human factors of the full range of direct manipulation tasks must be better understood, With such understanding emerges the ability to develop better predictive and analytic models, for example by extending the Keystroke-Level Model of Card, Moran$ and Newell  to handle this mode of interaction.
Pointing  tasks have been studied extensively.
Much of this work is based on a robust model of human movement known as Firrs' law , The law predicts that the time to acquire a target is logarithmically related to the distance over the target size, More formally, the time  to move to a target of width W which lies at distance  A is MT= a i- b log2
The log term is called the index of difficulty  and carries the units "bits" .
The reciprocal of b is the index of performance  in bits/s.
This is purportedly the human rate of information processing for the movement task under investigation.
Performance indices ranged from 1.1 to 5.0 bits/s.
There is recent evidence that the following formulation is more theoretically sound and yields a better fit with empirical data : MT=a+b log2.
These classes of action are characterized as State 1 and State 2 by Buxton , as illustrated in Figure 1.
State 2 motion on most input devices requires active maintenance of the state , generally restricting the freedom of movement.
Achieving these two goals was our main motivation.
Mean movement time, error rate, and Fitts' law were used to compare performance on three input devices in both State 1 and State 2 tasks.
In an analysis of data from Fitts'  experiments, Equation 3 was shown to yield higher correlations than those obtained using the Fitts or Welford formulation.
Another benefit of Equation 3 is that the index of difficulty cannot be negative, unlike the log term in Equation 1 or 2.
Studies by Card et al.
Typically this results when wide, short targets  are approached from above or below at close range.
Under such conditions, A is small, W is large, and the index of difficulty, computed using Equation 1 or 2, is often negative.
A negative index is theoretically unsound and diminishes some of the potential benefits of the model.
Fitts' original experiments used reciprocal tapping tasks where one alternately tapped on two rectangular targets.
The controlled variables were target width and the distance between targets; however, the motion was one dimensional .
Extending the model to two dimensions  has been discussed by Card et al.
There is little in the literature addressing human performance in dragging tasks.
One exception is the study by Gillan et al.
Like them, we extend Fitts' law to dragging.
However, their study cleats with text selection and is confounded on issues such as approach angle, Our work is at a lower level, and pays closer attention to device perfommnce in the respective tasks and to the formulation of the mathematical model.
Using Fitts' law to model dragging is best explained using an example.
Consider the case of deleting a file on the First, the user acquires the icon for the Apple Macintosh.
This point/select operation is a classic two-dimensional target acquisition task.
Then, while holding the mouse button down, the icon is dragged to the trashcan.
This also is a target acquisition task.
One is really just acquiring the trashcan icon.
Simple 2-State Interaction In State 1, mouse motion moves the tracking symbol.
Pressing and releasing the mouse button over an icon selects the icon and leaves the user in State 1.
Depressing the mouse button over an icon and moving the mouse drags the icon.
This is a State 2 action.
Procedure Pointing Task: Two targets appemed on each side of the screen  with an arrow indicating where to begin.
Subjects proceeded to point and click alternately between the two targets as quickly and accurately as possible, ten times in a row.
A beep was heard if selection occurred outside the target.
On each click a box at the top of the screen turned black while in State 2.
Following a one second pause the next condition appeared.
The dragging task can be likened to an inside-out pointing task During pointing, movement occurred with the mouse button up and a down-up action terminated a move ; during dragging, movement occurred with the mouse button down and an up-down action terminated a move .
Although instructed to move as quickly and accurately as possible, performance feedback was not provided.
Subjects were told that an error rate of one miss in every 25 trials was optimal.
Each A-W combination initiated of a block often trials, each being one pointing or dragging task.
Sixteen randomized blocks constituted one session.
Five sessions were completed for each device for each task, The task and device factors were within-subjects -- each subject performed both pointing and dragging on all three devices.
Ordering of devices was counterbalanced.
Within devices, a random process determined the initial task  and tasks alternated for each session thereafter.
Prior to each new device-task condition, subjects were given a practice block.
Breaks were allowed between blocks and sessions, but subjects completed all ten sessions on each device in a single sitting.
Three sittings over three days, for a total of about three hours, were necessary to complete alt conditions.
The dragging task was similar except an "object"  was acquired by pressing and holding down the button  or maintaining pressure on the stylus to "drag" the object to the other target.
The object was dropped by releasing the button or pressure.
Thus "dropping errors" were distinguished from motor variability errors.
Examining the distribution of "hits"  confirmed this source of error.
Figure 4 shows a sample distribution of responses around the target for one subject during dragging.
The data reveal deviate responses at very short movement distances distinct from the normal variability expected.
Because dropping errors are considered a distinct behavior, we adjusted the data by eliminating trials with an X coordinate more than three standard deviations from the mean.
Means and standard deviations were calculated separately for each subject, and for each combination of width , amplitude , device, and task.
We also eliminated trials immediately following deviate trials.
A multiple comparisons test indicated a significant drop in movement time after the first session , but no significant difference in movement time over the last four sessions.
Therefore, the first session for each subject for each device-task condition was also removed.
Henceforth, "adjusted" results are those subject to the above moditlcations.
The trackball was the slowest in both pointing and dragging; however, there was a significant task-by-device interaction .
While the mouse and tablet were comparable for pointing, performance was more degraded for the mouse than for the tablet or trackball when the task changed to dragging.
Adjusting for dropping errors had minimal effect on movement time.
An error was defined as selecting outside the target while pointing, or relinquishing the object outside the target while dragging.
Unadjusted error rates for pointing were in the desired range of 4% with means of 3.5% for the mouse, 4.0% for the tablet, and 3.970 for the trackball.
However, in the case of dragging, error rates were considerably higher, with means of 10.870 for the mouse, 13,670 for the tablet, and 17.3% for the trackball.
Figure 6 shows the mean percentage errors by device and task, both adjusted and unadjusted.
This effect, however, was entirely due to the dragging task as shown by a significant interaction .
While there was no difference in error rate across devices in the pointing task, error rate in the dragging task was dependent on device, with the trackball yielding the most errors and the mouse the fewest.
Adjusting for errors, not surprisingly, had a profound effect on dragging.
By definition, no dropping errors occur in the pointing task; however, the same criterion was applied for If valid, not as many errors would be consistency.
As evident in Figure 6, this was the case.
There were consistently high correlations  between movement time  and the index of task difficulty  for all device-task combinations.2 The performance indices , obtained through linear regression, were less than those found by Card et al.
The rank order of devices changed across tasks, with the tablet outperformed the mouse during pointing but not during dragging.
The differences, however, were slight.
The trackball, third for both tasks, had a particularly low rating of 1P = 1.5 bitsls during dragging.
Five of the intercepts were close to the origin ; however, a large, negative intercept appeared for the trackball-dragging combination .
With a negative intercept, the possibility of a negative predicted movement time looms.
However, the chance of such an erroneous prediction is remote because of the large slope coefficients.
For example, under the latter condition, a negative prediction would only occur for ID< 0.5 bits.
Fit of the Model A goal of this experiment was to compare the performance of several device-task combinations using Fitts' information processing model.
Although Fitts' index of performance  is considered an important performance metric, the disparity in error rates diminishes the validity of comparisons across device-task conditions.
Clearly , subjects were performing at different points on the speed-accuracy continuum for each device-task condition.
We applied Welford's  technique for normalizing response variability based on subjects' error rate.
For each A-W condition, target width was transformed into an effective target width  -- for a nominal error rate of 4% -- and ID was re-computed.
Then, MT was regressed on the "effective" ID.
This experiment confirmed the Card et al.
The experiment showed a clear difference with devices in performing State 1  and State 2  tasks.
The trackball was a poor performer for both tasks, and had a very high error rate during dragging.
This can be explained by noting the extent of muscle and limb interaction required to maintain State 2 motion and to execute state transitions.
The button on the trackball was operated with the thumb It was while the ball was rolled with the fingers.
This was not the case with the mouse or tablet which afford separation of the means to effect action.
Motion was realized through the wrist or forearm with state transitions executed via the index finger  or the application of pressure .
Clearly, in the design of direct manipulation systems employing State 2 actions, the performance of devices in both states should be considered.
The experiment also showed that Fitts' law can model both dragging and pointing tasks; however, performance indices within devices were higher while pointing.
Overall, 1P ranged from 1.5 to 4.9 bits/s, somewhat less than the values found by Card et al.
Of the devices tested, the highest index of performance was for the tablet during pointing and for the mouse during dragging.
It is felt that a stylus, despite the requirement of additional, non-standard hardware, has the potential to perform as well as the mouse in direct manipulation systems, and may out-perform the mouse when user activities include, for example, drawing or gesture recognition.
This research was supported by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada, Xerox Palo Alto Research Center, Digital Equipment Corp., and Apple Computer Inc. We gratefully acknowledge this contribution, without which, this work would not have been possible.
Evaluation of mouse, rate-controlled isometric joystick, step keys, and text keys for text selection on a CRT.
The keystroke-level model for user performance time with interactive systems.
Comparison of six cursor control devices based on Fitts' law models.
Proceedings of the Human Factors Society 30th Annual Meeting, 327331.
The information capacity of the human motor system in controlling the amplitude of movement.
How does Fitts' law fit pointing and dragging?
Proceedings of the CHI '90 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 227-234.
Fitts' law in two dimensions with hand and head movements.
Fitts' law with an isometric controlle~ Effects of order of control and control-display gain.
A note on the informationtheoretic basis for Fitts' law.
A review of human performance and preferences with different input devices to computer systems.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Errors and error correction in choice-response tasks.
The role of visual and kinesthetic feedback in the prevention of mode errors.
In D. Diaper et al.
An evaluation of an eye tracker as a device for computer input.
Proceedings of the CHI -t GI '87 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems and Graphics Inte~ace, 183-188.
The fundamentals of skill, London: Methuen.
