Department of Informatics University of California, Irvine, CA 92697 patil@uci.edu Abstract We report on a study  of user preferences for balancing awareness with privacy.
Participants defined permissions for sharing of location, availability, calendar information and instant messaging  activity within an application called mySpace.
MySpace is an interactive visualization of the physical workplace that provides dynamic information about people, places and equipment.
We found a significant preference for defining privacy permissions at the group level.
While "family" received high levels of awareness sharing, interestingly, "team" was granted comparable levels during business hours at work.
Surprisingly, presenting participants with a detailed list of all pieces of personal context to which the system had access, did not result in more conservative privacy settings.
Although location was the most sensitive aspect of awareness, participants were comfortable disclosing room-level location information to their team members at work.
Our findings suggest utilizing grouping mechanisms to balance privacy control with configuration burden, and argue for increased system transparency to build trust.
Categories & Subject Descriptors: H5.2 : User Interfaces - Interaction Styles; H5.2 : Group and Organization Interfaces - Computersupported cooperative work, Collaborative computing General Terms: Human Factors Keywords: privacy; context-aware computing; awareness; permission structures; contextual communication; information disclosure INTRODUCTION AND MOTIVATION Understanding the impact of using technology to support communication and awareness among team members is an important field of research in both the CHI and CSCW communities.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
IBM T. J. Watson Research Center Hawthorne, NY 10532 jlai@us.ibm.com devices , the tension between privacy and awareness has been acknowledged.
Researchers have examined ways to preserve privacy while sharing context by reducing the visibility of images from streaming video , replacing video with iconic presence indicators  or replacing audio feeds with analogous sounds .
Our research into the privacy/awareness tradeoff has been motivated by an interest in supporting mobile workers and creating workspaces that enable distributed teams to collaborate and communicate as effectively as co-located ones do.
While people have an interest in preserving their privacy, they also are interested in disclosing sufficient contextual information to colleagues to facilitate smoother communication and enable the job they need to do.
However, these primarily involve either global permissions for all contacts, or permissions that have to be defined on a personby-person basis.
Additionally, circumstances may change such that permissions defined for a colleague yesterday  might no longer be applicable today.
Continuous adjustments to reveal adequate information to the appropriate people at the right times is problematic in the digital domain.
This appears to be partly due to the difficulty in explicitly specifying preferences and partly due to the overhead of modifying settings according to context.
This paper presents mySpace, along with the results of a study that examines how users define permissions for such an application.
MySpace is an interactive visualization of the physical workspace  designed to promote awareness of the activities and availability of co-workers.
The goal of mySpace is to support the communication and collaboration needs of workers.
This includes locally mobile workers, workers who travel to the different buildings where a corporation does business, and those who telecommute.
Like other applications of this type, it inherently raises issues of privacy.
The goal of the study was to take a first step towards understanding the type of default permissions that would allow users to operate comfortably with the level of context sharing that is available through an awareness application such as mySpace.
MYSPACE MySpace  is a browser-based interactive visualization of a user's physical workplace that provides dynamically updated information about people, places and equipment.
Users maintain a list of contacts .
For each contact, there is an associated set of permissions granted to the user by that contact.
For example, if Sally has Paul in her team list, Sally will be able to view whatever information Paul has granted her permission for.
Possible permissions include whether Paul's phone is off the hook, the location of the wireless access point that his laptop is connected to at work, whether he is connected remotely , which application he is currently using, and his IM activity.
Additionally, a badgebased location tracking system is in the pipeline.
Paul can choose whether to allow Sally to view all system-known information about him, or just a subset.
In Figure 1, we see that the user has requested to view the location of a colleague, Paul, and mySpace is indicating that Paul's laptop is currently connected in the area close to conference room GN-K35.
The user can see this information because Paul has granted permission either to this user explicitly, or has set his default permissions so that anybody running mySpace can see Paul's location.
Had the user selected "BluePages - personnel" for the type of information instead of "Grapevine - location" mySpace would have highlighted the location of Paul's office along with his telephone number.
For example, once a user has located the closest printer to his or her current location, clicking on the printer will take him or her to the web page for setting up that particular printer.
Clicking on an unoccupied conference room connects the user to the reservation page for that room, and clicking on a colleague will bring up that person's e-card .
An e-card  is a means of initiating one-click communication.
Communication Channels The e-card provides access to co-workers via phone, IM, or email.
Alternatively, face-to-face meeting time can be requested via the calendar.
Email support is provided by spawning a mail client, and IM support is provided by programmatically starting a chat session with the selected person.
Phone support is provided by a server that stores phone numbers for all employees.
Moreover, the general emphasis is often on letting the system manage the privacy-awareness tradeoff via automatic action without explicit user involvement.
While this can be useful in removing burden from the user, it may leave the user feeling disempowered.
It is well-established that users may be willing to give up privacy if provided with the appropriate incentives .
However, preferences regarding when and where one might choose to reveal which aspect of private information to whom and to what extent, has not yet been systematically studied.
In an evaluation of a ubiquitous computing system with five undergraduate students at Berkeley, Lederer et.
Despite the limitations of the study, it is one of the few in the literature that systematically examines permission structures in an awareness application.
In our study of how users define permissions for mySpace, we report on a larger and more diverse sample of 36 users.
Also, our focus is on supporting workplace activities.
STUDY In order to better understand how people might achieve an appropriate balance between awareness and privacy when using mySpace, we asked users to configure permissions for disclosure of their personal information.
We were primarily interested in exploring two aspects: 1. extracting commonality  in how people configure privacy settings in order to inform appropriate default settings for mySpace.
2. examining the impact of disclosing a detailed list of all personal information about the user that the system had access to.
We hypothesized that seeing a formidable list of personal information  would cause users to define more conservative permissions .
We further hypothesized that if the system provided explicit feedback regarding which aspects of a user's context were viewable by whom, users would feel comfortable enough to define permissions that allowed greater sharing.
Participants Participants were recruited by requesting volunteers among permanent employees and summer interns in the research division of a large corporation.
A total of 36 participants took part in the study - 24 permanent employees and 12 interns.
Since mySpace is designed for supporting collaboration in the context of the workplace, the sample is representative of the target audience for such systems.
Summer interns were specifically included to increase the variability of our user sample.
Interns are much younger and less ingrained in the "organizational culture".
Figure 2. e-card showing context with one-click communication links Contextual Information MySpace uses a set of rules and data about the user  to model a user's availability for communication  on a scale of one to four, with 1 representing highly unavailable for communication and 4 representing highly available .
When people are highly available , their image is shown in full color and their image becomes progressively grayer as their availability for communication goes down.
It should be noted that the image itself is fixed and not a dynamically updated video snapshot as has been used in other awareness applications .
The only thing that changes is the degree of fading of the image based on the calculated availability for communication.
Wired and wireless network connectivity is used to estimate location.
For instance, if a person is currently on a virtual private network or dial-up connection, "remotely connected" is displayed below the image.
Or if a person is connected from the access point that the person uses most often, he or she is labeled as "probably in office".
PRIOR WORK Researchers in the CSCW and Ubiquitous Computing fields have been studying collaborative awareness and communication systems for more than a decade.
Examples of such systems include location-tracking systems with Active Badges , Media Spaces , shared calendars  and document repositories .
More recently IM-based systems  are becoming pervasive.
While researchers have recognized the privacy issues involved in most of these systems, providing users with effective means to deal with these issues is often left as an open question or future work.
Some solutions proposed for addressing these privacy issues include distortion of information , context sensitive system adaptation , feedback loops , and mechanisms for access control .
Additionally, the focus is often on global optimization finding the most suitable solution to apply to the system as a whole.
Participants were informed that we were studying mySpace but were not told that we were specifically looking at privacy aspects so as not to bias their perceptions regarding these aspects of the system.
The study lasted about 45 minutes, and each participant was provided with a lunch voucher as a token of appreciation.
Methodology The study itself consisted of three main parts with one of the authors acting as the experimenter.
Part 1 - Demonstrating mySpace: In the first part, participants were familiarized with mySpace by means of a demo/overview highlighting its various features and illustrating the different tasks that could be performed with it.
The same demonstration script was followed for all participants.
Part 2 - Performing tasks: We then asked participants to perform a set of ten tasks , which were selected as representative of typical situations encountered at work.
This allowed participants to acquire first-hand experience with mySpace, and provided a good opportunity for them to discover both the potential benefits and possible privacy intrusions implicit in an awareness application.
We felt that understanding potential benefits of awareness information would provide an incentive for participants to appropriately manage the trade-off between revealing information about themselves, and preserving privacy.
Each task was phrased as a question.
As participants were performing these tasks, the experimenter sat next to them and helped with the interface and interaction as necessary.
Since none of the participants had ever used mySpace before, being able to communicate with the experimenter while performing the tasks was essential to ensure that participants achieved a sufficient level of first-hand experience with the application.
At the end of each task, participants were required to write the answer for the task, which was checked for accuracy by the experimenter before proceeding to the next task.
Descriptions of configuration modes Mode Global Team Description One set of global permissions applies for everyone in the company.
You can define a special group of individuals called "My Team", to which you may add any individuals you desire.
You can then specify one set of permissions for the "My Team" group, and another one for the rest in the company.
You can specify a set of permissions for each individual separately.
Participants were told that permissions could be configured in one of four  modes: Global, Team, Groups, or Individuals.
They were provided with descriptions of each mode , and were asked to choose the mode which best fits their needs and practices.
Once they had selected a mode, participants worked on their own to configure permissions for "when at work" and for "working from home".
In the existing corporate culture, remaining at work after business hours, or working from home is not uncommon.
Participants specified permissions for location, calendar, IM and availability for communication.
For each of these aspects of awareness, participants had to choose one of four levels of awareness corresponding to none, low, medium, or high .
Participants who picked the Global mode were asked to configure a single set of permissions for everyone within the company, while those who picked the Team mode were asked to configure one set of permissions for their team, and another for everyone else in the company.
After specifying the groups, they proceeded to configure permissions for each group.
The Individuals mode was similar to Groups, except with individuals instead of groups .
After configuring permissions, participants completed an online questionnaire which asked questions aimed at gauging inherent attitudes towards privacy and trust.
We selected questions from previous questionnaires on privacy  and trust .
The questionnaire also gathered feedback on participants' opinions regarding privacy aspects of mySpace along with demographic information.
At the end of the study, the experimenter conducted brief, semistructured exit interviews regarding the configuration activity .
Study conditions: As mentioned earlier, we were interested in studying the impact of having the system explicitly disclose the information to which it had access for that user, and of providing a feedback loop confirming what access had been granted to whom.
To measure these effects, we defined three different conditions for the study: * No disclosure, No feedback: In this condition, participants received no explicit disclosure of pieces of personal context to which the system has access, nor were they shown any feedback/confirmation regarding the permissions they defined.
However, there was no feedback/confirmation after configuring permissions.
In addition, after completing each configuration screen, an additional feedback/confirmation screen  showed in tabular form, how the configured permissions would result in different aspects of awareness being shared with various contacts in the list.
The screen provided the option to return to the previous configuration to make changes, if necessary.
Participants were randomly assigned to one of the three conditions .
Of the 36 participants, 12 were assigned to condition 1, 13 to condition 2, and 11 to condition 3.
Only the third part  varied by condition.
List of all pieces of context available to mySpace FINDINGS A majority of participants  chose to configure permissions in the "Groups" mode.
Permissions granted to various groups were significantly different from each other.
Location was the most sensitive aspect of awareness.
However, participants were comfortable disclosing it to colleagues on their team while at work during business hours.
More privacy was desired after business hours - even in a company with a culture of flexible work hours and occasional telecommuting.
Contrary to expectations, explicit upfront disclosure of all pieces of personal context to which the system has access, did not seem to induce more privacypreserving settings.
Preference for groups: There was a strong preference for managing permissions at the group level with 25 of the 36 participants choosing to configure permissions using the Groups mode.
Three of the nine who picked Team indicated that in actual use they would have picked Groups.
Their choice of Team mode was driven by the fact that it involved less time and effort to complete the study .
Participant feedback indicates that the preference for Groups was driven primarily by the fact that it provides enough flexibility for controlling access to personal information, without requiring too much burden to set up and configure.
Participants indicated that Global and Team modes weren't flexible enough, while Individuals mode required configuring more details than necessary.
They also mentioned that, if necessary, a group with only one individual could be created.
Many of those who chose Groups indicated that they organized their IM contact list into groups as well.
However, even participants who did not group their IM contacts selected Groups mode of configuration because of the greater sensitivity of the information involved in mySpace.
Majority  of the 25 participants who chose Groups created 4 groups.
The rest specified between 2 to 5 groups.
The average number of groups specified was 4.
We believe that in actual use, without the burden of having to specify all groups at once, the number of groups created would probably be slightly higher than in the study.
We found a lot of commonality among group definitions.
Typically, specified groups exhibited a concentric circle pattern with less and less awareness being shared as one moved away from the center.
In some cases the center was "family" and in others it was "team".
To compare user permissions across groups, group labels created by participants were independently coded by the two authors into the following categories: team, family, friends, collaborators/department, managers, others, and rest of the employees in the company.
In most cases, the coding was quite straightforward as participants used labels such as "My Team", or "Family Members".
In some cases, knowledge of the company was used to appropriately classify labels such as "Social Computing Group", or "Rendezvous Project".
For participants who did not explicitly create a group for the rest of the employees in the company , we added this group for comparison purposes.
In these cases, all permissions for the added Rest group were set to "none" .
Lastly, participants who picked the Global mode were treated as having only one group, i.e.
After this reorganization, we ended up with a mapping of all 36 participants in Groups mode with group labels coded as described earlier.
The findings that follow are based on analysis of this data.
However, with calendar entries, the sensitivity is associated with the location and time of the calendar entry .
As a result, findings for calendar permissions are somewhat meaningless and have been excluded from the analyses.
As a final clarification, it should be mentioned that mySpace currently has no knowledge of a user's exact location within the home .
Participants who inquired about this aspect were asked to ignore the current limitations of the system when configuring location permissions for the home.
Permissions between groups: We found many statistically significant differences in the permissions granted to various groups.
In particular, regardless of time and place, the group Rest was granted significantly lower levels of sharing when compared to other groups.
Mean sharing for all three aspects of awareness ranged between 1  to 2 .
Not surprisingly, family received high levels of sharing regardless of place or time with means ranging between 3  and 4  for all aspects.
Most interestingly, during business hours the Team group  was granted the same levels of sharing as family  .
Paired-samples t-tests for comparison of mean permissions for family and team were not statistically significant.
The only exception was location information when working from home.
Compared to the corresponding permissions for business hours, all groups  received lower sharing during non-business hours - regardless of the user's location.
As can be seen in Figures 5 and 6, sharing for team members, collaborators, and managers decreased significantly during non-business hours.
Identical patterns were seen for the other aspects of awareness.
Permissions for work and home: Unlike time, place of work  did not have a big impact on levels of sharing .
Comparison of means for permissions granted to groups for availability awareness at home than others .
In our study, location seemed to be the most sensitive, while IM seemed to be the least sensitive.
This is evident from relatively large differences in permissions for location based on both time and place .
Additionally, participants were a lot more reluctant to disclose details of their location at home, whether during or after business hours.
Permissions for IM, on the other hand, remain constant and at high levels of sharing.
Effect of system disclosure and feedback: Contrary to our hypothesis, disclosing a detailed list of all pieces of personal context to which the awareness system had access did not lead to more privacy-conservative settings.
A t-test between Condition 1  and Condition 2  revealed no statistically significant differences between permissions in most cases.
Comparison of means for permissions granted to groups for location during business hours nearing statistical significance  for higher sharing in condition 2.
As stated earlier, not all participants created the same number of groups.
For instance, while almost every participant had a "team" group, only six created a "manager" group.
It is likely that a larger sample size would have led to statistically significant differences for these factors.
We had expected that permissions would move towards greater awareness sharing in Condition 3  than in Condition 2.
However, we found no significant differences.
This could be because the feedback was provided after participants configured permissions.
Real-time feedback with a visual component  may have achieved a more significant impact.
Inherent Privacy Preferences: Based on answers to the privacy and trust scale questions, we calculated a privacy index for each participant.
The scaled responses to each question were normalized on a 0-1 scale and averaged to yield a privacy index for each participant.
The range of variability among our participants regarding inherent privacy and trust attitudes was not very wide.
Thus all of our participants can be considered "privacy pragmatists"  .
There were no significant differences in permissions based on the privacy index.
Nor was there any significant impact due to organizational culture.
We looked for differences between permanent employees or summer interns, and again found nothing of interest except that summer interns tended to share less availability information with managers when at work after business hours .
Finally, we did not detect any major effects based on gender or nationality.
Comparison of means for permissions granted to groups for location during non-business hours IMPLICATIONS FOR DESIGN Our findings provide strong support for providing grouping functionality in awareness systems for more than contact list organization.
Defining permissions at group level appears to provide the flexibility needed to appropriately manage the balance between awareness and privacy, without undue burden.
Configuration burden could be further reduced by providing templates of settings for commonly used groups such as Team, Collaborators, or Family.
Defaults for templates could be based on a quick user study of the target population .
Creating defaults that are an acceptable starting point for most individuals avoid the pitfall of requiring too much configuration .
Since majority of users rarely modify default settings, getting defaults right ensures a balanced privacy-awareness setting from the outset.
Even if only 7580% of the defaults are appropriately set, the user is perhaps more likely to fine-tune the rest.
Setting defaults to broadcast more awareness information than necessary can undermine individual privacy, and may lead to underutilization  of the system.
On the other hand, creating defaults with higher privacy settings than required could undermine the awareness benefits of the system.
Many participants expressed the desire to have the ability to copy settings from another group, and make changes to that copy.
This desire also seems to reflect the underlying concentric circle pattern mentioned in the findings.
Providing a global template that groups can inherit from, or allowing the functionality to copy the settings from a pre-existing group also seem like useful solutions for reducing the configuration burden without forfeiting flexibility.
Further, automatic  adjustment of settings to accommodate differences for business and non-business hours could also help.
While user sensitivity to room-level location being broadcast from the home is not surprising, system builders of location-aware systems will be heartened that during working hours users are not averse to sharing their location with col-
If designers provide greater user control over more sensitive aspects of awareness, users may feel comfortable enough to appropriately share such information via the system.
There is also a case to be made for not excluding family and friends from consideration even when building systems primarily designed to support the workplace.
Apart from the obvious case of employees having family and friends working in the same company, there also seems to be a general desire to have a small extension of "home" into daily work life by allowing family and friends to have some access to oneself even when at work.
Of all participants who chose Groups mode of configuration, more than 50%  chose to create a group for family, while more than 60%  chose to create a group for friends.
The question of how exactly non-organizational personnel can be incorporated in a workplace system is one open to further research.
Disclosing a detailed list of all pieces of personal context collected by the system does not seem to scare users into choosing more privacy-conservative settings.
In fact, it appears as if such a disclosure may act as a trust-builder, reassuring users to reveal more information to the colleagues on their team .
Our table-based feedback/confirmation interface designed for alleviating user privacy concerns, seems not to have been effective enough.
A feedback mechanism that operates concurrently with the configuration activity, and provides a quick visual overview of which aspects of awareness are made available by the system to whom, seems worth exploring.
Finally, the willingness of participants to disclose relatively higher levels of information about their IM activities can be leveraged by embedding IM within other systems.
An example is disclosing IM status on a person's page in the directory.
Even today, in many organizations the use of IM is either completely prohibited, or severely restricted.
Our findings suggest that organizations may wish to re-evaluate whether they are likely to benefit by promoting an organizational culture in which use of IM is encouraged.
DISCUSSION Understanding how users achieve an effective balance between awareness and privacy involves studying how they configure permissions for an awareness system initially, as well as how these settings change over time.
In this study, our aim was to understand how best to help users with the initial configuration task.
The configuration of permissions in our study is similar to the personalization of default settings when installing a piece of software for the first time.
As noted earlier, one of the goals of the study was to understand how to reduce this burden by getting the defaults right.
In future work, we would like to examine the types and the frequency of changes to the initial settings during an extended pilot study.
Such a study would also provide an opportunity to verify the effectiveness of various interface mechanisms proposed in the previous section.
Reciprocity is often as an important privacy control feature in a media space .
However, the concept of reciprocity was not applicable in our study since the user explicitly allowed a colleague access to his or her information.
These permissions were granted without regard to the permissions that colleague had granted the user .
Although findings presented in the paper are within the context of mySpace, it should be noted that mySpace is a portal that provides unified access to various applications such as email, calendar, and IM by utilizing their APIs .
It is relatively straightforward to extend mySpace to include information from other applications that provide context information .
Also, mySpace presents the same aspects of awareness 
As a result, we believe that the findings are applicable beyond mySpace and could shed light on user preferences for privacy settings in other awareness systems operating within a corporate work setting with similar components .
CONCLUSION A study of how users define permissions for sharing various aspects of awareness about themselves reveals a strong preference for managing privacy by configuring permissions at group level.
This suggests that grouping provides a convenient balance between privacy control and the burden of configuration.
Empowering users to control how and when aspects of their context are shared with whom, can enable them to find more suitable points of balance between awareness and privacy.
This is evident from the willingness of participants to provide high levels of awareness to team members at work during business hours.
Increased system transparency through upfront disclosure of pieces of personal context to which a system has access seems to act as a trust builder.
Appropriate feedback mechanisms and interfaces need to be explored to further help users visualize their permission settings.
