Our goal is to enhance navigation in mobile interfaces with quick command gestures that do not make use of explicit mode-switching actions.
TilTouch gestures extend the vocabulary of navigation interfaces by combining motion tilt with directional touch.
We consider sixteen directional TilTouch gestures that rely on tilt and touch movements along the four main compass directions.
An experiment explores their effectiveness for both one-handed and two-handed use.
Results identify the best combinations of TilTouch gestures in terms of performance, motor coordination, and user preferences.
We can distinguish between two main forms of touch gestures for activating commands in mobile interfaces: free-form gestures, such as alphabetical ones , and directional marks inspired by marking menus .
According to Bragdon et al.
Tilt input has been used for navigation in sequential lists, twodimensional spaces, and menus containing few items, typically three to four .
They found that error rates are never below 5% on average, even for the smallest sets  that they considered, and increases fast with the size of the set.
Other projects considered more elaborated motion gestures like DoubleFlip  and JerkTilt gestures .
In the newest mobile devices, tilting automatically adjusts the view orientation of a device to portrait or landscape to fit its physical orientation .
The Sensor Synaesthesia design space  combines tilt and touch to create richer interaction sequences.
Specifically, it proposes tilt and touch interactions for discrete or continuous commands, however touch remains at a fixed screen location.
The work also only reports on subjective feedback from an informal user evaluation.
Thus, combined tilt and touch has never been studied before through a formal experiment.
Motion sensors such as accelerometers and gyroscopes offer a new space for the design of mobile interaction techniques that combine touch and tilt.
Several previous approaches  have studied motion-based gestures, but they depend on recognizers of rather exaggerated movements or explicit modeswitching techniques.
We address this limitation by combing the two modalities, touch and tilt, as part of a single TilTouch gesture.
TilTouch gestures do not interfere with simple touch and tilt actions.
Thus, users can activate them within the flow of common navigation tasks without having to perform additional actions to switch between modes.
Our approach lies within the Sensor Synaesthesia design space , but we focus on directional drags rather than static touch.
We empirically study the effectiveness of TilTouch gestures in terms of both user performance and preferences.
We also investigate the extent to which users can control tilt and touch as integral input dimensions .
We study the use of the gestures for both one and two hands as each use is subject to different symmetries and requires the coordination of different limbs.
We show that the same set of TilTouch gestures can be effective for both one- and two-handed use.
Theophanis Tsandilas, Caroline Appert, Anastasia Bezerianos, and David Bonnet.
Coordination of Tilt and Touch in One- and Two-Handed Use.
This is the author version of the work.
It is posted here by permission of ACM for your personal use.
Our goal is to facilitate command invocation while users perform navigation tasks.
By combining drags and tilts, we can enhance the number of available gestures but also avoid the use of explicit mode-switching.
To that end, we explored how a TilTouch gesture should be defined such that it does not interfere with existing navigation gestures.
We conducted a preliminary study to determine the angular range of unintentional tilts that occur during common drag and swipe actions.
10 participants interacted with three representative mobile interfaces: a large 2D view, a vertical list of 50 items, and a horizontally aligned view of five screens.
We analyzed a total of 3935 events of navigation or directional-drag gestures and defined unintentional relative tilt angles to be in the range of  degrees, where tilts are measured relatively to the initial orientation of the phone when the finger starts touching the screen.
This range corresponds to less than 0.2% of false positives and does not hinder the activation of intentional TilTouch gestures.
We also set the minimum drag distance for activating a gesture to 7 mm.
The command associated with this combination is executed after lifting the finger.
Our goal is to keep the shape of gestures as simple as possible while providing a reasonable number of accessible commands.
Therefore, we only consider the simplest touch marks and tilt angles along the four cardinal directions: N orth, South, East, and West.
Combining such simple gestures along the touch and tilt modality results in a total of 16 commands.
Figure 1 illustrates an example where the user performs an East, East gesture.
TilTouch gestures are especially useful as quick triggers of commands, e.g., copy-paste, make a call, and add a bookmark on a map.
The technique requires the sequential or parallel control of two input modalities.
We envision that novice users will start discovering the gestures by controlling tilt and touch in sequence.
However, we expect that with practice, expert users will be able to internalize a single action and use the two input channels in parallel, combining the two gestures into a single interaction chunk .
As other directional gestures, TilTouch gestures have drawbacks: drags are limited near screen edges, and screen visibility is reduced both by the finger and the tilt.
Yet, our low threshold value of relative tilts  minimizes this problem.
An experimental task for directional-tilt gestures.
2, instructions about the target direction of the tilt and drag movements are constantly displayed on the screen.
The drag direction is indicated with a flock of arrows while the tilt direction is shown with a trapezoid frame that represents the view of the device in perspective.
To assess the overhead due to selecting a given tilt direction, we tested two types of gestures: Free Tilt.
Participants were asked to perform a directional drag according to a suggested direction in conjunction with a tilt in any tilt direction.
No tilt direction was indicated.
Participants were asked to perform both a directional drag and a directional tilt according to a suggested combination of TilTouch directions.
We tested all the 16 possible settings of combined cardinal directions, e.g., tilting to the N orth and dragging to the West.
We also tested the two typical mobile uses: One hand.
Participants completed the tasks with their right hand and used their thumb to touch the screen.
The tilt and the drag movement were both performed by the same hand.
Participants hold the device with their left hand but used the index finger of their right hand to touch the screen.
The tilt movement was performed by the left hand while the drag movement was performed by the right hand.
We conducted a lab study where participants performed TilTouch gestures in conjunction with regular drags.
Our goals were to find:  which TilTouch gestures are more effective;  whether the same gestures are appropriate for both single and two-handed use; and  whether users can control the two input modalities in parallel.
We followed a mixed full-factorial design, with mobile use being a between-participants factor, and the remaining variables as within-participants factors.
We analyzed 6144 tasks: 2 mobile uses x 12 participants x 2 types of gestures x 8 blocks x 4 drag directions x 4 tilt directions In addition to these tasks, each participant completed 24 practice tasks for each type of gestures.
The tasks were grouped into eight blocks of 16 tasks  presented in a random order.
As no tilt direction is enforced for free tilt gestures, each participant performed four replications of each drag direction in each block.
The experimental task consisted of two sub-tasks: Pre-task .
First, the user drags a ring of 160pixel diameter over another 40-pixel target ring.
The direction of this sliding movement randomly varied circularly around the center of the screen.
The pre-task represents a usual drag navigation task that interlaces with TilTouch gestures.
Then, the user completes the main task by performing a TilTouch gesture.
They were asked to interact in a standing position and always use their preferred hand.
After the end of the session, participants answered a post-study questionnaire.
They were asked to evaluate each of the 16 combinations of tilt and touch directions by using a 5-level Likert scale.
The whole procedure lasted 30 to 40 minutes.
We measured the Task Time to complete the main task, which includes the Reaction Time to prepare a gesture and the Gesture Time to execute it.
We considered two errors: accidental activations of TilTouch gestures during the first subtask , and activations of the wrong direction, either tilt or drag .
In both cases, the user had to restart.
One participant  almost always chose an East tilt.
A second  always tilted South, while a third  always tilted N orth.
Three other participants  used a N orth tilt for their South drags.
As shown in Figure 3, the West direction was the fastest and the South direction was the worst.
We found no significant interaction between dragging direction and conditions .
Differences were consistent for both one hand and two hands.
Pairwise comparisons with Bonferroni's correction showed a significant difference between West and South  and between East and South .
Differences were mostly due to reaction times.
Our interpretation is that planning the tilt for the South drag direction is possibly harder.
For Directional Tilt, we did not observe any effect of drag  or tilt direction  on Task Time.
Figure 4 shows the detailed results for the two mobile uses.
By inspecting both task times and error rates, we see that certain tilt and drag combinations were particularly problematic: N orth, West for both conditions, and N orth, South , South, East , West, East , South, N orth and West, N orth for one hand.
In corroboration with observations on free-tilt gestures, combinations with same tilt and drag directions had the best performance.
This was especially true for one-handed use.
Overall, N orth tilts were more compatible with N orth and East drags, while South tilts were with South and West drags.
Effect of Mobile Use and Type of Gesture.
The difference for the overall Gesture Time was not significant between the two mobile uses .
However, taking a closer look reveals that participants had a higher Reaction Time  in a two-hand use.
This indicates a higher amount of planning to coordinate control.
We have studied combined touch and tilt gestures for oneand two-handed interaction with mobile phones.
Our findings suggest that most users can control the two input modalities in parallel  under both mobile uses.
We observed that not all combinations of tilt+touch are effective.
TilTouch gestures along the same direction result in lower error rates, are more intuitive, and are highly preferred by users.
East tilts were highly ranked.
Finally, we found that N orth tilts were more compatible with N orth and East drags, while South tilts with South and West drags.
These results are consistent between one- and two-handed use.
This is an important finding suggesting that designers can use the same set of usable TilTouch gestures for both hand configurations.
Future work needs to explore appropriate visual guides that assist in the discovery and effective use of such gestures.
West tilts generally received low ratings for two hands as opposed to East tilts, which were highly ranked.
Participants gave high ratings to gestures with the same tilt and drag direction.
Surprisingly, N orth, South was highly rated under one-hand use despite its poor performance.
Overall, participants considered opposite tilt and drag directions easy to perform.
We analyzed the degree of parallelism of the tilt and touch input channels.
To that end, we plotted the collected TilTouch gestures in the normalized tilt+touch space shown in Figure 5 .
The path length of a TilTouch gesture exhibiting the highest degree of parallelism  is 2 while a TilTouch gesture with no parallel control has a length of 2.
By normalizing the path length of each TilTouch gesture, we obtain the Separability measure  : the less parallel the control over the two input channels the higher the value of Separability.
Figure 5 shows its distribution across participants for directional tilts.
Its mean value ranged from .29  to .94 , who executed the tilt and the drag gesture always in sequence.
We found a positive correlation between mean Separability and mean GestureTime .
Pairwise comparisons with Bonferroni's correction showed that West drags resulted in significantly more parallel movements than North drags .
Finally, we observed low separability values for tilts and drags of the same direction for both conditions.
