Methods to support local search typically extract locations from queries and documents , but do not model local preferences based on a user's primary location.
Other work has focused on location-wise personalization based on URL access patterns , but has not leveraged local knowledge.
A better understanding of similarities and differences in local / non-local interests is lacking and necessary.
In this paper, we present a log study targeting two problems:  understand similarities and differences in local interests, and  study differences in the real-world resources that locals select.
We show that locals and nonlocals have different interests about the same location, and that if we control for venue type  locals make better decisions.
These findings can inform the use of local knowledge for search support, including personalization.
When searching for destinations and activities, the interests and knowledge of locals and non-locals may vary.
In this paper, we compare and contrast the search-related interests of these two groups, and when they share a common interest , we analyze the quality of the venues they intend to visit.
We find differences in interests depending on local knowledge, and that locals generally select higher-quality venues than non-locals.
These findings have implications for search and recommendation systems that can personalize results based on local knowledge and leverage that knowledge to benefit non-locals.
A national US survey showed that people spend over two hours per day in everyday places in their vicinity, including restaurants, malls, and health clubs , affording ample opportunity to gain experiences that are useful in identifying candidate places, and distinguishing between places .
Since studies have shown that one quarter of Web search queries have local intent , people's local experiences may bring significant benefit to others searching for local information or afford search personalization based on search engine estimates of a user's local know-how.
We use the term local knowledge to describe an understanding of a particular location gained through experience with it.
Despite the potential benefit of local knowledge to nonlocals, it may be tacit and undocumented, and therefore challenging to derive practical value from.
Large-scale Web logs gathered by search engine companies contain the search and browsing behavior of millions of users, including locals, and can implicitly reveal aspects of their local knowledge that are not documented online.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
There has been research on capturing and leveraging local knowledge.
Locals focused on daily life activities and newlyblooming neighborhoods whereas non-locals focused on tourist destinations and activities.
The authors also present promising early findings from using collaborative filtering to generate recommendations via map co-occurrence.
The authors identified the heuristics people use when deciding which place information to share, how these findings relate to the design of local knowledge sharing systems, and to identify new uses of place information.
The information retrieval community has used using geographic criteria to retrieve documents .
Rather than mining locations and distances from Web page or query content, Bennett et al.
They then personalized search result rankings based on both model properties and how typical the user's location is for each search result.
There has also been work on detecting and using locations.
Mummidi and Krumm  leveraged users' map annotations to discover geographic points of interest.
The primary source of data in this study is a proprietary data set comprising two months of anonymized logs  of URLs visited by users who consented to provide interaction data through a Web browser add-on widely distributed by the Microsoft Bing search engine.
The logs comprised billions of queries and URL visits.
We used the February data to identify locals , and the March data to study their search behavior.
The data include a random unique user identifier, the date and time, and the URL of the Web page visited.
Further, each user's IP address is resolved into geographic l ocation information  and recorded.
All log entries resolving to the same town or city were assigned the same latitude and longitude coordinates.
To remove variability caused by cultural and linguistic variation in search behavior, we only include log entries from the English-speaking United States locale.
Local actions were identified as queries pertaining to the location of interest and their associated SERP clicks.
A user's current location is less important in our analysis than their primary location.
By using February data to identify locals, and the March data to compare local/nonlocal interests we allow for cases of travel in our analysis.
To measure the similarities and differences in interest between locals and non-locals, we computed ranked lists of URLs for each of the locations based on URL popularity with locals and non-locals.
To understand the nature of the URLs selected, one of the authors also manually assigned topic labels  to the URLs for a randomly selected set of 50 locations.
The labeling scheme was iteratively refined as more URLs were encountered, and URLs re-labeled as necessary.
Table 1 shows the top 10 URL domains  visited by locals and non-locals with interest in Seattle, WA.
Table 1 shows that Seattle locals were primarily interested in classifieds, news and traffic reports, transit, utilities, and  hospitals and education .
Non-locals were interested in classifieds, but also general information, news, travel, and tourism.
This extends prior work , which showed similar differences in map labels assigned by NYC locals and non-locals, but did not study search interests.
Despite some differences, there were also common interests that were popular with both locals and non-locals, but since that interest did not center on a single URL, it is not represented in Table 1.
For each user in the February 2011 subset of our data, we computed a distribution of locations across all URL visits.
To improve the reliability of the location distributions, we restricted our analysis to users with 100 or more URL visits over at least 14 days in the one-month period.
Users for whom 100% of their page visits came from a single location were regarded as locals.
Using this methodology, we extracted 4.5 million users who were local to a single location .
We identified locals for over 14,500 locations from all over the United States, comprising large cities , NY and small cities .
Note that the non-locals for a given location were by definition locals in other locations.
We extend previous work in a number of ways:  we explore similarities and differences in search-related interests of locals and non-locals;  we examine differences in the quality of the venues visited by locals and non-locals; and  we present design implications for search and recommendation systems based on automatically inferring degrees of knowledge with respect to a location of interest.
These commonalities prompted us to look more at how we identified non-locals.
Although Table 1 shows local / non-local differences, there are still popular non-local URLs that we would expect to only see locals visit .
One reason for this is our local / non-local labeling method: people only need to be in a different city to count as nonlocals; we do not consider the distance from the location in our definition of non-local .
To better account for distance from the originating city, we studied the interests of non-locals in two regions:  those at least 1000 kilometers  from Seattle , and  those at least 3000 km away .
Table 2 shows that the top URLs visited by non-locals varies with distance from location: 1000 km non-locals wanted activities, buses/cruises, and healthcare facilities; 3000 km non-locals wanted general information, flights, tourism, and information related to life changes .
From these findings it appears that when we hold location constant but vary the user group searching for that location, there are quite significant differences in their local interests, especially as the distance from the location increases.
We applied the same 1000/3000 km thresholds to the other 49 US cities in our study  and saw similar differences in local/non-local interests to those observed for Seattle.
Although locals and non-locals may have different interests when searching for a location, as noted earlier there are common interests in topics such as dining out.
Extract sessions from the March 2011 log data described earlier using an approach similar to .
Browse sessions begin with a user opening the Web browser window, and end with an inactivity timeout of 30 or more minutes.
Find instances of users making restaurant reservations.
To do this we automatically search sessions for evidence of the OpenTable  reservation site URL, which contain a distinct URL pattern for reservations.
Automatically classify URLs in a session as belonging to the user's primary location  using a proprietary classifier with features such as addresses in page content, addresses in queries leading to SERP clicks on those pages, etc.
Given the occurrence of a reservation in a session and at least one local URL preceding the reservation, we assume that the most proximal prior local URL to the reservation URL was a restaurant of interest, and that the -tuple represents an RVI2.
Visual inspection of the sessions showed that this method correctly identified restaurants in most cases.
URLs incorrectly labeled with this approach included were for review sites, theatres, hotels, resorts/spas, wineries, and chocolatiers.
Those erroneous RVIs were excluded.
Using the expert identification method described in the previous subsection we identified instances of locals and nonlocals with RVIs for the same location.
To compare the quality of restaurants that locals and non-locals reserved, we searched the following five popular restaurant review sites for the restaurant and the location of interest: OpenTable, Urbanspoon , Yahoo!
Local , TripAdvisor , and Yelp .
For each restaurant, we averaged ratings across all sites with reviews of it and obtained a final rating from 1 to 5.
In total, there were 1,267 RVI instances at 984 distinct restaurants, each with an aggregate quality rating.
Search and recommendation systems could personalize based on whether a user is a local, perhaps by applying a ranking algorithm giving differential weight to tourist sites.
Since we also found differences in users' interests per their distance from the target location, search systems could also leverage distance between a user's primary  location and the target as a ranking feature or as a trigger for showing local event information or social recommendations .
Leveraging local knowledge: The lower quality ratings for restaurants non-locals intend to visit underscore the need for better support for non-locals' selection of local venues and activities.
To help, we could highlight local favorites to non-locals directly on SERPs for local queries or leverage the search behavior of locals mined from log data to improve the quality of the results returned for local queries.
Table 3 shows that there are differences in the ratings assigned to restaurants visited by locals and non-locals.
Unpaired t-tests  between the average ratings assigned to the places that locals and non-locals visit revealed that the differences were significant =2.33, p=0.02.
Although the rating differences may appear small, we average over reviews from different sites to obtain a wide range of opinions.
We believe that the trend in the findings  is noteworthy.
To better understand the nature of differences in the restaurants locals and non-locals visited, we studied additional features.
We randomly selected a set of 125 restaurants from Seattle and ten other US cities, all of which had local and non-local restaurant visits, and for each restaurant we visited OpenTable to obtain price level , cuisine, and whether the restaurant was in a hotel .
Our findings show that non-locals selected slightly cheaper restaurants --although not significantly so =1783, p=0.32--and exhibited different cuisine preferences .
One explanation for locals intending to visit higher-rated restaurants might be that it is mainly locals who are providing the ratings, and reflecting their own experiences with the restaurants.
However, from examining the review sites used in our analysis, we see that ratings are provided by a broad mixture of locals and non-locals.
The differences may in part relate to traveling users  being more constrained in their activities.
However, we did not observe differences between our local and non-local groups in the frequency with which group members visited restaurants in hotels.
Beyond technological augmentations, there are also important social implications from leveraging local knowledge that must be considered.
For example, directing non-locals to popular local attractions may turn local gems into tourist hotspots, detracting from their quality.
Qualitative data on local interests and knowledge are also needed to complement the quantitative analysis described in this paper.
In future work we will explore local knowledge in more detail, implement local-knowledge-based search personalization and develop search support that uses locals' search behavior to benefit non-locals, and evaluate our system enhancements via user studies and Web-scale deployments.
We showed that there were commonalities and differences in interests between locals and non-locals, and that these differences were more pronounced when we included distance.
Locals selected better quality restaurants, and there were indications of differences in price and cuisine preferences between locals and non-locals.
The implications of these findings fall into two main areas:
