We investigate how people adapt their strategy for interleaving multiple concurrent tasks to varying objectives.
A study was conducted in which participants drove a simulated vehicle and occasionally dialed a telephone number on a mobile phone.
Experimental instructions and feedback encouraged participants to focus on either driving or dialing.
Results show that participants adapted their task interleaving strategies to meet the required task objective, but in a manner that was nonetheless intricately shaped by internal psychological constraints.
In particular, participants tended to steer in between dialing chunks of digits even when extreme vehicle drift implied that more reactive strategies would have generated better lane keeping.
To better understand why drivers interleaved tasks at chunk boundaries, a modeling analysis was conducted to derive performance predictions for a range of dialing strategies.
The analysis supported the idea that interleaving at chunk boundaries efficiently traded the time given up to dialing with the maintenance of a central lane position.
We discuss the implications of this work in terms of contributions to understanding how cognitive constraints shape strategy adaptations in dynamic multitask environments.
As mobile devices become ever entwined in supporting our daily activities, it is perhaps inevitable that these devices will be `along for the ride' with the potential to distract the driver.
Previous research has consistently demonstrated that interacting with a secondary in-car device can impair performance and increase the risk of a crash .
These effects can be attributed to the driver having to sequentially interleave attention between tasks over time .
One issue that has not been given sufficient attention is that people can potentially adopt different strategies for interleaving attention between driving and a secondary incar task.
Consider for a moment the classic example of manually dialing a telephone number while driving .
Here, the driver needs to look away from the road in order to dial and can choose to dial more or fewer digits at a time before looking back at the road.
Presumably the choice of interleaving strategy will affect performance and impact safety .
At the same time there can be tight constraints imposed by prior knowledge and experience of how to perform a routine procedural task  that limit the range of available strategies.
Telephone numbers for instance conform to specific representational conventions, such as the 3-3-4 grouping of digits common across the US.
So for the dialing-while-driving example, the dialing task imposes internal psychological constraints that might limit the space of interleaving strategies that a driver might consider adopting.
Given such limitations on strategic variability, we would expect an analysis of the driver's task objective to be critical to determining their behavior.
The question of how objectives shape multitasking strategies is an important one for Human-Computer Interaction research given the field's promotion of mobile technologies: A better understanding will greatly facilitate the design, prototyping, and evaluation of such technologies in the context of how people actually use them in dynamic multitask contexts.
In this paper, we investigate how people adapt their strategy for interleaving multiple concurrent tasks to different objectives.
We consider objectives in this context to be influenced by many factors--for instance, desired speed of performance or perceptions of risk.
A study is described in which participants completed a dialing task while driving a simulated vehicle.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
The idea of the focus-on-driving condition was to capture something of the intent, if not the specific details, of public information campaigns aimed at improving safer driving behaviors.
The focus on dialing condition acted as a control.
We focus on the subtle adaptations of multitasking strategy to objective--in particular, how task interleaving is guided by the combination of psychological constraints on the retrieval of chunks associated with the dialing task while also being shaped by the desire to counter extreme vehicle drift.
A computational modeling analysis is presented to better understand why drivers might favor a strategy that interleaves attentional resources at chunk boundaries over alternative strategies.
The analysis suggests strategies are selected for efficiency, trading-off the amount of time allocated to dialing with the maintenance of a central lane position.
These additional glances carried the benefit of improving lane keeping performance.
In contrast, when participants gave greater priority to completing the secondary task, they did not invest the time in making additional glances back to the road, which necessarily brought about less stable lane keeping performance.
These findings suggest that drivers can effectively adapt their strategy to experimental task demands.
A weakness of Horrey et al.
It seems unlikely that lane keeping performance would have declined sufficiently enough during this period of time for there to be a need for the driver to repeatedly interleave attention between tasks.
The study reported here will further investigate how drivers adapt their strategy to varying objective while completing a secondary phone dialing task that affords multiple opportunities for attention to be interleaved between tasks.
One prominent idea for how people manage multiple tasks is that they utilize subtask boundaries as a cue to switch from one task to another .
The idea that task interleaving is constrained to subtask boundaries in the context of driving has been most clearly articulated in a theory put forward by Salvucci .
The theory assumes that task processing is controlled by a general executive, which sequentially passes subtasks through a central queuing mechanism.
In this way, the completion of a subtask is seen as providing an opportunity to interleave resources between tasks with minimal disruption to performance and reduced cognitive load.
Indeed, a recent study has shown that workload decreases at subtask boundaries .
Salvucci's  theory of task interleaving suggests that the structure of routine interactive skill plays a decisive role in shaping dual-task strategy, in that people should tend to shift attention between tasks on the completion of subtasks.
Empirical data to support Salvucci's account come from an experiment where participants were required to enter a familiar telephone number while driving.
The structural representation of the secondary dialing task followed the standard North American convention .
In dual-task conditions, significantly elevated delays between successive keypresses were found between digits at group boundaries in the sequence .
Presumably, lane keeping performance improved during these prolonged delays between the completion of one subtask and the commencement of the next, but data supporting this conjecture are lacking.
The study reported here will address this issue by explicitly considering how lane keeping performance changes during the completion of the dialing task.
It is generally understood that when people perform more than one task at a time, constraints on the human cognitive architecture  limit the extent to which multiple tasks can be performed in parallel.
For instance, drivers might need to shift their attention away from the road to interact with a visually demanding secondary in-car device.
This constraint on the field of effective vision forces the driver to make choices about which task to focus on at any moment; essentially, attention must be sequentially interleaved between tasks over time.
How these basic task processes are ordered permits a range of multitasking strategies.
Various strategies were evaluated that dialed more or fewer digits at a time and gave more or less time to steering control.
Analyses of this strategy space revealed a classic speed-accuracy trade-off in performance, where dialing all of the digits in quick succession without taking the time to check on steering control allowed the dialing task to be completed quickly but with significant disruption to steering.
In contrast, more frequent task interleaving brought about safer driving performance  but at the cost of increasing the total time required to complete the secondary task.
A central assumption of Brumby et al.
Recent studies  demonstrating that drivers are capable of prioritizing tasks give support to this idea.
In one study, Horrey et al.
Experimental instructions and feedback were manipulated to encourage participants to prioritize one task or another.
In this paper we extend the analysis of a recent experiment  that investigated multitasking behavior in the context of driving.
Participants in the study dialed a telephone number while driving a simulated vehicle.
The study aimed to determine the consequences of varying the relative priority of performing each task for how these tasks were interleaved.
While the original study focused only on lane keeping and total dialing time, here we examine the data at the level of individual keypress intervals and how lane keeping changed between keypresses.
We also present a new computational modeling analysis that explores the nature of the behavior at the foundation of these results.
For driving, participants were first given a practice session to allow them to become familiar with the simulator.
They then drove at two speeds, either a slow speed of 35 mph or a fast speed of 55 mph, where speed was always controlled by the simulator and held at a constant value.
For each speed, participants completed two blocks of five trials, with 10 seconds of driving per trial.
After each trial, participants received feedback as the root-mean-squared error  lateral deviation of the car from lane center over the 10second trial period.
Also, before the next trial would begin, participants were required to center the vehicle within +/0.30 m of lane center, which ensured that each trial began with the vehicle at a reasonably centered lane position.
As for dialing, the average lateral deviation over a block of five trials was shown after the completion of each block.
In the original study , eight experienced drivers  participated in a one-hour experiment.
The driving task was conducted in a fixed-base driving simulator with a three-lane highway driving environment.
Drivers navigated the center lane of the highway and construction cones on each side of the lane were used to discourage movement to another lane.
The driver's vehicle was the only vehicle in this environment.
The actual driving task required participants to steer the vehicle down the road while the simulator maintained a constant speed for the driver's vehicle ; the constant-speed paradigm was used so that drivers did not slow down as a response to distraction, simplifying the analysis to one of lateral deviation from lane center .
While driving, participants occasionally dialed a 10-digit phone number on a real cellular telephone  mounted on a hands-free bracket on the vehicle's center console.
All keypresses on the phone were recorded and time-stamped through the simulation software.
The dialing sequence involved pressing a "power-on" key, followed by the same 10-digit number given in the North American format , followed by a "send" key to terminate the dialing task.
Participants learned the phone number and practiced dialing the number on the phone in a 5-minute practice session that preceded data collection.
In the dual-task conditions, the experiment followed a 2x2 within-subjects design with variables of task priority  and driving speed .
To manipulate task priority, participants were instructed to focus on completing the dialing task as quickly as possible  or to focus on keeping the car as close as possible to lane center .
A trial began when the participant first pressed a key on the phone, and ended when the "send" key was pressed to terminate the dialing task.
After the trial, participants received feedback only for the focused performance variable--that is, dialing-time feedback for the focus-on-dialing condition, and lateraldeviation feedback for the focus-on-steering condition.
In total, each participant completed 80 dual-task trials: 5 trials x 4 blocks x 2 task-priority conditions x 2 driving-speed conditions.
It should be noted that, for both the dual-task and singletask conditions, the frequent presentation of feedback on performance was critical to the experiment: It encouraged participants to conform to the instruction to focus on one task or the other, and also to try to better their own `score' through the duration of the experiment.
In addition, participants were discouraged from making errors on the dialing task: If a participant made a dialing error, they had to locate and delete the incorrect key and then re-enter the correct key.
In this way, making an error incurred a time cost.
All error trials were excluded from the data analysis.
In the single-task conditions, participants completed the dialing and driving tasks separately.
For dialing, participants simply dialed the number as quickly and accurately as possible.
At the end of each trial, they received feedback on their performance consisting of the total time to dial the number.
At the end of a block of five trials, the average dialing time for the block was also shown.
Participants completed two blocks of five trials.
The primary dependent measures of interest were the time taken to correctly dial the phone number and the lateral deviation of the vehicle from the center of the lane.
Relatively few trials were excluded from the analysis because of participant error on the dialing task.
From a total of 160 single-task baseline trials for the dialing task, only 4 trials  were excluded; from a total of 640 dual-task experimental trials, 37  trials were excluded.
To gain an overview of the effects of interest in this study, Figure 1 shows a data plot where the elapsed time of each keypress from the start of dialing  is plotted against the corresponding lateral distance of vehicle from the lane center .
The chunk structure of the telephone number is clearly visible in the focus-on-steering condition and there are noticeable decreases in lateral deviation in between the dialing of chunks.
In contrast, when participants focused on dialing, there was no obvious delay between the entry of one chunk and the next, and the vehicle drifted steadily farther from the lane center.
Driving speed clearly moderated the size of the increase in lateral deviation over time.
We next describe the results of a detailed statistical analysis of the data that corroborates these initial observations.
Unless otherwise stated, a 2x2 repeated measures ANOVA with the variables of task priority  and driving speed  was used for statistical analyses.
An alpha-level of 0.05 was used throughout.
We first consider whether response times on the dialing task were slower when participants gave greater priority to steering.
Moreover, the time taken to enter the number in the dual-task focus-ondialing condition  was equivalent to the time taken in the single-task dialing condition .
For the driving speed manipulation, there was a trend for participants to complete the dialing task more rapidly when driving at a slower speed  than at a faster speed , but this effect was not statistically reliable, p=.09.
There was also no significant interaction between task priority and driving speed, p=.32.
While the time taken to complete the dialing task increased when participants focused on driving, this level of analysis does not show how this additional time was distributed.
To support the idea that the representational structure of the telephone number influenced the strategy that was adopted, we consider the interval between consecutive keypresses within the same chunk of digits  and the interval between keypresses that were from different chunks of digits .
Figure 2 shows that there were shorter intervals between keypresses between digits that belonged to the same chunk of numbers compared to those that were between chunk boundaries.
These pauses between chunk boundaries were considerably more elevated when participants focused on steering than when they focused on dialing.
For statistical analysis of this data, we used a 2x2x2 repeated measures ANOVA, which included the new variable of digit position  along with task priority and driving speed variables from before.
This analysis found no effect of driving speed on the interval between keypresses, p=.07.
Follow-up tests found that when participants focused on steering, there were significantly elevated delays between keypresses at chunk boundaries, F=10.45, p<.05, but this effect was not reliable when participants focused on dialing, p=.19.
The fact that participants were giving up more time between the dialing of groups of digits is critical because it reflects a strategic difference in how they were choosing to interleave these tasks based on their objective to maintain a stable lane position while dialing.
We next consider whether there were improvements in driving performance during these prolonged delays in between chunks.
Figure 3 also shows that lane keeping performance was affected by the driver's task objective, but only at faster driving speeds.
In particular, when participants focused on the driving task, lateral deviation in the dual-task condition was more or less equivalent to that in the single-task condition.
Whereas, when participants focused on the dialing task, lateral deviation was greater in the dual-task condition than in the single-task condition.
Statistical analysis found a main effect of task objective on RMSE lateral deviation, F=5.04, p<.05.
There was also a significant trend for the task objective x driving speed interaction, F=3.64, p=.06.
Follow-up tests showed that at a fast driving speed, lateral deviation was greater when participants focused on the dialing task rather than the steering task, F=7.35, p=.05.
But at a slower driving speed there was not a significant simple effect of task objective on lateral deviation, p=.76.
To determine whether lane keeping improved during the prolonged delays between chunks in the focus-on-steering condition, we consider the relative change in lateral position between consecutive keypresses within the same chunk of digits and those between different chunks of digits.
Figure 4 shows the relative change in lateral deviation between consecutive keypresses.
It is clear from the figure that the only decrease in lateral deviation occurred between chunk boundaries in the focus-onsteering condition; lateral deviation increased between all other keypresses.
There was no effect of driving speed, p=.09.
This interaction indicates that the only improvements in lane keeping occurred between chunk boundaries in the focuson-steering condition, F=10.77, p=.01; there was no effect of digit position on lane keeping in the focus-ondialing condition, p=.75.
The driving simulator logged the lateral distance of the vehicle from the center of the lane at a rate of 200 Hz.
The RMSE of these cumulative lateral deviation samples was then calculated over the period of time that the driver worked on the dialing task.
Figure 3 shows RMSE lateral deviation for single-task and dual-task conditions under varying task objectives and driving speeds.
First, it is clear that driving speed affected the driver's ability to maintain a central lane position.
In the single-task driving condition, a two-tailed t-test found that there was significantly greater lateral movement at 55-mph than at 35-mph, t = 5.40, p<.001.
The results of the study show how drivers adapt their strategy to give up more time to driving while performing a secondary dialing task.
Strategy was adapted in a way that was constrained by the retrieval of hierarchical chunks associated with the dialing task.
Improvements in lane keeping performance occurred only during prolonged delays between keypresses at the boundaries between chunks, and the chunk boundaries imposed such severe constraints on the adaptation of strategy that improvements in lane keeping did not appear to be reactive to changes in lane keeping.
This finding suggests that drivers were systematically choosing to suspend the secondary task at the completion of a subgoal to attend to the primary task of driving.
These data support the idea that when drivers interact with a visually demanding secondary in-car device, performance is impaired because limited attentional resources have to be sequentially interleaved between tasks over time .
It is possible that participants could have made use of peripheral vision while dialing to monitor their lane position.
We believe this possibility can be ruled out because the vehicle moved consistently farther from the lane center when participants were actively working on the dialing task and peripheral vision would have worked in favor of improved lane keeping performance while dialing.
One limitation of the current study is that eye-tracking data were not gathered.
Previous studies  have used eyetracking data to demonstrate how the allocation of visual attention affects driving performance.
Instead of gathering eye-movement data, we infer how drivers allocated visual attention between tasks based on the duration of time between successive keypresses on the dialing task.
We found that the only improvement in lane keeping came about during prolonged delays between keypresses at subgoal boundaries in the dialing task, and that the vehicle moved farther from the lane center between shorter interkeypress intervals.
This suggests that the duration of time between keypresses can be used to indicate when drivers are directing attention towards steering control.
Moreover, these behavioral measures, which were relatively easy to gather and analyze, give a good indication of how drivers were choosing to allocate limited attentional resources between tasks.
The empirical data leave a number of questions unanswered.
It is not clear from the data why drivers use these chunk boundaries as cues to switch from one task to the other.
Is the chosen strategy rational?
Would a strategy that interleaved less frequently, for instance by dialing the first six digits in sequence, achieve similar lane keeping performance?
Could a strategy that interleaved more frequently achieve better lane keeping performance than one that followed the representational structure of the dialing task?
To address these questions, we use a Cognitive Constraint Modeling   framework to model a space of alternative task interleaving strategies and derive quantitative performance predictions for each.
Based on an analysis of data from two previous experiments , Brumby et al.
The model captures the basic idea that as the vehicle strays closer to the lane boundary, drivers will tend to react by making sharper corrective steering movements, which in turn, increase the lateral velocity of the vehicle, returning it to a central lane position more rapidly.
This simple model can be used to derive predictions of changes in a simulated vehicle's lateral deviation over time given discrete periods of driver attention and inattention.
The model clearly reflects idealized performance.
The Gaussian distribution had a mean of 0.00m/s and standard deviation of 0.10m/s, reflecting the average standard deviation observed in the human data.
We assume that steering updates are performed once every 250ms.
This timing estimate is similar to previous steering control models .
In between steering updates, we assume that external factors affect the heading of the vehicle over time .
These external factors are modeled by simply perturbing the heading of the simulated vehicle every 50ms, with a random value sampled from a Gaussian distribution.
The Gaussian distribution had a mean 0.00 m/s and the standard deviation was a free parameter in the model, allowing for more or less variability in heading over time.
We shall see in the next section how this free parameter can be used to account for the effect of driving speed on lane keeping.
We assume that the dialing task interferes with steering control processes.
Specifically, we assume that steering control updates cannot be performed while the driver has their attention directed at the dialing task.
The dialing task is modeled at the granularity of the time taken to execute individual keypresses.
A critical component of driving involves maintaining a central lane position.
The model simulates a vehicle moving at a constant velocity down a straight road.
The model performs a series of discrete steering updates that alter the heading  of the vehicle dependent on its position in the lane at the time that the update is performed.
We assume that switching between tasks carries a cost overhead , which reflects the time required to move visual attention between the outside of the car  and the inside of the car .
Instead of developing a detailed model of the perceptual/motor processes involved, we use a simple timing estimate of 185 ms to move visual attention between the phone and the road, or vice versa.
This timing estimate was taken from the ACT-R cognitive architecture .
Furthermore, if a strategy disrupts the chunk structure of the dialing task, then we assume that there is an additional time cost to retrieve the relevant state information from memory.
Based on a more complex task model developed in the ACT-R cognitive architecture, we assume that these retrievals of state information took 100 ms to execute.
This meant that the execution of keypresses could each take up to 870 ms  in a strategy that returned attention to driving after entering each and every digit.
We derive performance predictions for seven different plausible strategy variants for completing the dialing task while driving.
The first strategy  completed all keypresses in succession without once returning attention to steering control.
Strategies S2-S4 used the chunk structure to signal when to switch tasks.
These variants either returned attention to steering control after entering the first  or second  chunk of digits only, or after entering both the first and the second chunk of digits .
S5 invested additional time in the middle of the final chunk, steering in between the entry of the eight and ninth digit in the sequence.
The remaining strategies disrupted the chunk structure by either entering digits in pairs  or singly , returning attention to driving after each.
For each of the different task interleaving strategies, we explored the consequences of dedicating more or less time to steering control before returning attention to dialing.
As more time is given to steering control, the model is able to conduct more steering updates in succession.
To understand the value of conducting multiple, successive steering updates, consider for a moment a situation where the vehicle is far from the lane center.
However, left unchecked the vehicle will continue along this sharp heading, possibly passing the lane center and beyond.
Further steering updates are therefore required to gradually stabilize the heading of the vehicle as it nears the lane center.
Figure 5 shows the performance predictions for each strategy variant in terms of dial time and RMSE lateral deviation at different simulated driving speeds.
This strategy space essentially ranges from doing the entire dialing task without driving  to maximally interleaving driving .
These extreme points in the strategy space are represented by S1 and S7.
At the faster simulated driving speed  there is a clear speed/accuracy trade-off between dialing quickly and driving safely: The upper-left portion of the plot represents faster but worse driving performance, whereas the bottom-right portion represents slower but better driving performance.
In contrast, driving performance did not decline with quicker dialing at the slower simulated driving speed .
For the model to capture the effect of driving speed, a single free parameter was varied, which determined the variability in vehicle heading over time.
Recall that in between steering updates the heading of the simulated vehicle was permuted by a random value sampled from a Gaussian distribution.
We identified standard deviation values for this distribution that maximized the goodness of fit between the modeled no-interleave strategy  and data from the focus-on-dialing condition at each driving speed.
We chose to fit data from the focus-on-dialing condition because participants tended to dial as quickly as possible without checking on steering control at all.
This meant that we could directly compare the lateral deviation data at each keypress with the predicted deviation for the no-interleave strategy.
The first panel of Figure 6 shows the performance of the no-interleave strategy  compared to the empirical data from the fast 55-mph focus-on-dialing condition.
In the figure, the elapsed time of each keypress  is plotted against corresponding lateral deviation .
A search of the parameter space found that a standard deviation of 0.8 m/s on the noise distribution provided a strong fit with the data .
A strong fit was also found between the data from the slower driving speed and the model with a standard deviation of 0.3 m/s .
With the model's nointerleave strategy fitted to data from the focus-on-dialing condition, we next use the model to account for participants' strategy in the focus-on-steering condition.
We explore the quality of fit between various task interleaving strategies and data from the focus-on-steering condition.
For each strategy, we systematically explored the cost/benefit of giving up more or less time to steering control.
A simple algorithm was used to identify the point where improvements in lateral deviation asymptote with increasing time given up to steering.
To do this for a given strategy, we identified all of the steering operators specified in the strategy and enumerated over a finite set of durations .
Given the strategy in this set that gave up the most amount of time to steering control, we identify a subset of strategies that do not significantly differ from it in terms of predicted RMSE lateral deviation.
To this end, a series of t-tests were conducted to reject strategies.
From this subset of strategies, which did not differ in terms of predicted lateral deviation, we select the fastest strategy .
The illustrative strategies S2-S7 shown in Figure 5 were selected using the algorithm described above, and represent the point for each strategy where improvements in lateral deviation asymptote with increasing time given up to steering.
Inspection of the upper panel of Fig.
5 shows that at the slower simulated driving speed, the predicted RMSE lateral deviation did not differ across the various illustrative strategies, and all were within the confidence interval of the focus-on-steering data.
This is to be expected at the slower driving speed, where changes in lateral deviation were slow to occur during periods of inattention.
At the faster simulated driving speed , however, the illustrative strategies differed greatly in terms of predicted RMSE lateral deviation.
But S2, S4, and S5 nonetheless gave performance predictions within the confidence intervals of the focus-on-steering data.
This is interesting because each of these interleaved dialing and driving more or less often, but all appear to be equivalent in terms of lane keeping.
In order to better determine how these strategies differ, we compare their performance at the level of changes in lateral deviation between keypresses.
Figure 6 shows a series of data plots where the elapsed time of each keypress is plotted against corresponding lateral deviation for S2-S6 at the faster driving speed.
The focuson-steering data is shown for comparison.
By comparing strategies at this level of granularity, we see how performing fewer than two steering updates while dialing-- as illustrated by S2--predicts extreme lateral deviation that brings the vehicle close to the lane boundary.
This level of drift was not evident in the focus-on-steering data, where drivers were able to maintain a relatively central lane position.
This is particularly interesting because the predicted RMSE lateral deviation for S2 is within the confidence interval of the human data.
It is only when we compare the quality of fit between model and data at the level of changes in lane position between each keypress that we discover that this strategy fails to capture the data.
We also see in Figure 6 that disrupting the chunk structure of the dialing task to perform additional steering updates is inefficient and carries very little benefit to lane keeping.
In particular, strategies S4 and S5 do not noticeably differ in terms of their lateral deviation profiles, but only in terms of the time required to complete the dialing task.
This analysis suggests that S4--which interleaved at chunk boundaries-- is particularly efficient at trading time given up to dialing with the maintenance of a central lane position.
The results of the study suggest that the adaptations selected by participants were intricately dependent on the constraints imposed by cognition.
People did adapt, but cognition imposed tight constraints on the adaptation.
The consequences of cognitive constraints is evident in the fact that improvements in driving performance  only occurred during prolonged periods between chunk boundaries.
Lateral deviation generally increased during periods where the driver was actively engaged in working on the secondary dialing task, and decreased during discrete periods in which dialing was suspended.
Moreover, the chunk boundaries appeared to impose such severe constraints on adaptation that improvements in lane keeping did not appear to be reactive.
It is clear that drivers took the opportunity to invest the time on improving lane keeping in between chunks, regardless of how far the vehicle had drifted from the center of the lane.
For instance, after dialing the first chunk of digits, the vehicle was still fairly close to the lane center, but drivers nonetheless invested time before commencing with the next burst of keypresses.
It is not immediately clear why drivers would choose to give up time to steering here since there is limited scope for improvement in lane keeping.
A computational modeling analysis was conducted to better understand why drivers might have favored a strategy that interleaved attentional resources at chunk boundaries over alternative strategies.
The model was used to systematically explore a space of plausible interleaving strategies and derive quantitative performance predictions for each.
The analysis showed that not returning attention to steering control at least twice while dialing resulted in extreme lane deviation.
This helps explain one of the nuisances of the empirical data, where it appears as though participants are investing time in steering control even though the vehicle is already close to the lane center: the benefit of this correction to steering control is to be had down-stream.
In contrast, disrupting the chunk structure in order to perform additional steering updates is inefficient because doing so incurs considerable time costs but brings about only modest improvements in lane keeping.
These insights could not have been gleaned from the empirical data, which only show how people actually behaved.
Cognitive modeling was useful in this context for rigorously exploring a space of plausible human behaviors in order to better understand why people behave the way they do.
The computational modeling approach taken here focused on understanding the constraints on the interaction between the driver and the task environment important to critical performance variables .
This could contribute to work aimed at developing tools for modeling driving behavior, such as Distract-R , which can be used to identify interaction designs for safer in-car systems.
The work presented contributes to this enterprise by offering a parsimonious account of steering control processes, in which a simple quadratic function is used to capture the idea that drivers tend to steer towards the lane center when the vehicle is far from the lane center but tend to keep a straight heading when the vehicle is close to the lane center.
These model-based predictions have been derived from an analysis of existing steering control data .
Additional work is required to corroborate the model and identify a plausible range of parameters that are reliable across a broad range of participants and driving environments.
One concern with the generalizability of the findings of this paper is that the driving task was artificially simple.
In the study participants were required to drive a vehicle down a straight highway with no other vehicles in the roadway and without controlling speed.
Because we found strong effects in this simple driving task between the various dual-task conditions, this probably provides a conservative measure of the effect of objective on performance in real-world settings, where driving is typically more demanding.
Indeed, previous studies  have shown that effects found in driving simulators are typically also found in the real world .
In contrast, the finding that drivers in the dual-task focuson-steering condition were able to drive just as well as those in the baseline, single-task condition is more than likely an artifact of the simple driving task environment.
It seems unlikely that drivers would be able to adapt their multitasking strategy sufficiently to drive "safely" in a more demanding driving environment.
Perhaps a slightly more interesting question to ask is whether drivers are sensitive to the changing demands of a typical real-world driving environment, and if they are, whether they adapt by perform secondary in-car tasks only during less demanding periods of driving.
It would also be interesting to see how drivers adapt when a step in a secondary in-car task takes substantially longer to complete than they are willing to take their eyes away from the road for.
An answer to this latter question would give some indication of whether people are willing to incur the costs of disrupting the structure of secondary task processing--if not, then lengthy, demanding interactions might present a particular safety hazard in the context of an on-going safety critical control-monitoring task like driving.
Given that people continue to engage in secondary tasks while driving, there may be substantial value in developing a greater understanding of how people adapt their strategy so as to inform the design of systems to reduce demand on the driver.
The results of this study show that changing drivers' objectives can affect how they choose to adapt.
The total time that the driver is distracted is less important than the extent to which they are encouraged to make quick glances back to the road while actively working on the secondary task.
However, strategy adaptation can be severely constrained by the representational structure of the secondary task.
This suggests that designing mobile devices that facilitate short bursts of interaction as opposed to requiring long stretches of interaction might help to alleviate some of the deleterious effects of distraction.
