Scale , which is based on self-reports of time online and number of friends, along with six attitude items like "Facebook has become part of my daily routine."
One of the goals of this study is to determine how well people self-report these values by comparing them with Facebook activity logs.
With few exceptions , these kinds of studies have focused on college students, and so we also test whether previous findings generalize to older users and those outside the U.S.
Early studies of the Internet examined the correlation between time online with outcomes such as loneliness , but later studies differentiate between social activities and pure entertainment, finding different results for different activities .
Similarly, current studies of SNS do not distinguish between time spent chatting with friends and time taking quizzes, raising a question as to how precisely "social" these interactions are.
This question of "how social is social" may also be changing as the Internet becomes a more pervasive technology--earlier studies of social interaction online tended to show Internet or SNS users as lonely because the pool of interactants was small, while today Facebook claims a worldwide user base of 350 million users, most of whom also have their entire social circles on the site.
As such, social psychologists and site designers would benefit from a more nuanced understanding of what SNS users are actually doing, and the relationship between their feature use and feelings of connection to others.
Therefore, the main goal of this study is to tease out the relative weight of different activities and their relationship to three measures of social well-being: bridging social capital, bonding social capital, and loneliness.
Previous research has shown a relationship between use of social networking sites and feelings of social capital.
However, most studies have relied on self-reports by college students.
The goals of the current study are to  validate the common self-report scale using empirical data from Facebook,  test whether previous findings generalize to older and international populations, and  delve into the specific activities linked to feelings of social capital and loneliness.
In particular, we investigate the role of directed interaction between pairs--such as wall posts, comments, and "likes"-- and consumption of friends' content, including status updates, photos, and friends' conversations with other friends.
We find that directed communication is associated with greater feelings of bonding social capital and lower loneliness, but has only a modest relationship with bridging social capital, which is primarily related to overall friend network size.
Surprisingly, users who consume greater levels of content report reduced bridging and bonding social capital and increased loneliness.
Implications for designs to support well-being are discussed.
Social networking sites  complement the network of relationships present in the offline world by providing a platform for active communication between friends and more passive observation through aggregated streams of social news.
Use of these sites has been associated with greater levels of social capital, or benefits made possible by the existence of a social structure .
These benefits include bridging social capital, or access to new information through a diverse set of acquaintances, and bonding social capital, or emotional support from close friends .
Ellison and colleagues show that students who are active on Facebook feel higher levels of both forms of social capital, and the effects are greater for students with lower self-esteem .
Heavy users of SNS also exhibit greater social trust and civic participation .
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
In the present study, we distinguish between two types of activity: directed communication and consumption.
Directed communication consists of interactions on the site between the focal user and another friend , in which one friend directly identifies another.
Wall posts and messages are strong predictors of relationship strength , and one-on-one chat sessions are associated with reduced loneliness and depression .
Bonding social capital will increase with the amount of direct communication.
H2: Loneliness will decrease with the amount of direct communication.
However, recent work has shown that users only interact with a small core of their friend network, even as their overall network size grows .
For the majority of their networks, we expect users keep track of their friends' activities through the "feed," an aggregated stream of social news.
We predict that users maintain their large, diverse networks through this more passive form of site use: H3.
Bridging social capital will increase with consumption.
The relationship between consumption and loneliness is more complex.
Reading stories about friends' activities could cause a user to feel embedded in a social circle or left out.
Lonely individuals could gravitate toward the feed because it reduces social boundaries, or they could avoid it because it reifies the social distance they feel face-to-face.
Thus, we simply predict: H4.
Consumption will be associated with loneliness.
Participants  were recruited via an ad on Facebook targeted at English-speaking adults.
The survey included five items each from the bonding and bridging scales in .
Bridging items  included "I come in contact with new people all the time," and bonding  included "There are several people I trust to help solve my problems."
Eight items from the UCLA loneliness scale  were included , such as "I often feel close to people."
All responses were given on 5-pt Likert scales ranging from "strongly disagree" to "strongly agree."
The loneliness items were adjusted to fit an agree-disagree scale.
A subset of users  was also given the eight-item Facebook Intensity Scale   to validate users' self-reports of site activity.
We collected activity data for each survey participant for the two months prior to the survey.
Survey-takers who had joined the site less than two months prior were dropped.
All variables were aggregated from server logs using the Hadoop distributed computation platform.
Data were analyzed in aggregate so that no individual's actions, friend networks, or identifiable information were used.
All of the activity variables follow power law distributions, and thus we use the logarithm  of these variables to control for skew and then standardize by centering at the mean and dividing by the standard deviation.
Because activity variables are highly correlated with each other, scale values were created for content production, directed communication and consumption by taking the mean of the standardized values.
The content production scale is used as a measure of overall site engagement, along with number of friends and time spent on the site.
Scale alphas and descriptive statistics for the raw variables are reported in Table 1.
The number of distinct friends who initiated directed actions or were the target of directed actions was also included.
Giftgiving, "pokes" and video- and note-tagging were excluded because few participants in the sample used these features.
Consumption This scale measures the degree to which the user paid attention to the general broadcasts shared by his or her friends, including status updates and public conversations by the user's friend with someone else.
Attention is measured as feed story clicks.
We also include the number of distinct profiles viewed, distinct photos viewed, and distinct friends on whose news stories the focal user clicked.
Table 2 presents general OLS models using controls and overall site engagement variables.
Older users reported lower levels of bonding social capital, but age had no impact on bridging social capital or loneliness.
Men were lonelier and felt less bonding social capital than women.
Self-esteem had a large effect on all three outcomes in the expected direction, and satisfaction with life was associated with increased bonding social capital and decreased loneliness.
Consistent with previous survey-based research, overall SNS activity, particularly friend count, was positively correlated with both kinds of social capital.
It was also negatively correlated with loneliness.
Time on site was highly correlated with friend count  and content produced ; after controlling for friend count it was not a significant predictor of any of the well-being scores.
Content production was associated with increases in bridging social capital.
Results also hold for samples of non-college-aged adults and those outside the US.
Analyses on the subsets of users over age 35  and those outside the US  were of similar magnitude and significance.
Participants' self-reports of friend counts were highly correlated with actual friend counts , most likely because the value is easy to find on one's Facebook home page.
Self-reports of time spent on the site were moderately correlated with actual time  after capping eight outliers at 500 min/day.
The six attitude questions collapsed into a single scale were only slightly correlated with other measures of engagement, such as content production  and number of days on site in the past month .
The present study confirms previous survey-based findings that greater SNS use is associated with increased social capital and reduced loneliness.
This can be interpreted in many ways:  people who feel more socially connected gravitate toward technical systems that reify those connections,  using sites like Facebook allows people to reinforce fledgling and distant relationships, or  there is a positive feedback loop.
We also confirm that these findings generalize to older users and English-speakers outside the U.S. and show that the common tool for estimating SNS use, the Facebook Intensity Scale,
Users are generally good at self-reporting their friend count and time on site.
The present results suggest that asking for friend count and time on site is sufficient to measure intensity, as the attitudinal self-reports did not correlate with plausible engagement metrics.
It is possible there are server data that correlate more strongly with the attitude reports, and we will continue to look for long-term engagement in the next waves of this longitudinal study.
In prior studies, attitudinal selfreport measures have shown problems such as central tendency and acquiescence bias , but server data such as days online in the previous month may not capture a user's full experience of engagement.
Overall, however, the present study suggests the attitude scales are unnecessary.
Directed communication plays the expected role in bonding social capital.
Messages exchanged between friends are both a product of the friendship and a means of facilitating and maintaining such friendships.
However, the results for consumption are somewhat surprising, as after controlling for directed communication users who click on lots of stories about their friends report reduced bridging social capital.
One interpretation is that to reap the benefits of a diverse network, you need to both have a diverse set of weak ties and the communication context to take advantage of them.
The results are less surprising for loneliness: People who feel a discrepancy between the social interactions they have and those that they desire tend to spend more time observing other people's interactions.
Whether the loneliness causes the clicking, or the clicking causes the loneliness is left to the future waves of this study.
One interpretation of these findings is that our measure of consumption could encode "noise" in the user experience.
That is, as users have more low-quality content in their feed, they may come to feel less connected with their friends.
This effect is mitigated by our approach, which only considers stories that users click on.
Furthermore, an analysis of subset of clicks on the Highlights feed--a form of the feed in which content is ordered by friends' interactions--shows the same effects, suggesting that these results are not due to noise.
Apart from the relationship between consumption and increased loneliness, we see that engagement with Facebook is correlated with greater overall well-being.
This association speaks to a number of potential design enhancements for fostering communication over passive engagement.
Users who appear to be exhibiting behaviors associated with loneliness, such as over-consuming for their level of direct communication, could be the target of interventions of content they are likely to interact with, or exposed to users with whom they have not conversed recently.
Likewise, content produced by these users could be exposed to friends who might directly interact with them.
While we cannot speak to causality at this stage of our study, these features could be validated through simple experimentation.
Since we do not have the responses of people who choose not to use social networking online, it is not possible to understand the bias introduced by our sample.
While we have extended these results to an international, English-speaking audience, other languages are likely associated with varying beliefs about group interaction, individualism, and other cultural norms that may greatly affect the results.
Finally, the results do not speak to causality.
We plan to repeat the survey with the same participants over two 6-month intervals and use a cross-lag analysis to observe the potentially causal relationship between SNS usage and social well-being.
