Norbert A. Streitz, Jiirg GeiBler, Torsten Holmer, Shin'ichi Konomi, Christian Miiller-Tomfelde, Wolfgang Reischl, Petra Rexroth, Peter Seitz, Ralf Steinmetz GMD - German National Research Center for Information Technology IPSI - Integrated Publication and Information Systems Institute, Dolivostr.
We describe the i-LAND environment which constitutes an example of our vision of the workspaces of the future, in this case supporting cooperative work of dynamic teams with changing needs.
Its design is based on an integration of information and architectural spaces, implications of new work practices and an empirical requirements study informing our design.
We present the current realization of i-LAND in terms of an interactive electronic wall, an interactive table, two computer-enhanced chairs, and two "bridges" for the Passage-mechanism.
This is complemented by the description of the creativity support application and the technological infrastructure.
The paper is accompanied by a video figure in the CHI'99 video program.
We approach the issues involved from the following four perspectives.
First, we discuss the relationship between the affordances provided by real, physical objects in the architectural space and digital information objects in the virtual information space.
Second, we discuss the implications of new work practices resulting from organizational innovations and their requirements for the design of collaborative workspaces.
These two perspectives represent the general conceptual framework.
In order to make our ideas more concrete, we illustrate them by two example scenarios which had a guiding function for our design.
A third perspective is provided by the technological framework, considering developments in augmented reality and ubiquitous computing.
The fourth perspective is provided by the results of an empirical requirements study informing our design by current work practices of existing teams and their expectations about future work environments.
These four perspectives set the stage for the central part of this paper: the introduction of our `roomware' concept and the description of the first prototype implementation in terms of the i-LAND environment.
The paper ends with a discussion of our approach with respect to related work and directions for future work.
In this paper, we present an approach for the design and implementation of innovative workspaces that are based on an integrated design of virtual information spaces and with equal weight - real architectural spaces.
While the general approach for the workspaces of the future is applicable to a wide range of application scenarios, we will focus in this paper on a specific example, the support for creative teams.
The first results of our approach will be presented in terms of the i-LAND environment: an interactive landscape for creativity and innovation.
Permission to make digital or hard topics of all or part of this work fat personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies hear this notice and the full citation on the lirst page.
To copy othcrwisc, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission andior a fee.
The advent of information technology resulted in a shift to a situation where information is being created, stored and communicated by means of computers resulting in virtual worlds as the places of information.
As a consequence, interfaces to information are being realized as - and in our perspective reduced to - displays of desktop computers or via virtual reality gadgets.
On the other hand, our day-today living and working environments are highly cletermined by the architectural space around us.
Buildings with their rooms, walls, floors, ceilings, doors, windows, furniture, etc.
This resulted in better results in the group problem solving activities .
In another empirical study , we investigated different combinations of personal and public information devices  and their role for collaboration in meetings.
These results show that the groups which developed a balanced proportion of individual work, subgroup activities, and working in the full group achieved better results than those groups which stayed most of the time in the full-group work configuration.
The degree of flexibility to work in different modes was largely determined by the range and combination of information devices provided to the team.
While these results were obtained in "standard" electronic meeting rooms, these constellations do not provide the necessary flexibility of assigning different workspace areas within a meeting room to subgroups and individuals.
So far, it was not possible to configure the combination of furniture and computer devices in a very flexible way.
It is a high priority design goal for i-LAND to provide an environment with high spatial flexibility and mobility of the employed information devices.
Two Sample Scenarios In order to have concrete examples of how we can transform our general approach into working prototypes, we developed sample scenarios guiding our ideas of how to work and cooperate in the future.
We present two of them.
Examples are the distribution and availability of physical objects as, e.g., books, magazines, drawings, notepads, photo copies placed on desks, tables, or window shelves; diagrams, pictures, and calendars hanging on the walls.
Another example is the physical layout of the workplace in an office or a meeting room and how it is embedded in the overall architectural environment.
The positioning of desks, chairs, tables, shelves in offices results from existing work practices.
At the same time, these characteristics constrain current group activities in terms of possible changes of their structure.
For example, the ease of forming subgroups of a team working in a meeting room is very much dependent on the flexibility of the furniture and the access to multiple information devices.
Architectural spaces are and serve as information and cooperation spaces.
With the spread of desktop computers in offices, the situation changed dramatically.
The monitor of the desktop computer became the primary, almost "holy" entrance to up-to-date information.
There is a tendency that information is more or less available only via the computer.
At the same time, the desktop computer turned out to be a bottleneck.
There are limitations for parallel access to different sources and types of information and limited screen space results often in complex handling of windows.
We are convinced that - also in the age of information technology - physical objects and their placement in the architectural space provide valuable "affordances" for organizing content information and meta information for the work process of individuals as well as for groups.
These affordances should be complemented by augmenting the physical environment by the rich information available in digital information spaces.
In some cases, this requires to present this "invisible" information via  physical objects in correspondence with the  underlying digital information.
There are many ways to approach this overall design goal.
For related approaches see  and .
New Work Practices In the future, work and cooperation in organizations will be characterized by a degree of dynamics, flexibility, and mobility that will go far beyond many of today's developments and examples.
On demand and ad hoc formation of teams, virtual organizations, physically distributed and mobile workers, desk sharing are only initial examples of the work practices and organizational innovation to be expected.
Contents and participants as well as contexts, tasks, processes and structures of collaboration will be changing frequently, in various ways and with an increasing rate of the innovation cycle.
The role of physical office space will change.
It is time to reflect these developments in the design of equally dynamic, flexible, and mobile work environments.
On demand and ad hoc formation of teams requires powerml methods and tools for the support of different work phases in teams.
In one of our empirical studies ,
Meeting a colleague by chance in the hallway and starting a discussion might result in the intention to explain something by drawing a sketch on the wall and annotate it by some scribbles.
Besides the fact that this is usually not accepted in office buildings, traditional walls do not support to store and later modify these elements of the discussion.
It is also not possible to search for related information in a background information base and to link this information to the sketch and the scribbles on the wall.
In the future, we like to be able to turn to the wall and do just this.
Think of the wall as an "interactive wall" or as one being "covered" by a high resolution electronic wallpaper providing the functionality needed.
A wall like this is also of great use for informal communication in other places, e.g., the cafeteria.
It often happens in group work, that a team divides the work by assigning subtasks and breaks up so that individuals and subgroups can go off to do their work.
After some time, e.g., on the next day, the full team meets again and discusses the results which form the basis for the next phase of cooperation.
An alternative is to provide ways for subgroups to split off during the meeting in the same work space, do their work, rejoin and then immediately merge the results.
Providing adequate IT support for this scenario requires a team or project room which is equipped with components and resources which are so flexible that they can be reconfigured dynamically and on-demand in order to meet the different requirements of changing team work situations.
From our analysis of this scenario, we came up with a plenary situation and different subgroup constellations.
The plenary is characterized by the full team sitting in chairs and facing a  public display.
One example of subgroup work is that some people move their chairs and group them in one comer of the room, discuss their task and exchange ideas.
Another subgroup might walk over to an ad hoc meeting table, stands around it, views and edits tables and diagrams.
A third subgroup walks up to a large whiteboard, draws sketches and annotates them with scribbles.
It is our vision that the chairs, the table, and the whiteboard are all interactive electronic devices providing adequate IT support for these interaction and cooperation situations.
We also suggest places for individual work, e.g., searching for background information, called `Columns of Knowledge'.
Furthermore, we think that there will be always paper in one way or another.
Thus, we suggest a device, the mobile `ScanTable', for scanning paper documents so that the content is immediately available in the network.
1 presents a first visualization of our ideas when we started the i-LAND project  showing parallel work of three subgroups and two individuals.
For an overview of initial work see .
A related but different approach is the notion of `graspable' user interfaces  and `tangible bits' .
Pursuing the approach of augmented reality at a larger scale requires to have many, loosely spread and networked information devices around, with displays of different sizes, providing functionality everywhere.
This is the concept of media .
The size of these devices can range from very small to very large.
Some of the devices will stand out and be recognized as computers, others will be "invisible" as they are embedded in the environment.
Once the physical space is filled with multiple devices, two set of issues come up.
First, how can one transfer information between them in an intuitive and direct way and, more general, how to interact with them.
Second, it is desirable to know the position of the devices and their state wherever they are in a room or a building.
The first issue is addressed, e.g., by the `pick-and-drop' technique  and by our concepts of `take-and-put' and `Passage' described later on.
The second issue requires to set up an infrastructure of sensing and localization technology.
We are aware that collecting information on where the devices and especially where the users are raises problems with respect to privacy issues.
A combination of ideas from' augmented reality and ubiquitous computing is employed in the approach of so called Reactive Environments .
While innovative concepts, visions about possible scenarios and advances in basic technologies are important to make progress, we know from the principles of user- and taskoriented design that this is not sufficient for the development of new systems.
We have to inform our design also by the requirements of anticipated user groups.
Therefore, we conducted an empirical study in order to investigate the current work situation of teams and their requirements for future environments.
We are convinced that we have to go beyond desktops in order to realize our vision of the `workspaces of the future' presented above.
It is obvious that this goal requires a different technological setup as usually available in offices.
In particular, two areas of recent developments are relevant: augmented reality and ubiquitous computing.
We selected five companies from the automobile and oil industry and the advertising and consulting business.
These companies were selected because they had special work groups which were called "creative teams" or could be labeled as such.
They are working in the areas of strategic planning, identifying future trends, designing and marketing new products, etc.
We expected these teams to be good candidates for working already with innovative tools and being creative when asked about their ideas and requirements of future work environments for team work.
It was also mentioned that "creative teams" are not only busy being creative all the time but they also have to plan and organize their work.
This motivated the request for computer- and video-based support for  documentation of meetings and preparation of the minutes.
While computer-based support was strongly requested, the computer should be in the background.
Quote : "We have the creative potential, not the computers."
Another issue was the creation of a certain atmosphere described with labels as freedom room for individuality, flexibility, etc.
In summary, the teams wanted to have much freedom in contiguring their physical environment and their information environment.
We interviewed at least one, sometimes more representatives of the teams, visited the project team rooms where they usually hold their meetings, and distributed a questionnaire to all team members.
The total number of people in these five teams was 80.
The age range was from 28 to 55 years.
They usually had an academic education and came from various educational and professional backgrounds: engineering, computer science, business administration, psychology, and design.
Unfortunately, only 20 % of the distributed questionnaires were returned but together with the interviews and site visits they provided valuable information.
Due to limited space, we report only selected results relevant for the design of i-LAND.
In most cases, the facilities were traditional meeting rooms furnished with standard equipment as, e.g., large solid tables and chairs, flip charts, whiteboards, and overhead projectors.
In only one case, there were a couple of computers, a scanner and a printer permanently installed in the meeting room.
In another case, people would bring a laptop and a beamer in order to project computer displays on the wall.
This configuration was only used for prepared presentations.
No active creation of content during the meeting was done with the aid of computers.
These results on the current state of the rooms were contrary to our expectations.
We had expected more  usage of computer-based technology in the meetings.
The situation changed when we asked about the requirements for the future.
Usually, a large room was required with a flexible setup and mobile components that would allow different configurations.
The room should have the character of a market place or a landscape providing opportunities for spontaneous encounters and informal communication.
Quote : "Team meetings are not anymore conducted by meeting in a room but by providing an environment and a situation where encounters happen".
The furniture should be multifunctional and flexible.
Although the current situation was rather low-tech, there was a great openness for computer-based support in the following areas: support for information gathering while preparing meetings by accessing internal and external data bases; in a special case, "pools of ideas" were mentioned - in an advanced version so called "idea spaces"; computer-based support for a wide range of creativity techniques allowing for flexible configuration or tailoring of the underlying rules; support for presentation styles deviating from the traditional situation and involving the attendees in an active fashion labeled as "participatory presentation"; support for visualizations inspiring and enhancing the creative process; support for communicating and experiencing content also via other channels than only visual, e.g., acoustic, tactile.
There was less emphasis on videoconferencing.
Our approach to meet the requirements of flexible configuration and dynamic allocation of resources in integrated physical and information environments is based on the concept we call roomware.
By roomware, we mean computer-augmented objects resulting from the integration of room elements, e.g., walls, doors, furniture 
The general goal of developing roomware is to make progress towards the design of integrated real architectural spaces and virtual information spaces from the perspective of augmenting reality.
In the context of supporting team work, roomware components can be tailored and composed to form flexible and dynamic "cooperation landscapes" serving multiple purposes: project team rooms, presentation suites, information foyers, etc.
These goals have in common that they require also to develop new forms of multi-user, multiple-displays human-computer interaction.
We will present examples as we go along.
The current focus is on designing workspaces for collocated teams but the i-LAND environment can easily be extended to provide support for global cooperation of distributed teams.
We have designed and implemented an initial set of roomware components.
So far, it consists of an interactive electronic wall , an interactive electronic table , and mobile and networked chairs with integrated interactive devices .
They are assembled in the AMBIENTE-Lab at GMD-IPSI in order to form the first version of the i-LAND environment.
The objective of the DynaWall is to provide a computerbased device that serves the needs of teams, e.g., in projects rooms where large areas of assembled sheets of paper covering the walls are used to create and organize The DynaWall can be considered an information.
Our current realization provides a total display size of 4.5 m width and 1.1 m height.
The software we developed  enables teams to display and interact with large information structures collaboratively on the DynaWall.
Passage is a concept for ephemeral binding of content to an object.
It provides an intuitive way for the "transportation" of information between computers/ roomware components, e.g., between offices or to and from meeting rooms.
A Passenger does not have to be a special physical object.
Any uniquely detectable physical object may become a Passenger.
Since the information structures are not stored on the Passenger itself but only linked to it, people can turn any object into a Passenger: a watch, a ring, a pen, glasses, or other arbitrary objects.
The only restriction Passengers have is that they can be identified by the Bridge and that they are unique.
7 show a small wooden block as an example of a Passenger placed on the margin of the InteracTable where the Bridge device is embedded.
The current Passage implementation uses the weight of physical objects for identification and computer-controlled scales built in the Bridge for detection.
The current application for i-LAND is to support team work with a focus on creativity and innovation.
The software we develop supports different types of creativity techniques and related generic functionality as, e.g., visualization of knowledge structures.
The BEACH software provides the new forms of human-computer interaction, e.g., take-andput, throw, shuffle, rotate, etc.
We focus on support for different brainstorming techniques and for project organization.
It has been shown that computer-supported brainstorming results in more number of ideas than verbal brainstorming .
There are limitations with existing brainstorming systems  we like to overcome.
Our software enables teams to work with networked hypermedia structures providing adequate representations for their ideas.
This is based on our earlier hypermedia work  combined with new concepts.
The possibility to display large information structures at once, e.g., on the DynaWal, provides new opportunities for innovative idea creation and concept presentation modes.
Our development includes new visualization metaphors for presenting content and structures of our `thoughtscapes'.
Passage describes an elegant mechanism of connecting information structures in the digital, virtual world of computers with a real-world object.
Such a detectable object, a so-called Passenger, can be seen as a physical bookmark into the virtual world.
One can assign information to it, take it, carry it physically to a new location, and simply by putting it on a device called Bridge, the information is displayed immediately at the new location.
It is no longer necessary to open windows, browse hierarchies of folders, worry about mounted drives, etc.
While each of the roomware components presented above has a value of its own, the full benefit is only available via a comprehensive integration and combined use.
This integration requires a network infrastructure providing the connectivity between the components and a software infrastructure providing a wide range of cooperative sharing capabilities.
For extending the mobility of team members and roomware components within the Lab and later on in the whole building it is necessary to identify them in different locations.
This requires a sensing and localization infrastructure planned for the near future.
The CommChairs are equipped with an antenna which comes along with a PC-Card.
Laptops with a wireless adapter are carried along , plugged into the docking station of the CommChair and the team member can join the meeting without reconfiguration.
The computers of fixed roomware components as, e.g., the DynaWall are connected via cables to the LAN.
The network connection for the wireless access to the LAN is realized by a 2-channel access-point which acts as a bridge between the cable-based and the RF-based Ethernet.
The transfer rate of one RF channel is currently 2 Mbps, soon to be upgraded to 10 Mbps.
This is achieved by creat:ing a new sublocation for each subgroup within the team's virtual location, corresponding to the different areas, the physical sublocations.
BEACH is developed in Smalltalk using Part Place Systems' Visual Work environment.
In order to meet the functional and integration requirements for i-LAND, we have developed BEACH.
It provides the software infrastructure for cooperative sharing of information between the devices in combination with new forms of human-computer interaction required and enabled by the roomware components.
BEACH is designed as a layered architecture.
It provides the functions necessary for distributing, replicating and synchronizing information objects.
This framework was used to create shared information spaces between different roomware components and, in addition, to couple several physically separate roomware components to a logically homogenous workspace.
This is also important for large interaction areas as the DynaWall which is currently build from three separate segments because of the limitations of displays currently available.
The next level of BEACH covers the interaction of one user with a roomware device.
Here, the software must take care of the different input and output characteristics of the roomware components: Display sizes vary from rather small  to the huge display of the DynaWall.
The user's orientation might be fixed with respect to the display  or it might be arbitrary and can change over time at the InteracTable.
The available input devices are keyboard, mouse, and pen, resp.
Gesture recognition is crucial for realizing the interaction forms.
On top of this, BEACH provides mechanisms to structure collaboration.
The basic metaphor is the "virtual location", which defines who is working together on which topic and which data are used.
The virtual location is the virtual counterpart of a physical meeting room: a meeting room is attached to a virtual location during a meeting - it might be associated with another virtual location at another time for another task or project.
There is a strong correspondence between the physical places and virtual locations.
If, for example, a team decides within a meeting to split up into subgroups, each subgroup might go to a different area of the meeting room or the building to continue their collaboration there.
We have presented the design and implementation of innovative collaborative workspaces based on an integrated design of real architectural and virtual information spaces.
Our approach is related to and was inspired by different developments in human-computer interaction, augmented reality, ubiquitous computing and computer-supported cooperative work, in particular meeting support systems.
We developed new ideas for human-computer interaction and applied them to the design of collaborative work environments.
On the other hand, we extended interaction techniques by cooperative functionality to create ubiquitous and collaborative workspaces.
Since there is not enough space to discuss the relationship to other work in detail, we do this only for a few examples.
Compared to work in augmented reality, e.g., the DigitalDesk , the InteracTable provides a touchsensitive interactive display with a bottom-up projection.
This avoids the problems of shadows caused by the overlay of video projections on the real surface of the DigitalDesk.
It is also used as means for physical transport between different roomware components.
Re ubiquitous computing, our roomware approach concentrates on devices that are embedded in furniture, like chairs and tables, as well as in architectural elements of buildings, such as doors or walls.
It is based on gestures.
It allows flexible and dynamic creation and allocation of workspaces in different parts of a room or a building in correspondence with different modes of the group activity instead of having a fixed setup, e.g., a set of chairs around a static table with computers.
This enables new methods of establishing cooperation and sharing of information.
For example, a subgroup is formed by simply moving chairs in close spatial proximity .
The reactive environments described in  are different due to their focus on the special issues of video conferencing rooms.
The i-LAND environment introduces new forms of humancomputer interaction.
Thus, we have to evaluate their usefulness and their usability.
Furthermore, we plan to sense and track the position of roomware components and people.
Thus, "the room will know" the position and orientation of each component and who is interacting with which device.
The i-LAND software mentioned above will process this information and, for example, automatically initiate a coupled session with shared displays between two or three CommChairs when they are moved together to form a subgroup and their distance is below a defined threshold.
It represents a more global vision about the design of the "workspaces of the future".
We would like to thank Michele Gauler, Jochen Denzinger, and Daniel Warth for their valuable contributions to various parts of the i-LAND project and in the AMBIENTE division.
Furthermore, we like to thank Dan Russell for very fruitful discussions in an early phase of our work and several anonymous reviewers for useful comments on the submitted version.
