Information visualizations can improve collaborative problem solving, but this improvement may depend on whether visualizations promote communication.
In an experiment on the effect of network visualizations, remote pairs worked synchronously to identify a serial killer.
They discussed disparate evidence distributed across the pair using IM.
Four conditions, respectively, offered  spreadsheet only ,  individual unshared visualizations,  view-only shared visualizations, and  a full-access shared visualization of all evidence.
We examined collaborative performance, use of the visualization tool, and communication as a function of condition.
All visualization conditions improved remote collaborators' performance over the control condition.
Full access to a shared visualization best facilitated remote collaboration by encouraging tool use and fostering discussion between the partners.
Shared visualization without full access impaired performance somewhat and made communication even more vital to identifying the serial killer.
This study provides direct evidence of visualization tool features and partner behavior that promote collaboration.
The department called a meeting to share information, and detectives noted that the last two victims lived in the same apartment complex.
As this case illustrates, significant breakthroughs in detective work often come about when someone notices and associates disparate and sometimes unlikely facts or events--colloquially, "connecting the dots."
Similarly, in intelligence analysis , business innovation , and scientific research , success may hinge on sharing and seeing linkages in previously unnoticed information.
Our focus is problem solving in which successful task performance, as in the example above, depends on whether individuals share information they have that is crucial to a group's ability to "connect the dots."
We argue here that advances in computing that allow collaborators to visualize information open up new opportunities for collaborative problem solving that have failed in the past.
For instance, in detective work, a shared map and database of offenses is feasible, potentially improving remote collaboration across investigators.
In this paper, we address this possibility and examine the kinds of visualizations that foster collaborative problem solving.
Visualization techniques represent complex numerical and textual information in pictorial or graphical form and allow individuals or groups to perceive and explore patterns in data .
By removing the burden of mentally consolidating disparate information, such holistic representations of large amounts of data can help people spot anomalies, see new patterns, and improve their problem solving success .
Information visualization tools can reduce task completion time and increase productivity on many information retrieval tasks and in data analysis .
Information visualizations available to a group can help promote feelings of community and foster discussion in "wiki" websites .
Visualizations also have costs--for individuals who must spend time learning how to manipulate them  and for groups, who can experience the tradeoffs involved in working alone versus being aware of others' work.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
This idea leads to the following general hypothesis: Hypothesis 1: Access to a visualization tool will increase remote pair performance in complex problem solving.
Second, prior research suggests that visualization tools may improve collaborative performance because they allow for shared access to data, and encourage information sharing and discussion.
In their evaluation of CACHE, a system that supports intelligence analysis via visual data presentation, Billman et al.
Their results suggest that communication was necessary to take best advantage of the visualization tools.
This argument leads to the second hypothesis.
Hypothesis 2: Access to a visualization tool will increase remote pair performance in complex problem solving when this access increases information sharing and discussion by the pair.
We further asked how fully a visualization tool needs to support shared information and communication.
Visualization tools can support different levels of sharing.
At the most basic level, each member of a collaboration can visualize his or her own data but cannot see others' visualizations .
Or, collaborators might be able to view their own and others' visualizations but would be able to directly manipulate only their own ; many applications can be shared in this manner.
A third possibility is that collaborators have full access to a shared visualization application that allows for viewing everyone's data and jointly manipulating these data  .
Full access also could promote joint attention and may help in the establishment of common ground more than applications that allow only shared views .
Hypothesis 3: Access to a shared full-access visualization tool will encourage discussion between partners, and increase remote pair performance in complex problem solving beyond the performance of those using a visualization tool that supports unshared visualizations or shared but view-only visualizations.
Two defining attributes of real-world complex problem solving are that it is ill structured  and, as noted above, that it often involves knowledge or information dispersed across people and groups .
For instance, a detective in Illinois investigating a possible serial killer may sift through local cold cases looking for linkages but, unknown to this detective, relevant cases may exist in other states .
Because of the need for insight and the fact of dispersed information, the success of criminal and intelligence investigations, scientific discovery, medical problem solving, and other important real world problems often depends on opportunistic cross-talk across information sources and serendipity .
Collaboration can increase the likelihood that such cross talk and serendipity will occur.
Collaboration can increase group performance over that of individual performance in these situations  but effective collaboration may depend on the free flow of information among partners .
There now exist computer-based visualization tools that support scanning for hidden linkages and sharing dispersed information.
Our research question is whether these tools do in fact change problem solving strategies, particularly information sharing, the collaborative relationship among partners, and ultimate collaborative task performance.
We studied a type of network visualization application similar to those used in intelligence analysis and criminal investigations .
Our experimental design tested whether the network visualization tool improved collaborative task performance of remote partners who were synchronously solving a complex analytic problem, and the extent to which sharing features in the tool affected the effectiveness of the collaboration.
Previous studies have shown that visualizations can facilitate information sharing in collocated groups .
Mark, Carpenter, and Kobsa , in a seminal study of visualization in collaboration, showed that collocated pairs' and remote pairs' use of visualization tools for making bar graphs of statistical data improved their analysis performance over that of participants using the tools alone.
Our work builds on these promising results, examining how visualizations aid collaboration.
Visualization tools could aid collaborative problem solving in at least two ways.
First, if each member of a group has a visualization of his or her own data, then the individual member's insight into the problem may improve, which in turn would raise the probability of better group performance.
Participants also were shown how to use a timeline and geographic worksheet.
Participants also were trained how to use NetDraw , the visualization tool adapted for this study, if they were assigned to one of the three visualization conditions.
A sample network diagram depicted the connections among the crimes in the second practice case.
Participants were familiarized with the concepts of nodes and relationships, and they practiced using search and manipulating the diagram by location, time, and type of theft to give different perspectives on the crimes.
Participants were encouraged to ask questions throughout the training.
Training, on average, took 30 minutes.
Ninety-four participants were recruited for a "Detective Mystery Study" .
Eighty percent of the participants were undergraduate or graduate students.
Participants were paid $15 for their participation.
They were told the experiment would last 1.5 hours.
For the duration of the experiment, participants were seated apart, such that they could not see their partner or their partner's workstation.
Participants role-played a pair of detectives in Zone 5 of a police department, working remotely together to identify a possible serial killer in Zone 5 and to complete reports on their findings.
The participants were trained on the visualization tool and the investigative task, given their detective task assignment, and left to work on the assignment for one hour.
After an hour, or when the participants had completed their report, they completed an online survey to elicit their memory of the evidence about the serial killer.
The experimenter then debriefed the participants.
They read documents containing evidence relevant to four suspects in the theft and were asked to organize the data using a template that organized the evidence as to the motive, opportunity, and alibi of each suspect.
Then they practiced on a more complex problem involving a rash of electronic equipment thefts.
The documents included witness and suspect interviews, and coroner's reports.
There were additional documents on crime statistics by police district zone, a map of the zone and adjacent zones, a bus route map, and a police department organizational chart.
Participants also could use an MO  worksheet for recording dates, weapons, and other relevant evidence for each case, a suspect worksheet for recording different suspects, their connection to the victim, and given alibis, and a timeline worksheet for recording when and where each crime took place, intended to support inter-case linkages.
All of the evidentiary documents and reports were available online and could be opened, searched, put in different or new folders, and manipulated freely.
To insure that sufficient screen space was available to examine multiple documents at once, the participants each had access to two 17" display monitors placed side by side.
Also, the participants were given paper versions of the instructions and worksheets.
The serial killer was responsible for four of the six homicides in the cold cases folder.
Eight pieces of evidence, six within the cold case files and one in the open homicide case file, could be linked to the serial killer: similar blunt force trauma injuries to the victims; victims killed in the evening after they returned from work; victims rode the same bus route; victims lived near the same bus route; offender worked at a local hospital on the bus route; offender had been identified on the bus ; offender had been seen carrying a tool box on the bus.
Identifying the serial killer required conceptually linking these disparate pieces of evidence from different cases rather than simply eliminating a defined group of suspects in one current case folder.
Social network diagrams are aptly suited for complex problem solving of the kind we used.
The evidence documents contained over 50 unique names and a diagram that represented how each person was connected to various other persons could serve to help participants categorize and group people, and to view how they might be connected across cases.
At the start of a session, each participant  received the software set up to show a predetermined social network diagram reflecting the relationships in the documents they had.
Figure 1 is a screen shot of the application.
Within the diagram, each circle  represented a person from the crimes and each line represented a relationship between two people.
Victims were represented in red and other persons  in blue.
Thick lines denoted a strong tie, such as married people or coworkers.
Thin lines denoted a weak tie, such as two people who happened to be at the same place at the same time .
Participants could freely manipulate and move the nodes within the screen, but they could not change underlying relationships.
Participants also could search or filter the diagrams based on a set of attributes to reveal people with common characteristics.
Searchable attributes included police district zone affiliation, case affiliation, occupation, mode of transportation, time of crime, location of crime, weapon used to injure the victim, and the injured body part of the victim.
For example, within the attribute weapon, the three options were handgun, blunt instrument, and poison.
If handgun were selected, all victims who were injured by a handgun would be visible on the screen.
The four experimental conditions varied the degree of access that participants had to NetDraw.
The caseload and evidence for the serial killer were distributed evenly between each member of the pair.
To accomplish this, the six unique cold cases and the documents of the current open homicide case were divided between the pair such that each member received 3 distinct cold cases and half of the documentation for the current homicide case.
The open homicide case concerned the murder of a woman named Darlene Raffield.
To solve this homicide, participants only had to examine the documents in one folder, review the alibis of witnesses, and evaluate their motives and opportunities to commit the crime.
If a pair spent time on this case, they would have less time to focus on the complex serial killer task.
In pretesting, we found that individuals who spent more time on the Raffield homicide were less likely to identify the serial killer.
Each pair was randomly assigned to one of four conditions, differing with respect to their access to a visualization tool.
The tool enabled participants to see social and information network relationships in the data that linked names, places, events and objects, thereby providing a visual analysis perspective to identify the serial killer.
To ensure that they received the same information as did participants in the other conditions, they were given Microsoft Excel spreadsheets containing the same relationship information among the persons mentioned in the evidence documents.
The names of these people were arranged to form a matrix.
Relationships in the matrix were represented by 0, 1, or 2 scores, which reflected no relationship, a weak relationship , or a strong relationship , respectively.
Each participant received a spreadsheet that contained the relationship data only for their own cases.
The experimenter explained the use of the spreadsheet and the meaning of the numerical data.
They could not view their partner's visualization.
As in the condition above, each member of the pair had access to NetDraw and a manipulable and searchable social network diagram of the data for the cases that they were given.
Each participant also had a window within which they could view their partner's social network diagram.
They could not search or manipulate this diagram but could view how their partner acted upon it.
The diagrams were shared using the Share Applications feature within MSN's Messenger client.
Mentioning the name of the correct offender as guilty or a primary suspect who should be arrested was counted as identification.
We scored individuals but were mainly interested in the success of collaboration, so both members of the pair had to have named the serial killer for the pair to be coded as having collaborative successful performance.
Online activities were recorded via WinWhatWhere, a software tool that records the application a participant is using, the time spent with that window as the selected window, all keystrokes, and screenshots of the selected window.
Due to resource constraints, one randomly selected participant within each pair was recorded.
To estimate tool use, we calculated the total amount of time these participants had the visualization tool as the selected window.
Active use was highly correlated with visualization window selection .
In analyses, the total minutes the tool was selected and was active were log transformed to adjust for skewness.
We calculated how much conversation occurred between members of a pair by counting the total number of IM lines they exchanged during a session.
An IM line refers to each new line within the recorded IM logs.
Visualization and Shared View Only Visualization conditions, each member of the pair had access to NetDraw and a manipulable and searchable social network diagram of data but unlike the conditions described above, participants shared access to a network diagram that contained data from all the cases.
This diagram could be manipulated and searched by both participants in the pair.
This diagram was shared via a third computer using TightVNC, an open-source remote desktop software application.
Participants' attention to different topics was coded in the IM conversations.
IM logs were coded by line for whether the participants were discussing the serial killer task, whether they were discussing the Raffield homicide, and whether they were referring to the social network diagram .
Discussion of the Raffield homicide was coded if the IM line referenced any person related to the Raffield homicide or if the line clearly showed them thinking about facts relating to the case, for example, "what did Darlene Raffield's boss say?"
Because a single IM conversation line could be affiliated with both the Raffield homicide and the serial killer task, these counts were not mutually exclusive.
For example, some participants discussed whether the Raffield homicide was connected to the serial killer task.
References to the social network diagram were coded if the IM line directly referenced the diagram, for example, if participants used words such as "diagram," "visualization," and "picture," or discussed their active search within the diagram, such as "Watch this" and "See how these pop out?"
The percentage of total IM lines during which IM lines referenced the visualization was calculated and log transformed.
Over 5,000 lines of IM were coded using the scheme.
An independent coder coded 7% of the data .
Consistent with this argument, the correlation between identifying the serial killer and solving the Raffield homicide was r = -.20.
There were no differences across conditions solving the Raffield homicide, suggesting that having a visualization tool does not influence performance on a simple problem.
We next examined individual performance on the serial killer case.
According to our arguments, if visualization improves individual performance then that improvement might translate into a greater likelihood of collaborative success.
Because the dependent variable, solving the serial killer, is a discrete variable, the appropriate analysis is a logistic regression .
This regression assesses whether visualization conditions predict the dichotomous outcome .
The logistic regression analyses at the individual level showed a highly significant influence of condition on whether individuals identified the serial killer  with the No Visualization condition different from the other conditions .
We predicted in Hypothesis 1 that using a visualization tool would increase collaborative performance over performance in the control condition.
We defined collaborative success when both members of the pair reached consensus and correctly identified the serial killer.
We conducted analyses at the pair level, whose results are shown in Figure 2.
To insure the task was equally difficult and enjoyable across conditions we administered the NASA TLX workload scale , CRT Scales , and measured task enjoyment on the posttest.
Mean scores did not differ by condition, suggesting that cognitive ability, cognitive load, and enjoyment were equal across conditions.
To insure that correctly identifying the serial killer reflected comparable insight across conditions, on the posttest survey we tested participant's recognition memory for the eight pieces of evidence leading to a serial killer .
Again, there were no differences across conditions.
Table 1 shows the correlations of measures on the pairs.
These allow us to examine across all conditions whether visualization-related communication is associated with collaborative success.
The table shows that, overall, when pairs identified the serial killer, they also had communicated more about the serial killer and talked more about the visualization.
Active use of the visualization tool was not directly associated with communication; this result could be due to partners' opening their visualization window once and then moving to talk and to view documents.
Pairs in all three visualization conditions outperformed pairs in the No Visualization condition, as predicted.
Only 7.7%  of pairs in the No Visualization condition identified the serial killer, whereas 50%  of pairs in the Unshared Visualization condition, 33.3%  of pairs in the Shared View Only Visualization condition, and 58%  of pairs in the Shared Full Access Visualization condition identified the serial killer .
Student's t tests revealed significant differences at the p < .05 level between the two best conditions--Full Access Visualization and Unshared Visualizations versus the No Visualization controls.
To test whether visualization helped the collaboration over and above the help it gave individual members of each pair, we conducted a nominal pairs analysis .
For this analysis, we compared actual problem solving success of each pair in each condition with the simulated success of all possible other pairs in the same condition.
The idea here was to compare these nominal  pairs with the actual pairs, to evaluate the extent to which collaboration really mattered when visualization was given to pairs.
The results of this analysis can be seen in Figure 3.
They show that, controlling for condition, performance was worse by nominal pairs than by actual pairs .
In nominal pairs, the top mean performance in the Shared Full Access Visualization condition was only 48% .
These analyses indicate that although visualizations aided individuals, collaborative performance was superior and benefited from using the visualization tool.
The results support Hypothesis 1 and show that visualization increases collaborative performance but the comparatively weak performance of the pairs in the Shared View-Only Visualization condition suggests that features of the tool do matter.
The next section delves into the different tool use and communication in the three visualization conditions, and tests of Hypotheses 2 and 3.
We thus tested whether the participants in the Visualization conditions, particularly in the Shared Full Access condition communicated differently than those in the other conditions.
We found no overall effect on the total amount of IM conversation in the pairs, but a significant effect on talking about the network diagram versus the spreadsheet .
We predicted that access to a visualization tool would increase remote pair performance in complex problem solving when this access increased information sharing and discussion by the pair .
The first step was to establish that participants with access to the visualization tool actually used it.
In the No Visualization condition, on average, participants spent 2.7 minutes with the spreadsheet selected.
Pairs in the two Shared Visualization conditions used the visualization tool more than did the pairs in the Unshared Visualization condition .
As shown in Figure 4, Shared View-Only Visualization pairs used the visualization tool the most , followed by Shared Full Access Visualization pairs , and then Unshared Visualization pairs .
A contrast revealed that this difference was significant when comparing both shared conditions against the unshared condition .
These results indicate that access to shared visualizations does encourage tool use.
According to a Student's t test, pairs in the Shared Full Access Visualization condition talked significantly more about the network diagram  than did pairs in the other Visualization conditions.
How was talking about the visualization relevant to identifying the serial killer?
To examine this question, we looked at whether those who identified the serial killer talked differently with their partners than those who did not in the three Visualization conditions.
The analyses showed interesting relationships: Across the three Visualization conditions, controlling for condition, the higher the percentage of pair discussion about the network diagram, the higher was the percentage of discussion about the serial killer .
The more pairs discussed the serial killer, the more likely they were to identify the serial killer .
These analyses point to the visualization as a contributor of solutions to the complex serial killer case.
Discussion was positively correlated with solving the case in the two best visualization conditions  and negatively correlated with time spent problem solving .
Talk was uncorrelated with solving the case in the less effective Shared View Only condition.
We can only speculate, but possibly, when each member of the pair had his or her own visualization and could only stare at the other person's diagram and manipulations, the tradeoff proposed by Gutwin and Greenberg prevailed.
Alternatively, the two nonintegrated diagrams of data might have violated the "proximity compatibility" principle of display design , and confused pair members.
Our study is a step in the direction of understanding how visualizations can aid collaboration.
Our nominal pair analysis  showed that real collaboration was valuable on this task but we do not know exactly how pairs came to aid one another, for example, whether they formed a common mental model of the problem  or whether they simply tried harder because the visualization was fun and motivating .
Future research will be needed to study these potential consequences of the use of collaborative visualization tools.
How joint representations are created, perceived and given meaning is still being explored and understood as different from linguistic and gestural cognitive processing .
We studied the impact of a shared visualization tool on difficult collaborative problem solving .
The visualization tool made a significant difference, improving not only individual performance, but also collaboration.
Although differences among the tools tended to be overshadowed by the positive impact of having any visualization at all, the Shared View-Only Visualization was comparatively unhelpful.
That is, having full manipulable access to the shared visualization  encouraged pairs to use the tool and fostered more discussion and better performance-- 58% of the pairs solved the serial killer case.
By contrast, when pairs had a tool that gave shared views but no ability to manipulate others' data , there was a dip in performance--only 33.3% of pairs solved the serial killer case.
We wondered if the mere awareness of the partner's visualization  was a distraction to these pairs, explaining why mere awareness was worse than not seeing the partner's view at all .
A decade ago, Gutwin and Greenberg  proposed that collaborative systems involve "mixed focus" whereby individuals must attend to their own work and to that of others.
They analyzed a groupware concept map editor, showing that the tradeoffs of a shared view may include less individual flexibility and more attention to coordinating with others, detracting from accuracy.
Overall, we did not see that tradeoff.
This study cannot be generalized now to other genres of visualization tools, to other task types , or to other remote collaborative settings.
For example, sharing information through IM may have introduced barriers to the effective flow of information or made visualizations particularly effective in a way they would not otherwise be effective.
Previous studies have shown that IM provides an effective channel of communication between partners  but an audio chat feature could help us understand the role of different channels in the use of visualization tools.
Participants were all given predrawn social network diagrams.
One might argue that taking a more active role in creating the diagram would aid pairs in understanding their data .
However, a recent trend in using social network diagrams for analysis is to use diagrams automatically generated from an existing dataset.
Oftentimes the datasets have millions of different records from which diagrams are produced, so a real challenge is how to engage users in helping to create them.
This study examined synchronous interactions.
In distributed teams, colleagues often do not work simultaneously.
Asynchronous collaborative visualizations can encourage to knowledge discovery .
Asynchronous communication and access to the information visualization tools would be most similar to our Unshared Visualization condition.
This study has just one main implication for designing tools for complex problem solving--that is, create a visualization tool.
Our study also suggests that, for most effective collaboration, visualization tools should have the capability of being jointly manipulated and should facilitate the integration of data from different collaborators.
Information visualization in the form of a network diagram aided both individual and collaborative complex problem solving.
Real collaboration improved the performance of pairs over statistical pairings, particularly if pairs  had an integrated visualization that both could manipulate, and  when pairs discussed the visualizations they received.
Doing so led to more relevant discussion of evidence and higher solution rates.
Information Slices: Visualization and Exploring Large Hierarchies using Cascading, Semi-Circular Discs.
Controlling the information flow: Effects on consumers' decision making and preferences.
Opportunity recognition as pattern recognition: How entrepreneurs "connect the dots" to identify new business opportunities.
Collaborative intelligence analysis with CACHE: Bias reduction and information coverage.
Palo Alto Research Center, CA.
Cognitive Science Approaches To Understanding Diagrammatic Representations.
Situated cognition: How representations are created and given meaning.
In Lewis, R. and Mendelsohn, P.
