Understanding the complexities of users' judgements and user experience is a prerequisite for informing HCI design.
Current user experience  research emphasises that, beyond usability, non-instrumental aspects of system quality contribute to overall judgement and that the user experience is subjective and variable.
Based on judgement and decisionmaking theory, we have previously demonstrated that judgement of websites can be influenced by contextual factors.
This paper explores the strength of such contextual influence by investigating framing effects on user judgement of website quality.
Two experimental studies investigate how the presentation of information about a website influences the user experience and the relative importance of individual quality attributes for overall judgement.
Theoretical implications for the emerging field of UX research and practical implications for design are discussed.
These personal interpretations of a system's quality will influence future interaction with the system and may be communicated to other users with the potential of influencing their subjective experience .
Much UX research has focused on aesthetics and initial user perceptions of the interfaces and web sites; however, the nature of information presentation has received less attention.
Information presentation can be vital in lead messages in websites and in inter-site links and recommendations.
In this paper we investigate the subtle biases that might be introduced in expression of textual messages within websites and recommendations from broker sites or other users.
In previous work, we have demonstrated the subjectivity and variability of user judgement based on decision-making theory .
We found that personal background as well as contextual factors influenced judgement of website quality and decisions based on the website .
Furthermore, these studies showed how the relative importance of individual quality attributes for overall appreciation of a system changed according to the decision context, specifically the criticality of the decision that users had to make .
This paper explores the strength of the decision context in influencing judgement, by investigating framing effects with website quality evaluation.
It is hypothesised that users change their judgements and preferences as a result of having been primed with positively versus negatively framed information about objectively equivalent choices.
We further investigate how prior information about a website can influence the relative importance of individual quality attributes for users' overall judgement of the website, as well as whether viewing versus interacting with a website affects users' judgement and decision making in general, and framing effects in particular.
The paper first introduces the theoretical background on framing in the context of judgement of website quality.
Then, two experimental studies are reported.
Finally, we conclude with a discussion of theoretical implications of the results for the emerging field of UX research, as well as practical implications for design.
Understanding user judgement and users' experiences with interactive systems is an important prerequisite for informing HCI design .
Recent user experience  research has become increasingly aware of the complexity of users' experiences  and the importance of understanding this complexity for design .
While traditional usability focuses on users' tasks and accomplishments, UX emphasises a more holistic approach  including non-instrumental aspects such as a system's look and feel .
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Studies of the framing effect investigate how accentuating positive versus negative views of objectively equivalent events, items, or information affects judgement and decision making.
Framing effects essentially demonstrate information presentation biases, where the same information can lead to different judgements and decisions according to whether it is presented in a positive or in a negative frame.
According to Levin et al.
Risky choice frames are the most commonly studied framing effects .
They hypothesise that choices between a sure and a risky option of equal expected value depend on whether the options are formulated in positive or negative terms.
The original demonstration by Tversky and Kahneman's Asian Disease problem  showed that participants who were given the positively framed version  were more likely to select the sure option than participants who were given the negatively framed version , who were more likely to select the risky option.
Goal framing is used in persuasive communication .
In the positive frame the gain or benefit of an event or issue is emphasised.
The negative frame focuses on the event's potential to avoid a loss.
In contrast to risk framing, there is no choice to be made between a risky and a sure option.
The two frames aim towards achieving the same goal and the question is which frame is the more powerful enhancer.
In attribute framing, an attribute of an event or object is subject to the framing manipulation .
The event or object is then evaluated in terms of favourability .
The hypothesis is that a positive frame will yield a more positive rating of the event or object than the negative frame .
Most recent studies on attribute framing involved consumer judgement of product evaluation such as toasters , condoms , or ground beef .
For instance, Levin  showed that perceptions of the quality of ground beef depend on whether beef is labelled as 75% lean or 25% fat.
It was rated as significantly better tasting and less greasy when it was labelled as % lean  compared to % fat .
A subsequent study  showed that the attribute framing effect persists with direct product experience, i.e.
However, the framing effect was less strong when the product was actually experienced compared to the previous description-only study.
Levin and Gaeth  suggest that attribute framing influences the encoding and representation of information in associative memory, whereby positive encoding highlights the positive aspects of the information, while negative encoding highlights the negative aspects.
This paper investigates framing effects in the context of website quality evaluation.
In current UX research, a number of multi-dimensional models of quality hypothesise that a variety of quality aspects can contribute to overall appreciation of a system.
Such models combine, for instance, usability, service quality, and aesthetics , pragmatic quality  and hedonic quality  , or ease-of-use, usefulness, attractiveness, and enjoyment .
ADM theory asserts that people's decision making is adaptive and sensitive to task, context, and their background and experience.
In particular, we showed that a user's personal background as well as contextual factors influenced judgement of website quality and decisions made about a website .
While these previous studies have shown how users adapted their judgement and decision making based on different task scenarios, this paper investigates whether users' judgement and decision making are susceptible to more subtle changes, in particular between objectively equivalent scenarios, which are merely presented differently.
This was implemented as a series of attribute framing experiments, where the participants were given prior information about a website attribute, for instance about its usability.
The first experiment investigated framing effects on judgement of website quality.
In this experiment, one attribute of a hypothetical website, such as its usability, was described to participants.
They were then to report their expectations about the quality of such a website.
It was hypothesised that participants would rate such a website more or less favourably, depending on whether the objectively equivalent descriptions of the website were formulated in positive or in negative terms.
Framing effects were investigated for three website quality attributes: usability; look and feel; and content and service quality.
The paper reports two experiments which were modelled after two attribute-framing studies by Levin et al.
The second experiment is based on a subsequent study by Levin and Gaeth  on attribute framing of ground beef with product experience.
The original studies found that while the framing effect persisted in both cases, it was significantly lower with actual product experience than in the description-only study.
To explore the effect of exposure in more detail, in the second experiment we introduced two conditions with different degrees of exposure.
In the first condition, participants were restricted to briefly viewing a screenshot of the website's homepage.
In the second condition, participants could browse and interact with the website.
This allowed investigating differences between a first impression of the website and user judgement after interacting with the system.
The study was conducted using an unsupervised online survey consisting of 8 questions on 2 pages.
The questionnaire required about 2 minutes to complete.
In the first page of the survey, participants were briefed that "this study investigates users' expectations of websites" and demographic data was collected .
Participants were not told about the framing hypotheses.
Participants then were given information about a hypothetical website's quality.
They were randomly assigned to receive information about usability, look and feel, or content and service quality.
For each attribute, participants were randomly assigned to be given either positively framed information or the equivalent information negatively framed, e.g.
The sentences used for framing are summarised in Table 1.
Participants were neither given any other information, nor exposed to any website.
Usability 10% of users experience difficulty using the website.
90% of users experience the website as easy to use.
Look & feel 10% of users find the website visually unattractive.
90% of users find the website visually attractive.
Content & service quality 10% of the information on the website is unreliable.
90% of the information on the website is reliable.
Framing effect: ratings of perceived website quality will be significantly higher in the positive frame than in the negative frame.
Exposure effect: the strength of the framing effect will be reduced with increasing exposure to the website.
Shift in relative importance: the relative importance of individual evaluation criteria for overall judgment will change according to which attribute was accentuated in prior information about the website.
Participants were then asked to rate such a website on a 2item, 7-point Likert scale for overall quality , as well as for the respective quality attribute that they had received information about, e.g.
Expected attribute quality was measured with Lavie and Tractinsky's measurement instruments , modulated on 7-point Likert scales.
They propose a model of website quality consisting of usability, service quality, classic- and expressive aesthetics.
Classic aesthetics refers to traditional aesthetic notions emphasising orderly and clear design, while expressive aesthetics is associated with the design's creativity and originality.
The order of scale items was randomised between subjects.
There was no significant difference between groups in the analysis with classic aesthetics as dependent variable.
Subjects in the positive framed condition rated expressive aesthetics significantly higher  than participants in the negative framed condition .
The subject population was divided into three groups based on which quality attribute  they had received information about.
The results were analysed separately for each group.
Scale indexes were computed as the means of the individual scale items for each scale.
All scales showed high reliability .
Univariate analyses of variance were conducted separately for overall quality as well as for all of the respective evaluation criteria  as dependent variables and frame  as between-subjects factor.
For participants that were given prior information on the content and service quality of the website, there was a significant main effect of frame as factor and service quality as dependent variable  = 4.81; p < .05; p2 = .20.
Subjects who were given positively framed information on service quality of the website rated its service quality significantly higher  than participants who were given the same information, but negatively framed .
For participants who were given information on the usability of the website, there was a significant main effect of frame as factor and usability as dependent variable  = 6.33; p < .05; p2 = .25.
Subjects who were given positively framed information on the usability of the website gave significantly higher ratings  than participants who were given the same information, but negatively framed .
The analysis with overall quality as dependent variable showed no significant difference between the negative and positive frames.
The results demonstrate attribute-framing effects for website quality consistent with results from previous studies in other domains .
For all attribute frames, subjects who received positively framed information about a website attribute indicated higher expected quality ratings for the respective evaluation scale, with the exception of classic aesthetics ratings which were not affected by framing prior information.
Overall quality judgement was influenced by framing of prior information about look and feel and service quality, but not for usability .
The second experiment expanded the first by adding website exposure, in contrast to the previous information-only setup.
The effect of website exposure was investigated in two conditions: viewing a screenshot of the website's homepage; and in a free-browsing session where the participants interacted with the website.
Equivalent to the first experiment, participants were given equivalent, but positively or negatively framed, prior information about one attribute of the website and subsequently asked to evaluate it.
The primary hypothesis was that participants would rate the respective website attribute more- or less-favourably according to whether prior information about that attribute was formulated in a positive or negative frame.
As in the first experiment, participants received prior information about one quality attribute only.
However, as in this study participants experienced the website, they were asked to rate the website's quality in all attribute dimensions in the site evaluation.
This allowed investigating whether framing the information about one quality attribute had any effect on judgement of other attributes.
We further hypothesised that accentuating a particular attribute in prior information would increase the relative importance of that attribute for participants' judgement of overall quality.
For instance, participants who were given information about the website's usability would give more importance to usability in their overall quality judgement, while for participants who received prior information about look and feel, the perceived aesthetic quality rating would be the most important predictor for overall judgement.
In the first page of the survey, participants were briefed that "this study investigates users' opinions of websites" and demographic data was collected .
Participants were not told about the framing hypotheses.
Participants were then randomly assigned positive or negative frame and to receive information about either the website's usability, its look and feel, or its content and service quality, e.g.
See Table 1 for a complete list of sentences used for each attribute and frame.
Next, participants were randomly assigned to exposure conditions.
Half of the participants were instructed that they would be seeing a 10-second screenshot of a website's homepage and then be asked to evaluate the website, while the other group was instructed that they would be exploring a website for 1 minute and would then be asked to evaluate it.
The screenshot and browsing intervals were chosen after a series of pilot studies with 12 participants with the aim of selecting intervals that would assure that participants would be viewing / browsing the website for the entire interval, as the study was conducted as a non-supervised online survey.
For the screenshot, we followed recommendations from the eye-tracking literature, which have found 10 to 15 second intervals to be an appropriate interval in studies that record first impressions based on website screenshots .
While viewing or browsing the website the remaining time was displayed above the website .
The viewing / browsing session was stopped automatically after the allocated time was up, upon which the participants were instructed to resume the survey.
The study followed a 3  x 2  x 2  between-subjects design.
Additionally, there was a control group of participants who received no prior information before experiencing the website .
The study was conducted using the CHI 2008 website  as experimental stimulus .
A copy of the website was made and the content frozen so that the website did not differ between participants in any way.
The website consisted of 13 pages with content and 8 pages that were under construction .
The only change that was made to the original, was to remove links that pointed to external websites  to ensure that participants could not accidentally leave the pages of the CHI website while browsing.
After experiencing the website, participants proceeded to the final part of the survey where they were asked to report their opinions or expectations based on their current impression of the website.
Participants were asked to evaluate the website with a two-item overall quality scale , as well as an evaluation for each attribute dimension.
Attribute quality was measured using Lavie and Tractinsky's scale items for usability, classic and expressive aesthetics, and service quality .
All items were measured on 7-point Likert scales.
The order of scale items was randomised between subjects.
A final question recorded whether this had been the first time that participants had seen the CHI 2008 website.
Participants were recruited by e-mail invitation and advertising in online student-forums.
392 participants took part in the study, 376 of 392 responses were complete and valid.
Similarly, service quality was rated higher in the positively framed condition  than in the negatively framed condition .
There was no significant effect of exposure in both analyses.
The analyses with classic aesthetics and expressive aesthetics as dependent variables did not show any significant effects of frame or exposure for this group.
There was no significant difference in mean ratings of overall judgement in the screenshot condition, but a significant difference in the browsing condition , where participants who were given positively framed information rated the overall quality of the website higher  than participants who were given negatively framed information .
The subject population was divided into three groups based on which quality attribute  they had been given information about, as well as a fourth control group which consisted of participants who had received no prior information before evaluating the website.
The results were analysed separately for each group.
Scale indexes were computed as the means of the individual scale items for each scale.
All scales showed high reliability .
Univariate analyses of variance were conducted separately for all evaluation criteria  as dependent variables, with frame  and exposure  as between-subjects factors.
For participants who were given prior information about the usability of the website, there was a significant main effect of frame as factor and usability as dependent variable  = 5.79; p < .05; p2 = .06.
Subjects who were given positively framed information on usability rated the usability of the website significantly higher  than subjects who were given the same, but negatively framed information .
For participants that were given prior information on the look and feel of the website, there was a significant main effect of frame as factor and expressive aesthetics as dependent variable  = 4.18; p < .05; p2 = .04 with no significant effect of exposure.
Subjects who were given positively framed information rated the expressive aesthetics significantly higher  than participants who were given the same information but negatively framed .
For participants given prior information on the content and service quality of the website, there was a significant main effect of frame as factor and service quality as dependent variable  = 8.98; p < .01; p2 = .10.
Subjects who were given positively framed information on service quality of the website rated its service quality significantly higher  than participants who were given the same information, but negatively framed .
There was no significant effect of exposure.
Neither the analyses with other evaluation criteria as dependent variables, nor with overall quality as dependent variable, showed any significant effects for this group.
To analyse the relative importance of individual evaluation criteria for overall judgement, stepwise linear regressions were carried out for each participant group with overall judgement as dependent variable and the evaluation criteria  as independent variables.
For participants who were given prior information on the usability of the website, the regression results suggest that usability was the most important predictor for overall judgement .
For participants who had received information on the look and feel of the website, the regression results suggest that classic aesthetics was the most important predictor for overall judgement , followed by a model of classic and expressive aesthetics , and a model of classic aesthetics, expressive aesthetics, and usability .
For participants who were given information on the content and service quality of the website, the regression results suggest that classic aesthetics was the most important predictor for overall judgement , followed by a model of classic and expressive aesthetics , and a model of classic aesthetics, expressive aesthetics, and service quality .
For the control group with no prior information, the regression results suggest that classic aesthetics was the most important predictor for overall judgement .
For the control group of participants given no prior information on the website before experiencing and evaluating it, univariate analyses of variance were conducted separately for each evaluation criterion  as dependent variables and exposure  as between-subjects factor.
None of these analyses showed any significant effect of exposure as factor, i.e.
The mean ratings per evaluation criterion of the control group were generally between the ratings of participants who had received positively framed information for that quality attribute  and those who had received the same information, but negatively framed  as depicted in Figure 6.
For all attributes, there was a framing effect on the evaluation of the `framed' attribute, e.g.
However, framing prior information on one quality attribute did not affect the ratings of any other quality attributes, with exception of the usability frame affecting service quality ratings .
This is consistent with findings of attribute framing studies in other product domains .
The only exception was that in both studies ratings of classic aesthetics , which emphasises low-level perceptual properties of the system , were not susceptible to any framing.
As the results of the second experiment demonstrate, prior information about one quality attribute did not have any significant effects on ratings of any other individual attributes.
The only exception was that participants who were given positively versus negatively framed information on usability significantly differed in their service quality ratings.
This may be due to the scale used to assess service quality  which emphasised perceived reliability , that participants might have associated with a website's usability.
While the results demonstrate attribute-framing effects for judgement of individual website quality attributes, corresponding to the findings of related studies in other domains , the inconsistencies in judgement of overall quality make it difficult to interpret the strength of framing prior information of individual quality attributes on judgement of overall website quality.
However, the significant differences in the effects of prior information between attributes reinforce the need for multi-dimensional models of quality that include the investigation of multiple quality attributes and their effect on overall judgement and decision making.
Framing of overall quality judgement showed a more complex picture and varied between groups, depending on which quality attribute they had received prior information about.
Participants who were given information on usability differed in their overall rating only in the browsing condition, whereas for participants who had received information on the look and feel, framing affected their overall judgement in both screenshot and browsing conditions.
There was no difference in judgement of overall website quality for participants who had received prior information on the website's content and service quality.
The regression results indicate that prior information about a website not only had a significant effect on judgement of website quality, but also on the relative importance of individual evaluation criteria for overall judgment.
The most important predictor for overall quality changed according to which quality attribute was accentuated in prior information about the website.
The results demonstrate framing effects on judgement of website quality both when participants had received only a description of the website and with various levels of exposure to the website.
Participants consistently rated the quality of the website better or worse according to whether objectively equivalent prior information about the website's quality had been formulated in a positive or negative frame.
The framing effect was smaller when participants were exposed to the website than in the information-only experiment .
The difference in effect sizes between framing without and with exposure to the website is consistent with findings of related previous studies  that show that the mean difference in rating scores between the positively framed and the negatively framed conditions decreases with exposure to the stimulus.
This can be explained with the averaging model of information integration , which hypothesises that the effect of one source of information decreases when combined with another source of information.
It is to be noted that the two experiments here were conducted with a significantly different sample size , so the significance levels of the difference in mean sizes in the first experiment were lower, although the mean difference was greater.
However, the second experiment did not find consistent significant differences in judgement between participants who evaluated the website after only seeing a ten-second screenshot and participants who interacted with the website in a one-minute browsing session.
Only aesthetics ratings differed between screenshot and browsing, which was due to participants seeing more of the website in the browsing condition, which generated higher ratings for browsing participants, across positive, negative, and no-frame  conditions.
This extends results of recent research about the importance of first impressions of websites .
However, it is noteworthy that while our study's comparison does contrast viewing-only with interacting, the browsing session only lasted 1 minute and thus may be labelled only an "extended second impression".
Further work that addresses the short-, medium-, and long-term temporal dynamics of judgement of website quality in more detail is necessary .
In the wider context of HCI design and evaluation, the results imply that context and prior information about websites are powerful influences for the user's subsequent experience and judgement of perceived quality.
The results demonstrate that not only the information itself, but also different presentation of equivalent information, will influence future appreciation of a website.
This advocates a careful consideration of the decision context  and the inclusion of contextual factors in models of perceived quality.
The perceived quality and impact of a website depend not only on direct properties of the design, but also on external sources of judgement , such as the brand or reputation of the organisation behind the website, or recommendations by other users.
For designers, the results imply to check value laden information within websites for possible biases.
In persuasive technology the implications are to present positive information first to foster a favourable attitude to a subsequent choice, but reverse the order with negative information to dissuade users.
Designers of recommenders, web broker sites, and training materials need to beware of potential biases in information presentation sequence that could colour users' subsequent judgements.
Finally, as expressions of trade-off positive versus negative opinion are pervasive in many CMC and e-community systems, individual users and moderators should be aware of presentation biases.
In previous studies  we had shown that the relative importance of individual quality attributes for overall appreciation of a system can shift according to different decision contexts.
The results of the regression analyses of the second experiment, where participants were asked to rate the website in all quality dimensions, show that focusing on a particular attribute in prior information about a website can cause such changes in relative importance.
Highlighting a particular quality attribute in the information prior to experiencing the website changed the most important predictor for overall judgement between groups.
For instance, for participants who were given prior information on usability, 35% of the variance in overall judgement could be explained by ratings of usability as most important predictor, whereas for participants who had received prior information about the look and feel of the website, classic and expressive aesthetics accounted for 40% of the variance in overall quality.
In conclusion, we found that even subtle manipulations in the decision context can influence users' judgements of individual quality attributes and overall quality judgement, as well as the relative importance of individual evaluation criteria for overall judgement.
This further demonstrates the subjectivity and variability of users' experiences and judgements advocated in UX research, and in particular the powerful influence of decision context.
Differential versus unit weighting of violations, framing, and the role of probability in image theory's compatibility test.
De Angeli, A., Sutcliffe, A. and Hartmann, J., Interaction, usability and aesthetics: what influences users' preferences?
Forlizzi, J. and Battarbee, K., Understanding experience in interactive systems.
Hartmann, J., Assessing the Attractiveness of Interactive Systems.
Hartmann, J. and Sutcliffe, A., A framework for judgement of quality of interactive systems.
2nd International Open Workshop on User Experience Towards a unified View at NordiCHI2006 Hartmann, J., Sutcliffe, A. and De Angeli, A., Investigating Attractiveness in Web User Interfaces.
Hassenzahl, M. The effect of perceived hedonic quality on product appealingness.
Hassenzahl, M. The Thing and I: Understanding the Relationship between User and Product.
Funology, Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2003.
Hassenzahl, M. and Tractinsky, N. User Experience - a research agenda.
Jordan, P. Designing Pleasurable Products.
Karlsson, M. Expressions, Emotions, and website design.
Kim, J., Lee, J. and Choi, D. Designing Emotionally Evocative Homepages: An Empirical Study of the Quantative Relations Between Design Factors and Emotional Dimensions.
Lai, Y.-L. and Hui, K.-L., Internet Opt-In and Opt-Out: Investigating the Roles of Frames, Defaults and Privacy Concerns.
Lavie, T. and Tractinsky, N. Assessing dimensions of perceived visual aesthetics of web sites.
Associative effects of information framing.
How Consumers Are Affected by the Framing of Attribute Information Before and After Consuming the Product.
All Frames Are Not Created Equal: A Typology and Critical Analysis of Framing Effects.
AIDS risk perceptions and decision biases.
The social psychology of HIV infection, Lawrence Erlbaum, 1993, 5-38.
A framework for a theory of picture recognition.
Eye movements and psychological processes, John Wiley and Sons, New York, NY, USA, 1976.
Lowgren, J. and Stolterman, E. Thoughtful Interaction Design: A Design Perspective on Information Technology.
McCarthy, J. and Wright, P. Technology as Experience.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 1993.
Framing and conflict: Aspiration level contingency, the status quo, and current theories of risky choice.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 18 .
Sutcliffe, A. and De Angeli, A., Assessing Interaction Styles in Web User Interfaces.
Tractinsky, N., Toward the Study of Aesthetics in Information Technology.
Tversky, A. and Kahneman, D. The framing of decisions and the psychology of choice.
