The objective of this course is to provide newcomers to Automotive User Interfaces with an introduction and overview of the field.
The course will introduce the specifics and challenges of In-Vehicle User Interfaces that set this field apart from others.
We will provide an overview of the specific requirements of AutomotiveUI, discuss the design of such interfaces, also with regard to standards and guidelines.
We further outline how to evaluate interfaces in the car, discuss the challenges with upcoming automated driving and present trends and challenges in this domain.
Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the Owner/Author.
Copyright is held by the owner/author.
Today, driving a car is more than the activity of maneuvering the vehicle from one location to the other.
Besides the driving task, drivers also want to perform  tasks  including the operation of safety and comfort functions or the infotainment system.
Drivers want to be entertained  or com-
In this part, we also discuss the influence of invehicle activities on road accidents.
As a second part, we provide an overview on principles, guidelines, and standards that one should consider during the design of AutomotiveUI.
We take this as a basis to also give deeper insights into the design of such interfaces, enriched with practical experiences from previous projects.
In the third part of the course, the participants learn how invehicle interfaces can be evaluated during the design.
This includes the explanation of various measures with regard to evaluation, different testing procedures .
Furthermore, we plan to discuss study-related aspects by running a simulation experiment in the course.
For the fourth part, we elaborate the specific requirements and expected changes for future automated driving situations.
Also based on the Dagstuhl Seminar #16262 on Automotive User Interfaces in the Age of Automation , this includes a discussion of the different driving modes from manual driving to fully automated driving, as well as the possibilities that arise when driving highly and fully automated.
Also, the importance of take-over requests while highly automated driving will be explained.
As a concluding part, we outline remaining challenges and expected trends with regard to AutomotiveUI and more general human mobility.
The objective of this course is to provide newcomers to AutomotiveUI with an introduction and overview of the field and show how it is different from others.
An intensive discussion of the requirements, trends, and challenges will help participants to get an overview and might be the basis for new research ideas.
Especially with automated driving, we see the car as a platform that becomes more and more important for HCI.
We want attendees to leave the course with a fresh perspective on the field and inspire them to build the next generation of in-vehicle interfaces or services.
This course is targeted at a broad audience including graduate students as well as industrial and academic researchers.
We expect to present it to novices in the field of AutomotiveUI but assume that also researchers and practitioners with experiences in designing, developing, and evaluating AutomotiveUI are interested in joining and discussing.
Regarding the presentation format, we want to offer an interactive lecture where we include various interactive elements for the audience.
By involving the audience, we strive to adapt the presentation to the specific  knowledge and interests of the audience.
We prefer to stretch the course over two sessions and assume that a typical audience size of 50 participants is acceptable.
Andrew L. Kun is associate professor of Electrical and Computer Engineering at the University of New Hampshire, and Faculty Fellow at the Volpe Center.
His research focus is human-computer interaction in vehicles , primarily in speech interaction , as well as the use of visual behavior and pupil diameter measures  to assess and improve the design of user interfaces.
He served as the General Chair of the 2012 AutomotiveUI conference .
Bastian Pfleging is a senior researcher at the HumanMachine Interaction Group at the University of Munich , Germany.
His research interests are automotive user interfaces, with a focus on multimodal interaction , workload , and the support of non-driving-related activities in the car , including communication .
Before joining LMU, he was a PhD student at the University of Stuttgart and a visiting researcher at the BMW Technology Office.
In the HCI community, Bastian is involved in co-organizing different conferences like AutomotiveUI , MobileHCI, and Augmented Human, as well as various workshops .
Nora Broy is a researcher at BMW Group in Munich, Germany.
Her research interests lie on novel input and output modalities in the car and on the interaction with an automated vehicle .
She received her PhD at the HumanComputer Interaction Group of the Institute for Visualization and Interactive Systems  at the University of Stuttgart, Germany.
Her thesis is about new display modalities in the car and particularly addresses the interaction with 3D displays .
As part of her Master studies Nora was visiting the BMW Technology Office in Palo Alto.
Introducing Novel Technologies in the Car: Conducting a Real-world Study to Test 3D Dashboards.
In Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Automotive User Interfaces and Interactive Vehicular Applications .
FrameBox and MirrorBox: Tools and Guidelines to Support Designers in Prototyping Interfaces for 3D Displays.
In Proceedings of the 32nd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems .
User Interfaces for First Responder Vehicles: Views from Practitioners, Industry, and Academia.
In Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Automotive User Interfaces and Interactive Vehicular Applications .
In Workshop on Experiencing Autonomous Vehicles: Crossing the Boundaries between a Drive and a Ride .
Exploring User Expectations for Context and Road Video Sharing While Calling and Driving.
In Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Automotive User Interfaces and Interactive Vehicular Applications .
