A number of these kinds of applications have been subject to in depth social observation and analysis.
This has provided considerable understanding of the impact these technologies have on visitor experiences in terms of how users interact with each other and with the exhibits.
Notable examples are the studies of Sotto Voce by Woodruff and colleagues that detailed ways in which information from a PDA-based guide in an historic house were integrated into social and conversational aspects of visitor experiences .
Likewise, vom Lehn and Heath in their studies of museum experiences have also documented the minutiae of visitor experiences around museum and gallery exhibits and the particular role technologies such as PDAs play in shaping interaction with exhibits and with co-visitors .
However, by focussing on the "here and now" aspects of location based experiences, many of these studies and applications have overlooked some potentially important behaviours and motivations that relate to the collecting and keeping of location-based content.
There are some exceptions to this where previous location-based applications have been designed to support the keeping of content.
A notable example here is the Rememberer system at San Francisco Exploratorium  where web pages based on the exhibits visited were constructed in support of the post visit reminiscing experience.
However, while such a system is of interest to our concerns in this paper, there was no real in depth user analysis of the system of the kind we see in the work of Woodruff et al  and vom Lehn et al .
In addition, the focus of the Fleck  work was not specifically about collecting per se.
Consequently the social, behavioural and interactional properties of such a system remain under explored.
Where collecting in location-based applications has been explored it is only as a game mechanic.
But in our searches, we have not found any significant studies of the social and behavioural motivations underlying the collection of location-based content as an end in itself.
In this paper, we address this gap in the literature through a more in-depth behavioural analysis of these aspects of location-based applications in a visitor attraction.
We present a field trial of a location-based visitor application at London zoo, where content triggers at particular animal exhibits allowed people to gather and consume location-
The use of location-based technology to augment visitor experiences has received considerable attention over the years.
In this paper, we take an alternative perspective on these kinds of location-based experiences by focussing on the collecting and keeping of location-based content as opposed to simply the in situ consumption of content.
We describe a trial of a location-based experience at London zoo in which mobile camera phones were used to access digital content at particular animal enclosures around the zoo.
Through the fieldwork we demonstrate ways in which collecting and keeping have important social values over and above simply consuming the content in situ.
More specifically, the role of the collection of location-based content in identity work; in developing a sense of challenge and achievement; in defining a sense of group camaraderie; and in creating a playful sense of competition among group members.
Further, we see how narratives told around the collected location-based content over time imbue it with additional value.
These narratives become part of the resources through which relationships with family and friends get actively constructed.
We discuss how these aspects have different design implications from the in-situ consumption model of location-based experiences and tensions this introduces.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Rather it is to present findings from the fieldwork that highlight how hitherto overlooked behaviours and social motivations associated with collecting and keeping of content can be important in location-based experiences.
Through this analysis we hope to show how design options in support of collecting sometimes contrast with design decisions suitable for the in-situ consumption model of location-based experiences.
As Bisland  describes: "It would be meaningless to acquire all the pieces of a collection at once.
The difficulty in finding an object, the chase after it, makes its acquisition much more valuable of acquisition itself."
Indeed searching for objects to add to a collection is regarded by many collectors as one of the most enjoyable features of collecting .. With rare objects that are difficult to find or attain, there is generally more and kudos associated with them.
While much of the sociological work on collecting has been explored within the context of physical objects we are starting to see some explorations in the context of digital objects.
Digital music and video collecting is a good example of this, as elucidated in the research of .
These highlight for example, the identity work done through the collection and the social meaning developed when collecting is done within the context of a networked group of people .
Other authors are beginning to discuss content collecting more specifically in relation to mobile content.
In studies of mobile video content consumption for example, one thing school children do is browse each others' collections of video on their phones, comparing, sharing, valuing and exchanging content .
The mobility of device allows the collections to be brought into a range of new social contexts and circumstances.
In this paper we want to build on this foundation of research and explore how collecting behaviour can become manifest in location-based applications where digital content is tied with particular locations - and thereby be an important consideration for the design of such applications.
We do this by taking the behaviours and values of collecting characterised in the social science literature and highlight examples from our fieldwork in London Zoo that parallel these behaviours.
We first describe the system deployed in London Zoo and then go on to discuss the findings.
Before discussing the particular behaviours observed in the current study let us first consider insights from the social studies of collectors and collecting.
These provide a theoretical foundation within which to explain and understand the behaviours we observed in the zoo trial.
In McIntosh and Schmeichel  a collector is defined as a person who "accumulates a series of similar objects where the instrumental function of the objects is of secondary  concern."
Objects as part of a collection acquire value in symbolic terms and not simply utilitarian .
For collectors, objects themselves and the collection as a whole can play an important role in identity work, coming to represent parts of the self .
Collecting is not just about the objects themselves but about the narrative in which the things are collected: how they come to be talked about to others .
For children, in particular, collecting can become a means by which they gain an understanding and mastery of the world.
By organising things together from different places and times into coherent sets they provide a sense of structure to the world .
Another important aspect of collecting can be found in the membership it bestows to a group of other collectors of the same objects .
There is value here in the friendship and camaraderie this brings; a sense of belonging to a group with similar, if sometimes arbitrary interests.
Within these groups, there is also an interesting sense of competition.
Collectors begin to compare themselves and their collections to those of their peers.
To have a bigger, better, more valuable or more complete collection than others can be an important source of self esteem.
Conversely, it can have a negative impact if the collection is smaller, less valuable or incomplete.
These factors  can be an important source of motivation underlying the desire to continue collecting.
We see this, for example, in children who collect things such as football cards.
Much of the value of collecting is not simply in the ownership but in the whole process of finding and acquiring the objects themselves.
The situated signs were approximately 20cm x 30cm, an example of which can be seen in figure 1.
The data matrix codes on each sign encoded the file locations for the media content associated with that particular location.
Thirteen situated signs were distributed at thirteen animal enclosures around the zoo, including lions, tigers, penguins, gorillas, monkeys, giraffes, camels,
The application was created to run on Nokia Series 60 camera phones.
The application was designed to let users retrieve content from data matrix code on signs and to review that collected content as they toured the zoo.
To read data matrix codes on the signs, users would choose the "Capture Barcode" option to launch the code reader.
The user would then point the phone's camera at the data matrix code to gather the content it referenced.
The optics and resolution of the camera phones are such that the phone has to be held close to the code and roughly parallel to it for successful reading.
When the code had been read, pop-up text appeared saying `Click to capture' .
When the users clicked on the phone, the software would extract the `file' URIs from the codes and accesses the corresponding content files.
For each situated sign/location there would be a mixture of audio, video and text files about the animals at that particular enclosure.
These would be a variety of natural history content such as short video documentaries, animal sounds, audio commentaries, textual facts about the animals, etc.
Users could also choose to review any of the content that they had gathered.
Upon registering to use the system, a personalised web site was created for the user.
An individual's web page was actively constructed from the content items they collected on the way round the zoo.
The content on a particular web page replicated the content found on a user's trial phone.
The design draws on the look and feel of the phone-based application but scaled and optimized for viewing through a PC-based web browser.
A person's page was available immediately after their zoo visit and could be accessed for several weeks subsequent to the visit.
The system was deployed at London Zoo situated at the north end of Regents Park, London, UK.
The Zoo, set over 36 acres, was originally opened in 1828 as the World's first scientific zoo built to house a collection of animals for the purpose of scientific study.
It has since been open to the public and today has a collection of over 650 animal species.
Over 800,000 visitors come along to the Zoo each year, with 90,000 of these being part of organised school visits.
There is also an ongoing redevelopment of the visitor experience in terms of purpose built trails, information displays and interactive exhibits.
The aim is to facilitate learning about the animals and conservation programmes undertaken by the zoo.
This website would be available for a limited period after the zoo visit.
Participants were also given a leaflet to carry round with them which contained a map of the zoo indicating all the animal enclosures where they would find one of the situated signs with a barcode on.
Observations were carried out by the research team as participants went about exploring the zoo.
Some of these involved posting a researcher at particular points around the zoo, while other researchers would shadow particular groups all the way around the zoo.
In some cases, the shadowing was done discreetly at a distance from the group.
At other times, with the permission of the participants a much more engaged shadowing approach was also used.
This allowed the motivations underlying observed episodes to be unpacked in more detail by the researcher through the use of in situ interviewing immediately following the episode.
Video recordings were made where possible, providing the basis for more in-depth analysis of certain interactional episodes.
The observations were focused on the interaction and social behaviour that took place around the key information artefacts such as the mobile phones, the situated signs, and other general signage/exhibits at the animal enclosures.
They also looked more broadly at how the participants interacted with the animals and enclosures as well as the movement around the zoo between the different enclosures.
When participants completed their visit and returned their trial phones, a follow up interview was conducted with children and adults being interviewed separately.
The interviews consisted of a core standard set of questions.
A number of these questions had constrained responses such as rating particular aspects of the experience .
Others required a more open ended response for richer details of the experience to be explored.
Once they had completed the interview, participants were given a "Goody Bag" as thanks for their participation in the trial.
Following the visit to the zoo, all participants were sent an email prompting them to access their personalised website.
An online questionnaire was also delivered to the participants 1 week after their zoo visit which asked questions about the post visit aspects of the experience and their use of the web site.
As well as the questionnaire, faceto-face interviews were conducted with a select number of participants from the two invited school groups.
The purpose of these interviews was to gather a richer picture about participants' post-zoo aspects of the experience such as the motivations and contextual circumstances surrounding their interactions with their web site.
The primary participants in the trial were eighty children aged between nine and twelve years of age .
Of these eighty children, forty-seven were female and thirty-three male.
Thirty-three of the participants came to the zoo as part of an organised school trip, having been explicitly invited by the research team to take part in the trial.
The remaining forty-seven participants were child members of the public who were visiting the zoo at the weekend or during half term.
A small marquee was set up in the Zoo as a registration point for the trial where members of the public could come along and sign up to try out the technology.
By trying out the technology, they were volunteering to be an active part of the trial.
In addition to the children participating in the trial there were a total of sixty-two accompanying adults.
Thirteen of these were part of the school trips, made up of teachers, learning support assistants and parents.
The remaining forty-nine accompanying adults were part of the family visits.
Fifty of the children owned their own mobile phone and used it regularly on a daily or weekly basis primarily for talking texting to friends, playing games and taking photos.
Other functions such as listening to music, watching video and surfing the Internet were much less frequently used.
Seventy-four of the children owned or had access to a computer on a regular daily or weekly basis.
These were used primarily for playing games, emailing, surfing the Internet and instant messaging.
Other functions such as listening to music, watching videos and viewing photographs were also done but to a lesser degree.
Participants were asked to register at the tent where they were given one of the trial mobile phones.
For security purposes the members of the public participating were asked to leave a deposit of something valuable such as a credit card, driving license, or passport of the accompanying adult.
These were given back on return of the trial phones.
The registration was used to gather various data about each participant, such as age, mobile phone and technology experiences, who they were with and prior visits to the zoo.
A member of the research team would then talk the participant through the technology and give them a demo of it.
Participants were able to try out their trial phones on a demo sign, to practice capturing barcodes and to see the kind of content that was returned upon successful capture.
The research team member would answer any questions and resolve any difficulties the participants had at this point.
In the interviews, we saw how underlying competitive sentiments were being felt in particular by the school children using the application, turning the experience into a form of play: "You almost had a game and it made you race against your friends."
Utterances such as "How many have you done?"
Other comparative verbalisations related to whether others had specific items in their collection.
One comment we heard was "Have you got this one?"
Differentiated Value This kind of behaviour was particularly important because some items in the set were deemed to be more important and valuable than others.
Some of this related to the fact that certain signs  were difficult to find.
For example, the sign for the jelly fish proved to be a particularly difficult one for the children to locate because of its placement.
This bestowed upon it a certain "economic" value, giving individuals particular kudos if it was in their collection.
In other instances the value of the objects related more to personal preferences such as, for example, content about the favourite animals of the users.
Completing the collection As well as competition about numbers of items collected, there was evidence that completing the collection was an important motivation for users, a goal seen in other systematic collecting behaviours in the literature .
One child was proudly heard to say: "Yep, got everything."
Others expressed their disappointment when they were unable to get a particular item or to complete their collection.
This is illustrated in an episode by the tiger enclosure where a group of school girls were trying to collect the content relating to the tigers.
Because the barcode technology required the children to trigger the barcodes one person at a time, some of them didn't have time to read the codes before being told by their accompanying teacher that they needed to move on in order to get back to school.
The children expressed their disgruntlement at this because it meant they were unable to collect that particular item and complete their collection: "But Miss, some of us haven't got the picture yet."
Another girl then said: "I feel so left out."
Identity and self What the above example illustrated was the social importance of these collections and their in terms of identity among the group.
Taken from a functional point of view, not having this particular item in the collection would seem to be a trivial thing.
The mean number of signs for which:  the barcode was read;  at least some content was consumed.
An ANOVA showed that while participants read on average nearly ten of the thirteen data matrix codes on the signs, this was significantly greater than the mean number of times for which at least some content from the signs was consumed on the phone  = 78.995, p < .001, MSe = 6.293.
Given the discrepancy in these figures, it poses the question of why people were reading the barcodes on occasions without consuming the content in that moment .
While there may be several explanations here, what we want to go on to demonstrate through our fieldwork is that is that over and above consuming content in the moment, additional value was gleaned by participants through the collecting and keeping of content.
At times these were even sufficient motivations in themselves so that consumption of accessed content was not always necessary.
We organise the findings around key characteristics of collecting behaviour from the literature: goal setting; competition; differentiated value; completing the collection; identity; search and discovery; and narratives.
Goal Setting This suggestion of sufficiency of collecting corresponds to our observations of participant responses immediately after reading the barcodes on the signs.
In some instances, some children were satisfied simply at collecting the item by reading the barcode.
It was not important for them to view, read or listen to the information there and then.
As one school child said: "I'm not going to read it now.
I'm going to see how many I collect first" On these occasions, the informational characteristics of the location-based content were of secondary importance to the children relative to the value of collecting the media objects.
A goal had been set by this particular child to collect as many items as possible in the time available for a visit.
Such goal setting is one characteristics of collecting identified in the social science literature on collecting.
What we see, however, is the social importance attached to the possession of these objects as part of a collection.
The children bound these issues up with their sense of self, creating the feeling of disappointment when they were unable to achieve their ideal "collector self".
It is not just because they were unable to read or hear about tigers that they got disappointed - it was that their collection was incomplete.
The binding of the collection to a sense of self was also seen in a strong preference for the children to keep their collections separate from each other.
This was apparent, in particular, in the school groups who all decided to each have their own phones rather than share a phone among a small subgroup.
While the non-school group children did share phones on occasion, in order to make a joint collection, the evidence suggested that they would have preferred not to have done; they "had to" because the parents would only allow one phone.
Searching and Discovery We can see this too in the experience of searching for these situated signs.
For many of the children, there was excitement bound up in this search behaviour which again is consistent with the findings from the literature.
Discovering a sign with a data matrix code was usually accompanied by animated utterances such as "There's one" and "You guys - a sign post" and then running up to the sign to read the code.
Again there were occasions when this sometimes took precedent over the excitement at seeing the animals themselves.
The exclamations at discovery are indicative of this act of discovery being a social act.
Being the one to find the signs bestowed kudos on the individual shouting out the exclamation.
Key here was also the time and effort that went into the search.
As Bisland notes, the collector, who has put time and effort into the acquisition of the items, is the only person who really understands the true significance of the item in relation to the whole collection .
In this particular application, because the content was bound to location, the collected items embodied the fact that the collector had actually been to the place or seen the real life counterpart of the collected item.
It became proof of the visit to the location - a digital souvenir.
Narratives around the Content Collection As we have seen in the literature, much of the value of collected content is bound up in the narratives that can get told around the objects.
We saw several instances where such narratives were being told around the content that had been collected and at locations away from the initial collection points.
A good example of this was an episode in which a young boy was visiting the zoo with his mother and grandmother.
At one point the grandmother had decided to rest in the cafe area while the mother and son continued round the zoo to see some more animals.
When they met up again later, the mother asked her son to show his Grandmother what he had collected.
Boy showing his Grandma what he has seen and collected on the visit.
Both mother and Grandmother smiled as he talked through his collection.
The fact that the location-based content had been collected and kept on the phone meant that it could be brought to the bench where the Grandmother, mother and son could sit together.
The point here, though, is not that this is something exclusive about location-based content.
Rather, the point is that location-based content which has been collected comes to acquire additional meaning and significance through these kinds of narratives that get told as it is shared with others beyond the actual trigger location.
As DeVault, 2000 has argued, family is something that is actively constructed through such activities as the family visit to the zoo .
This relationship also has bearing on the behaviours and motivations associated with collecting the content.
As well as doing things such as coordinating what to look at and coordinating movement of groups of children around the zoo, adults would be involved in structuring the collecting behaviour.
Part of this was giving the children a certain sense of responsibility and independence  as we can see this in the following remark: "The kids hate being force fed with information - it makes them feel like they are at school.
This  gives them more independence.
They can read the signs and go `look what I have found'.
I think it is a great idea" By making their children responsible for the phone and initiating the interactions with the codes and content, they were given a sense of control which the parents felt encouraged their engagement with the zoo experience.
What was also important was for the parent to demonstrate their interest in their child's behaviour and performance.
Parents sitting down with their children to watch the collected video content was a way of them demonstrating their interest in the child and encouraging their engagement.
This behaviour was much more than the parents simply having some interest in the collected content themselves.
If we return to the Grandmother/Mother/Son episode we can see this aspect of the behaviour played out.
As he sat on the bench next to his Grandmother, she asked him: "Have you got any more photos ?"
He replied by listing what he had collected, to which the grandmother replied: "Ooh that's nice."
With the Grandmother having demonstrated her interest, he went on to ask: "Do you want to see some lions?"
The mother then interjected: "What did you learn about the Komodo dragons?"
He replied: "That they are very rare and live in trees for 4 years."
Looking at the content again on the web site also provided a way for participants to "revisit" their experience and reminisce about what they had done.
This activity was something that happened over a period of time with some participants revisiting their site several times.
The persistence of the collection over time and the revisiting the site allowed participants to make further emotional investment in the objects in their collection, building the narrative around the objects through the reminiscing it mediated.
Participants talked of the value of "keeping  for ages," - they had a sense of ownership of the collection.
As well as reviewing the collection as a whole, the web site allowed the collected content to be consumed in more detail, at a more relaxed pace and in a more comfortable setting without distraction.
The value of this behaviour related to some of the experiences in the zoo and the particular opportunities  for actually consuming content in the moment.
One example here was that as a social activity, the zoo visit involved coordination of movement around the zoo with the other family members or school friends .
Sometimes the group would move before an individual in the group had an opportunity to consume the content.
It was really good because I couldn't spend too much time looking at each animal at the Zoo as my brother and sisters and cousins were all with me."
At times this was conducted as a personal activity, but there were other occasions where it created opportunities for social action.
As we saw with the use of collected content at the zoo for social interaction, so too was the collected content used in this way.
In the responses to the on-line questionnaire about the web site, all participants reported that they had shown the web site to someone else; to brothers and sisters and parents.
Understanding the motivations and practices underlying the collection of location-based content can only be partially achieved with reference to experiences at the zoo itself.
This is perhaps best illustrated through the more familiar example of taking photographs during a visit.
The value and importance of taking the photo is not fully understandable without reference to the show-and-tell episodes based around photographs that occur subsequent to the visit.
In this section, we explore the role of the personalised web sites generated around the collected content.
The discussion here is not simply about the behaviours and values associated with a participant's web site but also how knowledge that a web site would be constructed shaped the collection of location-based content during the visit itself.
One of the things about the web site was that it gave a greater sense of value to the collection.
The fact that the collection was "published" on the web gave it a kind of legitimacy.
This is illustrated by the following comment: "I enjoyed using it because it is not every day you see your work and name on the Internet.
It is something I have done and it is on the Internet."
In going onto the website to review the content, part of the motivations were about the sense of achievement.
In particular this was valuable when parents had not been part of the zoo visit itself such as for those who attended the zoo as part of a school trip.
As well as an opportunity to display what they had done to their parents, it again provided an opportunity for parents to demonstrate their pride in their children's activities and achievements.
The content on the web site was used as a resource in the conversation to talk about the visit to those who had not been there and to explain what they had seen and done there.
Again what is important to emphasise here is that the value of these social interactions was derived both from the informational aspects of the particular content as well as its presentation as a whole collection as representation of what the children had accomplished.
So it was a vehicle for talking about how well the children had done as well as for discussing the particularities of the animal facts.
These are different properties which, in turn, have different implications for how the content and collection come to be interacted with.
While there are many ways in location-based collecting simply shares the social and psychological motivations underlying any collecting behaviour  it is nevertheless important to highlight that these are a key ingredient to these experiences.
But there are ways, too in which it has some distinct properties over and above traditional collecting.
Tying objects to location imbues them with particular value because one has to go to the location to retrieve the object.
The collected object becomes proof of the visit to the location; a kind of digital souvenir.
It also embodies the effort associated with getting there and finding the object.
This effort again is all part of the value that gets bound up in the object that can distinguish it from other types of collected object.
It creates a sense of play around everyday activities in the same way that I-Spy books  do.
Location-based collecting also allows particular narratives to be attached to the collected objects in the moment that are associated with the visit or outing.
As we saw, it is these narratives that are an important part of the value of these collected objects.
Collecting was also about the keeping of content over time.
Some aspects of this were difficult to achieve with the trial phones having to be returned at the end of the zoo visit.
Ideally such experiences would be conducted on people's own phones in which case people would have a mobile version of their collection.
While we were not able to explore the mobile aspects of keeping the collection over time we were able to get insights into the value of keeping location-based content over time through participant experiences with their personalised collection web site.
The repeated visiting of content on the web site after the zoo visit contributed to the value of the collection, nurturing the psychological relationship the collector could have with it.
This was both through the informational qualities of the content as well as its status as a collection.
Value was derived from the web site despite being pretty limited in terms of its collection management facilities.
Given the demonstration of value associated with collections, it would be interesting in further experiments to explore a richer set of collection management facilities in the web site.
As an illustrative example, it would be good to explore further aspects of categorisation which the psychology and sociology literature on collecting has identified as being important.
This was not a supported feature of our trial but could perhaps contribute to the creation of a richer collecting experience in future applications.
The digital domain is particularly suitable for supporting diverse categorisation and sorting arrangements for collected objects so building on this could add value here.
Collecting and keeping content in relation to the zoo visit was also important in how the visit contributed to the active construction of ongoing family and group relationships.
Through the fieldwork in this paper what we have demonstrated is that over and above the instrumental value of location-based content, where the right information is provided at the right place/time, there are additional noninstrumental aspects of these location-based experiences fro which value is derived.
These have to do with the social motivations bound up in the collecting and keeping of content.
This is more than simply the automatic logging of content accessed that you would get from the likes of the History section in a web browser.
It was about the active construction of a meaningful set of the location-based content which made the act of collecting an end itself.
What we saw was how this behaviour was bound up with identity work in terms of how the collection came to represent something about the self, the goals that were set in relation to collecting and the sense of achievement associated with attaining these goals.
We also saw how this non-instrumental aspect of the experience created a sense of camaraderie among participants doing the same activity.
This included attempts to help others in the search and discovery.
It also involved a playful sense of competition with others through comparisons with their collections.
Key here is the use of the collection and persistence of the content as a valuable resource for achieving this in ongoing conversations about the visit back at home with other members of the family who may or may not have been there.
The value of location-based content extends beyond its in situ value.
Bearing these findings in mind, attempts to support both the instrumental and non-instrumental aspects of locationbased experiences can lead to some interesting tensions and potential conflicts arise.
As an illustrative example here, making location-based information easy to find and access supports the functional aspects of providing relevant information at the right place and time.
However, if we think of this in term of the non-functional aspects of collecting, making the location-based content easy to find and retrieve could diminish the value of acquiring the object; more difficult-to-reach-and-find objects being more valuable.
In highlighting some of these tensions our aim is not to resolve them all here.
Indeed there are no absolute resolutions here, merely design judgments on the basis of the relative experience desired.
Our aim, then, is to make apparent to designers of such experiences a broader set of values and social behaviours that contribute to these experiences.
Through this, they will be able to make more informed judgments about particular design attributes in future location-based applications.
Collecting Oneself: The meaning of objects in the home.
Central Saint Martins College of Art and Design, London.
In Proceedings of ECSCW '03, Helsinki, Finland.
Sharing the Square: collaborative leisure in city streets.
In Proceedings of ECSCW '05, Paris, France.
Brown, B., Geelhoed, E. and Sellen, A., 2001, Music sharing as a computer supported collaborative application.
Experiences of developing and deploying a contextaware tourist guide: the GUIDE project.
In Proceedings of the 6th Annual International Conference on Mobile Computing and Networking.
Boston, Massachusetts, United States: ACM Press.
Developing a context-aware electronic tourist guide: some issues and experiences.
In Proceedings of CHI 2000, The Hague, The Netherlands.
Designing mobile technologies to support co-present collaboration.
Personal and Ubiquitous Computing, 7, pp.
Producing Family Time: Practices of Leisure Activity Beyond the Home.
Fleck, M., Frid, M., Kindberg, T., O'Brien-Strain, E., Rajani, R. & Spasojevic, M.  From Informing to Remembering: Ubiquitous Systems in Interactive Museums.
Fournier, S. & Richins, M. L.  Some theoretical and popular notions concerning materialism.
Sotto voce: exploring the interplay of conversation and mobile audio spaces.
In Proceedings of CHI '02, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA.
Bal, M.  Telling Objects: A Narrative Perspective on Collecting.
Barkhuus, L. and Brown, B.
In Proceedings of CHI '06, Montreal, Canada.
Revisiting the visit: understanding how technology can shape the museum visit.
In Proceedings of CSCW '02, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA: ACM Press.
Heath, C. & vom Lehn, D.  Configuring Reception: Regarding the `Spectator' in Museums and Galleries.
I saw this and thought of you: some social uses of camera phones.
In Extended Abstracts of CHI '05, Portland, OR, USA.
In Proceedings of CHI '07, San Jose, CA.
User Centred Opportunities for Supporting Consumer Behaviour through Handheld and Ubiquitous Computing, Proceedings of HICSS '03 - Track 9 - Volume 9: IEEE Computer Society.
Pearce, S.  Museums, Objects and Collections: A Cultural Study.
In Proceedings of DIME '06, Bangkok, Thailand.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Computer Laboratory.
In Proceedings of CHI '05, Portland, OR.
International Journal of Arts Management 7.
Local Use and Sharing of Mobile Phones.
Wireless World: Social and Interactional Aspects of the Mobile Age.
Godalming and Heidelberg: Springer Verlag, pp.
The Conversational Role of Electronic Guidebooks.
