Web browsers show HTTPS authentication warnings  when the integrity and confidentiality of users' interactions with websites are at risk.
Our goal in this work is to decrease the number of users who click through the Google Chrome SSL warning.
Prior research showed that the Mozilla Firefox SSL warning has a much lower click-through rate  than Chrome.
We investigate several factors that could be responsible: the use of imagery, extra steps before the user can proceed, and style choices.
To test these factors, we ran six experimental SSL warnings in Google Chrome 29 and measured 130,754 impressions.
Usable security researchers have studied web browser secu rity warnings for years .
However, the difficulty of creating ecologically valid laboratory studies of warnings has impeded warning research.
Participants may behave unnatu rally in a laboratory setting .
Even when some idiosyncra cies of laboratory studies are mitigated, experimenters still have to use contrived designs to direct participants toward sites where warnings will appear.
The most natural way to study SSL warnings is to measure reactions to real warnings on users' computers.
We measured user reactions to experimental warnings encountered during everyday browsing in Google Chrome.
In this paper, we present findings from 130,754 warning impressions.
We im plemented six experimental warnings in Google Chrome 29 that are designed to test several hypotheses about how users respond to warning design manipulations.
Akhawe and Felt showed that Firefox's SSL warning has a considerably lower CTR than Chrome's  .
We tested the hypothesis that it is the warning's design -- rather than the characteristics of Firefox or its user popula tion -- that leads to Firefox's lower CTR.
We further tested whether any design advantages of the Firefox warning were due to: its requirement of an extra step to proceed through the warning; its distinctive, non-commercial styling; or its use of a human image with its gaze directed at the user.
We make the following contributions: * We show that warning design can drive users towards safer decisions.
Design accounted for between a third and half of the difference in CTRs between Chrome and Firefox.
This means that other factors in fluence the CTR.
Web users rely on SSL for the privacy and security of their data.
For journalists and dissidents, SSL can be the difference between safety and physical harm.
Browsers show SSL warn ings when they cannot establish a well-authenticated HTTPS connection to a website.
When these warnings appear, it is up to the user to decide whether to proceed.
Our goal is to decrease the number of users who click through  Google Chrome's SSL warnings.
Clicking through an SSL warning can be a safe choice if the user is confident that the warning is due to a benign server miscon figuration.
However, it is often difficult or impossible to dif ferentiate between server misconfigurations and attacks.
Sep arate efforts are needed to improve the precision of SSL warn ings, but we focus on nudging users in the direction of a lower CTR.
We aim for a lower CTR because  it's safer to err on the side of caution, and  we hope that low CTRs will en courage developers to adopt valid SSL certificates.
Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted.
To copy otherwise, or re publish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
We deployed six experimental SSL warnings and one matched control as part of Google Chrome 29.
We measured user reactions to the default Chrome SSL warning , three versions of the Chrome SSL warning with new images , and a replica of the Firefox SSL warning with two variants .
Hypothesis: The visual design of the Firefox SSL warning is the reason for the lower CTR in Firefox.
Akhawe and Felt found that Firefox's SSL warning has a CTR of 33% whereas Google Chrome has a CTR of 70% .
To test the impact of visual design on the CTR, we im plemented a replica of the Mozilla Firefox SSL warning in Google Chrome.1 Figure 1 shows the default Chrome SSL warning , and Figure 2 shows the mock Firefox SSL warning .
Demographics, browsing habits, and other non-appearance factors are held constant because they were both tested in Google Chrome.
Our mock Firefox warning is identical to the actual Firefox warning in all ways but two.
First, we replaced the name "Firefox" with "Chrome" in the warning text.
Sec ond, proceeding through the actual Firefox warning yields a secondary pop-up dialog that asks whether the browser should permanently remember the user's decision to proceed.
Google Chrome did not support this feature at the time of this experiment, so there is no secondary dialog.
Hypothesis: Applying corporate style guidelines to a warning will increase the CTR.
We hypothesize that warnings that resemble corporate prod ucts will have higher CTRs because they do not stand out as unusual.
To test this, we created a Google-styled version of the Firefox SSL warning.
Condition 5 is a faithful replica of the Firefox SSL warning, with a gray palette and unstyled buttons and links .
A Google designer created an other version by applying Google's corporate style guidelines to the warning .
Condition 7 uses Google's palette, Google-styled buttons, and Google-styled links .
We kept the text and layout constant between the two versions.
Although Condition 7 could have been made to look more like a Google product if we had altered the text and lay out, we wanted to control for these factors.
Hypothesis: Including an image of a human in a warning will decrease the CTR.
Studies have found that people behave in a more socially con scious manner when they are near images of watching eyes .
Detecting a human face in an image activates the "social brain," which encourages pro-social and cooperative behav ior .
We hypothesize that this physiological effect would lead to a lower warning CTR.
The Firefox warning  contains a black image of a human figure on a yellow-orange background.
Al though this figure does not have eyes or a face, it should still create the sensation of being watched because its posture in dicates that it is looking at the viewer .
For comparison, Condition 6 is the same warning without the image.
Hypothesis: An extra step will decrease the CTR.
Some designers add extra steps to warnings with the intention of reducing the CTR.
For example, Firefox users need to take three steps to proceed through the Firefox SSL warning:  click on "I Understand the Risks,"  click on the  button to proceed,  click through a final pop-up dialog that appears in a separate window.
We added two images of human faces to the Chrome SSL warning: a policeman  and a criminal .
Their eyes stare directly at the viewer.
The images are drawings, which prior work has shown to be sufficient to activate the social brain .
For comparison, Condition 4 in cludes a red traffic light; the traffic light conveys the same "stop" message, but without a human face.
Figure 4 shows the three images, which were the same height as the first para graph of the Chrome warning .
We modified Google Chrome 29 to include our experimental versions of the warnings.
The first time a Google Chrome 29 client begins to load an SSL warning, our field trial code pseudorandomly assigns the client to a condition and loads the appropriate version of the warning.
For each condition there was a 1.4% chance that the client would be assigned to it.
A given client could be assigned to only one condition.
The remaining 90.2% of the population received the default behavior and was not part of the study.
Google Chrome's opt-in metrics allow us to measure reac tions to security warnings.
During installation, Chrome users are asked whether they would like to send "crash reports and statistics" to Google.
If they choose to participate, Chrome periodically sends statistical reports to Google.
Each report includes whether the user has recently seen or clicked through an SSL warning, and this data is tagged with the appropriate condition.
This lets us correlate CTRs with our experimental conditions.
The reports are pseudonymous and, once stored, cannot be traced back to the sending client.
We report data from Google Chrome 29 .
Our data is from English  clients on Windows, Mac, Chrome OS, and Linux.
We find that visual appearance accounts for between a third and half of the 37-point  difference between Chrome' and Firefox's CTRs.
We calculate this as follows: * Participants clicked through 67.9% of default Chrome warnings  and 56.1% of mock Firefox warn ings .
Since all other factors were held con stant, differences in the warnings' appearances are respon sible for 12 of 37 points.
15% of the time that users see this dialog, they turn back .
If we were to implement this dialog in Chrome, it might have reduced the CTR by another 15%.
This would make the warning as a whole responsible for an additional 8 points .
Novelty could potentially bias participants' responses to the mock Firefox warning.
Participants might have been star tled or intrigued by an unfamiliar warning, leading to a lower CTR.
However, the overall CTR remained steady for the du ration of the study, and the CTR for participants with repeat impressions did not vary.
Either ten days is insufficient for novelty to wear off, or novelty did not contribute to the CTR.
The control condition yielded a CTR of 67.9%, whereas Akhawe and Felt previously reported a CTR of 70% for Chrome .
A small amount of the difference could be at tributed to fluctuation over time.
We therefore estimate that the design of the warning and pop up dialog together account for between 12 and 20 points  of the difference between the two browsers' CTRs.
This demonstrates that design can influence users' se curity decisions.
We relied on Google Chrome's opt-in metrics to measure click-through rates.
We did not collect any sensitive or per sonal information about participants .
We followed our internal review processes for field trial design quality and privacy.
One concern was that our experiment could increase the CTR, thereby putting users at greater risk.
The study was first de ployed on a small scale to developer versions of Chrome in May 2013, and we monitored the CTRs of the conditions.
If any of the conditions had yielded adverse effects, we would have halted those conditions; however, they did not.
For Conditions 5, 6, and 7, participants had to click twice to proceed past the warning.
The second step did not serve as a meaningful deterrent: for all three conditions, 98% of partici pants who performed the first step also completed the second step.
This demonstrates that the addition of a very simple extra step may not have a notable effect on the CTR.
How ever, Akhawe and Felt reported that only 85% of users clicked through Firefox's third step , which means the third step is a bigger de terrent .
Combined with our finding, this suggests that the effectiveness of an extra step may depend on its complexity.
We found that the design of the Mozilla Firefox warning without the pop-up accounts for a third of the difference be tween the two browsers.
What makes it more effective?
We have ruled out the image of a human, the first additional step, and the styling as the cause.
We therefore hypothesize that the Firefox warning's text, layout, and/or default button choice are responsible.
The Firefox warning appears to fol low warning design guidelines from prior work.
The warning avoids technical jargon, identifies ways to mitigate the risk under "What Should I Do?"
Applying Google's corporate style guidelines to the mock Firefox warning did not increase the CTR.
The Google-styled version of the warning  performed slightly bet ter than the unmodified mock Firefox warning , which is the opposite of what we predicted.
We interpret this result to mean that tweaks to the color and style - e.g., updat ing an old warning with a newer style guide - may not have an effect on the CTR.
We held the layout and wording constant between Conditions 5 and 7 to avoid potential confounds.
It is possible that chang ing the layout and wording to look more like a commercial product would yield the anticipated effect.
Akhawe, D., and Felt, A. P. Alice in Warningland: A Large-Scale Field Study of Browser Security Warning Effectiveness.
You've been warned: an empirical study of the effectiveness of web browser phishing warnings.
Emery, N. The eyes have it: the neuroethology, function and evolution of social gaze.
Nodder, C. Users and trust: A Microsoft case study.
Rigdon, M., Ishii, K., Watabe, M., and Kitayama, S. Minimal social cues in the dictator game.
Senju, A., and Johnson, M. H. The eye contact effect: mechanisms and development.
Trends in Cognitive Science .
Sotirakopoulos, A., Hawkey, K., and Beznosov, K. On the Challenges in Usable Security Lab Studies: Lessons Learned from Replicating a Study on SSL Warnings.
Sunshine, J., Egelman, S., Almuhimedi, H., Atri, N., and Cranor, L. F. Crying Wolf: An Empirical Study of SSL Warning Effectiveness.
Wogalter, M. S., Conzola, V. C., and Smith-Jackson, T. L. Research-based guidelines for warning design and evaluation.
The brain's social response to human images is instinctive, and it should occur for even a hint of a human face .
If the feeling of being watched were to influence how users react to warnings, all of the conditions with human images should have lower CTRs.
However, we did not find this.
It also had a lower CTR than the red traffic light, which served as a secondary con trol .
Although ignoring an SSL warning can have social implica tions , this may not occur to participants when they are viewing warnings.
