Fitts' law has proven to be a strong predictor of pointing performance under a wide range of conditions.
However, it has been insufficient in modeling small-target acquisition with finger-touch based input on screens.
We propose a dual-distribution hypothesis to interpret the distribution of the endpoints in finger touch input.
We hypothesize the movement endpoint distribution as a sum of two independent normal distributions.
One distribution reflects the relative precision governed by the speed-accuracy tradeoff rule in the human motor system, and the other captures the absolute precision of finger touch independent of the speed-accuracy tradeoff effect.
Based on this hypothesis, we derived the FFitts model--an expansion of Fitts' law for finger touch input.
We present three experiments in 1D target acquisition, 2D target acquisition and touchscreen keyboard typing tasks respectively.
The results showed that FFitts law is more accurate than Fitts' law in modeling finger input on touchscreens.
At 0.91 or a greater R2 value, FFitts' index of difficulty is able to account for significantly more variance than conventional Fitts' index of difficulty based on either a nominal target width or an effective target width in all the three experiments.
Because of its strong predictive power, Fitts' law has served as one of the quantitative foundations for human-computer interaction research and design.
It has been used as a theoretical framework for computer input device evaluation , a tool for optimizing new interfaces , a predictive element in complex gesture recognition algorithms , as well as a logical basis for modeling more complex HCI tasks .
Dating back from Fitts' original studies , target acquisition tasks were typically carried out with a stylus or a cursor that is much smaller than the targets.
As finger touch on the popular smart phones and tablets emerges as one of the main input modalities today--the post-PC computing era--examining Fitts' law for finger touch has been attracting attention from HCI researchers .
A critical challenge in applying Fitts' law to finger input is that finger input is imprecise, especially relative to smallersized targets , due to the obvious and wellknown "Fat Finger" problem.
Previous research showed that Fitts' law's predictive power dropped when targets were small .
Our experiments presented later in this paper confirmed such degradation of the conventional forms of Fitts' law for small target acquisition using finger input as well.
To accurately model finger input, we propose a dualdistribution hypothesis to interpret the distribution of endpoints of finger input.
We hypothesize that the endpoint distribution is a sum of two independent normal distributions.
One reflects the relative touch precision governed by the speed-accuracy tradeoff in the human motor system, and the other reflects the absolute precision of finger touch independent of the speed-accuracy tradeoff effect.
Based on this hypothesis, we derive the FFitts model--an expansion and also a refinement of Fitts' law for finger touch input .
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Their work showed  that  partially compensated for subjective accuracy choice and reduced the discrepancy of a and b estimates between different experimental conditions.
The R2 value of T vs.  regression across different operating biases was higher than the R2 value of T vs.  regression.
Given the justification from information-theoretic metaphor and empirical foundation, adjusting W based on 2 has been widely adopted if the observed error rates deviate from 4%.
There has been an increasing interest in understanding the "Fat Finger" problem, and examining Fitts' Law for finger input.
To our knowledge this is the first time Fitts' law has been systematically and successfully extended to finger input on phone-sized touchscreens.
In three experiments we show that this model is able to better predict finger touch performance than the conventional forms of Fitts' law.
Fitts' law in its original form predicts human  movement time from the nominal task parameters of target distance  and target width .
The logarithm of the ratio A/W, measured in bits, was viewed as the task's index of difficulty.
It was realized that the performer may over- or under-utilize the target size W. In other words the performer's actual pointing precision could be different from the nominal task specification .
The most common way of compensating for this discrepancy is to replace the nominal target width W with the so-called effective width,   = 2 , hence:
As a key input modality for touchscreens, touch input has been extensively studied by many researchers.
Holz and Baudisch's research  showed that the offsets of touch point locations from the intended point were affected by the angles between the finger and the touch surface .
In the following studies , they discovered that users relied on the visual features of fingers such as finger outlines and nail outlines for placing the touch points.
As touchscreen hardware usually reported the centroid of the contact area between the finger and the touchscreen as the touch point, the registered position could be very different from the perceived touch point.
The results showed that the completion time of finger tap and drag strongly conformed to the  model, though the error rate was high  when W = 5 mm.
They did not particularly investigate small target acquisition tasks.
Their study also showed very high error rates when targets were small: the error rates were above 20% with targets in which W = 5mm.
They did not report the regression results for Fitts' law.
Lee and Zhai  studied soft button finger tapping performance on smartphones.
It is interesting to note that Fitts' law in its traditional form clearly did not work well for their tasks.
When the target was smaller, finger touch performance degraded much faster than Fitts' law would have predicted.
Although this information-theoretic foundation is only metaphorical without stronger or more rigorous basis, adjusting effective width based on 2 has been advocated by many researchers of Fitts' Law.
For example, MacKenzie  suggested that "this adjustment lies at the very heart of the information-theoretic metaphor that movement amplitude area analogous to `signals' and endpoint variability  is analogous to `noise'."
The justification for the use of   is commonly traced to Welford , which in turns attributes it to Crossman .
Crossman's reasoning of   relies on an informationtheoretic metaphor.
Since endpoints are observed to be normally distributed about the center of the target, the theoretically correct expression for endpoint entropy  , is   = log 2 2 .
Although Fitts' law has proven to be a strong and robust model under a wide range of conditions, its prediction power drops in small-target acquisition tasks.
They proposed using   -  instead of   , in Eq.
3, where  was an experimentally determined constant attributed to hand tremor.
The modified version gave a good fit to the observed results.
Chapuis and Dragicevic  also observed a clear departure from Fitts' law for small target acquisition using a mouse.
Their studies confirmed the existence of a small-scale effect that violates Fitts' law, and the causes are both visual and motor.
They empirically demonstrated that the c constant adjustment as originally proposed by Welford in passing, was effective in their dataset.
In sum, there is sufficient evidence in the literature to show Fitts' law's degradation in small target acquisition tasks and particularly so when the implement of the acquisition is a "fat finger".
More formally, we propose a dual normal distribution hypothesis to interpret the distribution of endpoints for finger input.
It is controlled by the speedaccuracy tradeoff of the performer and reflects a precision relative to the movement amplitude.
The faster the performer, the wider dispersion  has.
It reflects the absolute precision of a motor system that includes the implement  and the internal human motor control system.
Fitts' law in essence reveals a speed-accuracy tradeoff rule in human control performance.
The less precisely the task is , the faster it is to accomplish the task, and vice versa.
If the performer does not comply with the precision specified by the nominal task parameters, the "effective width" adjustment has been suggested in lieu of  .
An underlying assumption behind the "effective width" adjustment is that the variability of endpoints is solely determined by the speed-accuracy tradeoff rule in the human motor system.
Therefore, the whole variability in the endpoints  is taken into account when estimating the "effective width" .
In finger input, this assumption faces challenges.
Obviously a finger per se is less precise than a mouse pointer or a stylus.
Variability in endpoints was observed no matter how quickly/slowly a user performed the task.
For example, Holz and Baudisch's studies  showed that even when users were instructed to take as much time as they wanted to acquire a target on a touchscreen, there was still a large amount of variability in endpoints.
These observations indicated that a portion of the variability in endpoints is independent of the performer's desire to follow the specified precision and cannot be controlled by a speed-accuracy tradeoff.
This portion of variability reflects the absolute precision of the finger input.
In other words, the observed variability in the endpoints may originate from two sources: the relative precision governed by the speed-
We first examine the  model in 1D Fitts' tasks .
We recruited 12 participants  between the ages of 18 and 45.
All of them were right-handed and used touchscreen devices  several times a day.
The experiment was conducted on an HTC NEXUS smart phone running Android OS.
The capacitive touch screen was 48mm wide and 80mm high with a resolution of 480 x800 pixels.
When a finger touched the screen, the approximate centroid of contact area between the finger and the screen was reported as the touch point.
Each participant performed both 1D Fitts' tasks and finger input calibration tasks.
The orders of these two tasks were counterbalanced among participants.
This was a typical "discrete" 1D Fitts' task.
At the beginning of each trial, the smart phone played a beep sound and displayed a 6 mm wide horizontal grey bar as the starting bar, and a red horizontal target bar with varying width .
Upon successfully selecting the starting bar, the starting bar turned green and the smartphone played a starting beep sound, indicating the start of a trial.
The starting bar appeared at a random position for each trial.
8, 9 and 10,  is the standard deviation of the distribution of endpoints, which can be measured directly.
It may vary with individual's finger size or motor impairment .
Because such tasks do not involve human motor systems traveling from one place on the screen to another, the speed-accuracy tradeoff rule has a negligible effect.
To correctly measure the absolute precision of the input finger, the targets must be sufficiently small yet legible.
Accomplishing such a task should require the highest possible precision the user could achieve.
A break should be enforced between trials so that the user has sufficient time to attempt to accurately acquire the target.
It could happen if the input device is highly accurate , or the target width is sufficiently large and performers fully utilize it.
A was measured from the center of the starting bar to the center of the target bar, and W was the width of the target bar.
Each A x W combination included 16 trials.
The target widths were chosen to reflect the sizes of common UI elements on smartphones.
For example, a hyperlink on a webpage is approximately 2.5 mm wide and a key on a smart phone soft keyboard is around 4 mm wide.
The orders of trials were randomized for each participant.
At the beginning of each trial, the smart phone played a beep sound and displayed a 2.4 mm wide red target bar across the screen.
Participants were instructed to acquire the target with the index finger once the trial started.
They then lifted their fingers off the screen and rested them comfortably.
Each participant performed 16 trials that were divided into 2 blocks.
The locations of targets were randomized.
The interval between trials was 1000ms.
In both tasks, participants were instructed to acquire the target as quickly and accurately as possible.
They performed tasks in hold-and-tap postures: holding the touchscreen device using the non-dominant hand and acquiring the targets with the index finger of the dominant hand.
It is one of the most common postures of using a touchscreen device .
The target turned yellow and the smartphone played a success beep sound if the touch point hit the inside of the target.
Otherwise the target turned blue and played an unpleasant failure sound.
After each trial, the number of successful trials M and the number of total trials thus far N in the current block was displayed on the top right corner of the screen in the format of M/N.
The completion time was the elapsed time between the starting beep sound and the participant finished the acquisition task .
The error rate was the percentage of trials failed.
We label touch points that were more than 20 mm away from the target center as "outliers" and removed them from the recorded data.
Six trials were removed, consisting of a small percentage of the total number of trials .
Participants tended to over-utilize the target region on small targets.
As indicated by the dual distribution hypothesis,  overestimates  in all conditions.
The difference between  and  is especially big when   is small.
According to the Eq 10, the  model becomes an approximation of the  model if the effective width is large.
Figure 3 visually demonstrates it: as   becomes bigger,  and  tend to converge.
A user's touch action can generate a series of touch points.
We can view a touch action in three stages: land-on, onscreen, and take-off.
Land-on refers to the moment when the finger first contacts the screen; on-screen is the state during which the finger remains in contact with the screen; take-off refers to the moment when the finger is lifted off the screen.
There are different ways to determine the selection point based on these different stages, which may give different error rates.
ANOVA did not show a significant main effect of acquisition point type on error rate , indicating that touch point type had a minor impact on touch performance.
In what follows we use take-off position as the default touch point in the subsequent sections without additional comments.
Figure 4 shows detailed results from the regression tests.
As shown, the  model shows a stronger fit than the  , and a slight improvement over the  model.
In particularly, the  model showed a marked improvement over the  model: R2 value increased by 11%, from 0.86 to 0.96.
The  model appears to be a poor adjustment for target utilization rate in the case of finger pointing.
First,  was higher than  across all the A x W conditions.
The difference between  and  is especially big in small target conditions.
The SDxy of touch points in the 2D finger calibration tasks was 1.5 mm, which was used as  in the IDf models .
The following observations were made by comparing the  with  models.
When W = 2.4, the effective width  was more than twice of the nominal target width.
Similar to the finding in 1D task, Figure 5 shows that  is greater than  in all conditions, and the difference between  and  is especially big when   is small.
Also, as   becomes bigger,  and  tend to converge.
Figure 6 show regression results for different models.
Similar to the findings in the 1D Fitts task, the  model showed the strongest fit.
The R2 value of the  model is 21.5% and 12.9% higher than those of the  and  models.
The improvement of R2 values from  and  to  was greater than that in the 1D experiment.
Our study data showed that  was smaller than  across all the A x W, in both 1D and 2D tasks.
The underestimation became relatively big when targets were small.
To further evaluate FFitts Law in practice, we applied it to model touch screen keyboard text entry, a critical and popular research topic .
Previous research shows that once users reach expert levels, the typing behaviors are largely constrained by the capacity of human motor system to move fingers, not by the visual search.
The time to move the tapping device with a single finger from key i to key j for a given distance  and key width  follows the Fitts-Digraph model :
FFitts law is also stronger than both  and  models in predicting finger touch performance, especially in 2D tasks.
Using the same data and number of parameters, the R2 values of the  model were 21.5% and 12.9% higher than the  and  models respectively.
Based on these results, FFitts law, a refinement and expansion of Fitts' law, appears to be a better modeling tool for small target acquisition using finger input.
Our purpose was to capture the basic, native and natural text entry behaviors, without being affected by any modern features on smart keyboards, such as auto-correction or auto-completion.
It also reflected the expert typing behaviors: typing quickly without checking intermediate results within a word.
Typing a digram on a touchscreen keyboard with one finger is in essence a 2D Fitts' tasks for rectangular targets.
Literature has shown different approaches for choosing  for the nominal form of Fitts' law .
Key width  on the keyboard was 30% smaller than key height .
Previous research showed that using min as W in Fitts' Law yielded a fairly successful fit for 2D Fitts tasks .
We used SDxy as  in the  model.
Assuming that  has little variance across tasks, we used 1.5 mm, the value measured in the finger calibration tasks in Exp2.
We recruited 11 participants with an average age of 32.
All had experience with text entry on smartphones.
Participants entered text with index fingers on a Samsung Galaxy Nexus.
In the study, each participant repeated a word four times.
By repeating a word multiple times in a row, we assumed that the last few repetitions would reflect a user's expert behaviors.
This has previously been adopted as an approach to approximate experts' text input behaviors .
The whole study included a set of 40 words, which were distributed into 4 blocks.
The orders of words within a block were randomized.
Classifying Digram according to Index of Difficulty.
Digram with the same distance between two letters but different start or end characters were classified as the same AxW condition.
To ensure that the Fitts' tasks had a sufficient number of sampled touch points, we only picked  which had more than 120 sampled touch points.
To align the touch points with the intended keys, we discarded trials in which the number of touch points was different from the number of intended characters.
53 unaligned trials were removed.
We labeled touch points as outliers and removed them if the distance between the touch point and the center of the target key was beyond 30 mm.
The input speed increased markedly from repetition #1 to #2, and plateaued after repetition #2.
The results suggest that in the given experimental task users probably reached expert behaviors from repetitions #2 to #4.
This finding was similar to the observation from Bi et al.
We used data in repetition #2, #3 and #4 for model evaluation Note that the input speed was calculated according to the following equation :
In comparison to the conventional Fitts' law formulations based on either  or  , FFitts law also matches better with the keyboard tapping task, which is more complex and less abstract than the 1D and 2D target acquisition tasks.
For the text entry task in which the target width, distance and users' behaviors were less controlled than the laboratory Fitts' tasks, FFitts law still showed stronger predictive power than the conventional Fitts' law.
Since the Fitts-digrah model, previously developed for stylus typing, has been an important theoretical tool for touch keyboard research, design and optimization , improvements found here with the  model constitute an important contribution in their own right.
Fitts' law serves as a quantitative foundation for many applications on touchscreen devices.
For example, besides the sizable body of touchscreen keyboard optimization work , Zhai and Kristensson  suggested using Fitts' law to refine recognition weights between two channels for word-gesture keyboard recognition.
Figure 8 and Table 5 show regression results.
The results echoed the findings from the 1D and 2D Fitts' studies:  yields the strongest fit among the three test models.
We plan to investigate whether the dual distribution hypothesis holds with larger amplitudes and wider targets in the future.
A novel part of the hypothesis is that  is introduced to account for the finger's absolute precision, which is an intrinsic characteristic of the finger and not dependent on the movement amplitude.
Logically the dual distribution hypothesis and FFitts model are likely to hold for greater amplitudes as well.
This suggestion should also be empirically verified in future work.
To accurately model finger input for small target acquisition, we propose the dual distribution hypothesis, and derive the FFitts model, which is an expanded and refined form of Fitts' law.
Three experiments showed that the predictive power of FFitts law is superior to the conventional forms of Fitts' law.
Our investigation has led to the following conclusions.
On a large touch surface, the target sizes are likely to be larger.
The FFitts model suggests that the impact of the absolute finger precision component  diminishes very quickly , so the FFitts model will converge with the conventional Fitts' model quickly when the targets are larger.
This smooth conversion is a potential strength of the dual distribution hypothesis.
Although the absolute component,  is obtained from a separated calibration task, it can be used to model other Fitts' tasks for the same group of participants.
Assuming finger size and shape do not vary drastically across users,  could be used across users as an approximation.
For example, we used the same  in both Experiments 2 and 3.
FFitts law showed strong prediction power in both experiments.
In fact, the participants in Experiment 3 were different from those in the calibration task where  was obtained.
First, FFitts law is a strong model for predicting finger touch performance in small-sized target acquisition tasks.
Second, FFitts law has stronger predictive power than both the  and  models.
FFitts law is especially more accurate than Fitts' law using "effective width".
The R2 values of the  model were 11%  and 21.5%  higher than those of the  model.
Third, neither the  or  model is a strong model for finger input, especially the  model.
It suggests that the "effective width" adjustment might not be an appropriate choice for finger input.
