Our work explores the convergence between participatory sensing, political activism and public expressions.
Unlike prior research, which focuses on personal sensing, we present low-cost, networked air quality sensors, designed to be repositioned across public landscapes by communities of citizen stakeholders.
Our GPS-enabled sensors report dust, exhaust, or VOC's , along with temperature, humidity and light levels to a website that visualizes this data in real time.
The sensors can be attached to a variety of surfaces serving as research probes to demarcate  public spaces with environmental concerns.
We deploy our fully functional system with four urban communities- parents, bicyclists, homeless and activists, positioning our system as a tool for studying and supporting community togetherness and public activism.
Our findings highlight community sharing of the physical sensors and dialogues surrounding the collected data.
Despite the success of existing strategies for personal participatory sensing, there has been little exploration of important related concepts of sensor ownership, public authorship, expressions and community sensing strategies.
This paper directly confronts, questions, and explores these concepts by introducing a new sensing paradigm: rather than belonging to a particular person or space, our low-cost modular sensors can be moved, left and placed throughout public spaces by various stakeholders.
We challenge the conventional notion of sensors as passive instruments of data collection.
The act of placing a sensor, particularly one with politically or environmentally loaded content such as air quality, can be an overt and public act.
The mere presence of such a sensor can project a statement or concern about a place, and the resulting sensor data can be broadcast within and across communities to provoke and transform perceptions, usage, and labeling of space.
We explore these ideas by developing a system of networked movable sensors as tools for bottom-up community data collection and expression in the public sphere .
A range of technologies and methods enable non-experts to collect and share environmental data through participatory sensing .
We ask how low-cost and widely available sensors can be leveraged as instruments of environmental and political change.
How can citizencollected data become a point of reflection, a tool for taking action, and a matter of public concern?
Participatory sensing is inspired by a history of bottom-up initiatives- from neighborhood watch campaigns to political revolutions- these movements empower stakeholders to act as agents of change.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Air quality sensors have also been deployed on moving surfaces such as street sweepers , bicycles , robots  and pigeons , or in bounded spaces .
Drawing from HCI work that explores the intersection between technology, art and politics , we position our system of movable sensors as an approach for supporting community expressions and activism.
Numerous technologies facilitate public engagement and authorship: Pushpin Computing  is a platform for computation and visualization, DataTiles  and Siftables  are programmable tile displays; `Light Bodies'  are distributed interactive light nodes.
We apply the flexible and modular design paradigms of past systems to the design of our public place-based sensors.
Similar to LED Throwies , our sensors can be attached to a range of public surfaces to express and monitor environmental concerns.
Unlike prior public visualizations of air quality, including wearables WearAir  and CO2RSET1, the spatially-fixed pollution e-sign , or the municipally-installed and Air de Paris Balloon2, our movable sensors serve as a community resource for grassroots air quality monitoring.
These factors are of serious public health concern within the geographic region of our study: our city was rated as one of the worst in the United States in terms of air quality and exposure to exhaust, dust or VOC's can lead to chronic respiratory illnesses, including asthma, bronchitis, inflammation or cancer .
The sensor case is outfitted with a mounting magnet, hang strap, and carabineer, affording easy attachment to public surfaces.
Measurements are displayed on a community website  to facilitate community rather than individual use of the sensors.
We explore participatory sensing as an approach for sustaining and supporting cohesive publics  -groups of people that are affected by an issue, working towards alleviating a common problem.
Latour and Weibel's Making Things Public addresses the mechanisms by which ideas are broadcast into the public sphere, exposing the complex interplay between technology, art, space and people that fosters the creation of `assemblies' .
Recent HCI literature explores design principles for supporting and creating publics  as well as opportunities to engage with and empower specific communities .
We present a public sensing system as a tool for monitoring and expressing community concerns.
We previously explored this space through the use of sensor probes- non-working sensors that simulate the measurement of exhaust, smog, pathogens, chemicals, dust and noise, distributed to stakeholders from communities of parents, students, bicyclists, and homeless .
Participants were asked to place, leave, and move the probes throughout public spaces as if they were real sensors, and our findings suggest environmental sensing as a tool of community togetherness, engagement and activism.
In this paper we re-affirm, challenge and augment these findings through the deployment of a working system with four communities of urban stakeholders.
To gain insights into community appropriations of public place-based sensing, we deployed our system with four groups of urban stakeholders: bicyclists, parents and their children, homeless people, and activists.
Each group, consisting of four to seven participants, was asked to share three air quality sensors , placing and leaving them throughout the city over the course of one week.
A website displayed community-collected data on a comment-enabled map and interactive graphs.
We designed and built a system of networked air quality sensors entirely from off-the-shelf parts.
We intentionally chose low-cost and low-precision sensors to develop DIY  technology that can be re-created by nonexperts without high-end calibration procedures.
Our sensors provide relative rather than absolute 
Rather than focusing on scientifically precise values, our initial goal is to highlight variability across time and space.
Our sensor circuit is supported by a custom PCB board that can be populated with exhaust, VOC, and/or dust sensors from Figaro3.
In order to highlight specific air quality concerns and spatial affordance, every deployed unit was outfitted with a single sensor  and our participant groups received one of each.
In addition, all units include a dual function temperature/humidity sensor and a light sensor.
Units are powered by rechargeable 6600mAh lithium batteries and enclosed in custom vacuu-formed polystyrene cases .
Units are branded with our university name and logo on the front, and contact information and sensor description on the back.
Small holes in the case allow for air circulation and light inside the units, and although several deployments encountered significant rain, sensor functionality was not affected.
Our units function continuously for up to ten days by supporting three power modes: full power  with sensors powered on and GPS/SMS transmitting, standard mode  with sensors powered on and the GPS transmitter off, and low power mode  with the system in sleep mode.
During sleep mode, continuous sampling from a tilt sensor is processed to determine whether a unit is being physically moved .
When movement is detected, units power up to full mode, transmitting GPS coordinates and sensor data every five minutes.
However, if left static, units remain in sleep mode, changing to standard mode once every 30 minutes to sample sensor data and store it locally.
The units then send the data in bulk every 5 hours.
Clicking or mousing over each location activates a tabbed info window .
The default `Overview' tab shows the latest data from the corresponding location: exhaust, dust or VOC value on a color-coded gauge along with temperature and humidity.
Other tabs include temperature, humidity, air quality, and light data from the location as static line graphs.
In addition, the map supports geo-referenced comments.
Data from the units is sent as a comma-delimited SMS message to an e-mail address that is polled by cron-job.
Since we did not calibrate the air quality sensors, all dust, exhaust and VOC values are scaled to a range between 1  and 100  for consistency.
Data is inserted into an SQL database, with separate tables for each of the studied communities.
Consequently, participants can access sensor placements and data collected by their community.
The right side of the website contains interactive graphs showing data from all three sensors in the default `Overview' tab, and from individual sensors along with temperature and humidity data under the `VOC', `exhaust', and `dust' tabs.
A draggable scale bar along the bottom allows zooming into parts of the graphs, and clicking on a point activates an info window over the corresponding location on the map.
The `Comments' tab contains a feed of all community comments, and clicking on a comment activates also the corresponding location.
Sensor units  were deployed with four urban communities .
We selected the following communities to gain insight into how a range of urban stakeholders approach public sensing: * Bicyclists/students are a young demographic with similar educational backgrounds, traversing a range of spaces with vested interests in roads, parks and traffic Parents form an older group occupying spaces that revolve around children  as well as work 
Yea, that's probably the biggest concern I have right now."
Each group completed a preliminary interview exploring community concerns as well as activism, roles and attitudes in public spaces.
Participants were also asked to draw a community map showing locations they considered `healthy', `unhealthy', etc., on transparencies overlaying a map of , along with spaces where they would like to monitor and publically broadcast air quality.
Communities were then presented with three air quality sensors  and introduced to the website with a walkthrough of basic features.
All participants had access to a computer during the study, including the homeless who used a shared desktop that we donated to the shelter.
Groups were instructed to move, place and leave the sensors throughout the city as they preferred, over the course of one week, photographing each location .
We encouraged participants to leave the sensors for longer periods of time, emphasizing that they were not expected to return them.
We did not suggest a minimum number of placements or uses of the website, recommending that participants do `what feels natural' for their group.
After one week, participants returned for an informal wrap-up  interview discussing their experiences with our system.
In addition, we observed participants' use of our website for 5-10 minutes to evaluate our interface.
Each participant was compensated $10 for the initial interview and another $25 for completing the entire week-long study.
When asked to converge on a mutual concern, participants identified urban development, because "we all use the city pretty heavily" , including the quality of streets, parks, and green-spaces, as well as economic and environmental disparities across the city.
Participants agreed that street art was an effective approach for improving urban space  and they have previously contributed to grassroots expressions including graffiti , guerrilla gardening, and murals.
They also discussed future plans to `add' bike lanes to the city:
B1: We haven't done it yet, but we're strongly considering doing this.
Just like finding areas that need a bike lane real bad B4: And just spray-painting it on.
B1: Yea, just going in at night a making a big stencil of the bike think that's like kinda stretched out a little bit and just putting on some orange jackets and like just doing it.
All sensors  functioned as intended over the course of the study.
Overall, participants enjoyed the project , were impressed with our system  and wished the study was longer .
Most participants did not use the comment feature .
We now detail our findings, referencing data from participants in particular groups as: B, bicyclists; P, parents; H homeless; and A, activists.
We recruited four commuter bicyclists  through local bike forums.
Participants are students who have been friends for several years, and three are neighbors , such that they see each other at least a few times a week.
Participants voiced individual concerns ranging from bike hazards , to personal safety as affected by "drug dealers, violence and vandalism behind my house" , and the homeless:
B2 carried the exhaust sensor  placing it on a busy street near a thrift store , post office, and park.
B1 did not attend the final interview but kept the VOC unit at what others identified as his friend's house on the map.
Tracing their movements, participants noted that the data made them to want to move around more, "making a web around the city" .
They initially felt that the air quality graphs looked "very busy", but became more interested in the data after a brief tutorial of the zoom feature .
Participants focused on re-occurring peaks in exhaust and VOC data .
Parents took turns using the sensors: each having all units for 2-3 days, and handing them off to the next person .
While parents tended to decide on locations, their children physically placed most sensors 
P2 had the sensors first, using all three together to "get readings from all 3 and then you can compare":
Others were also curious about the whereabouts of the exhaust sensor .
Participants indicated that they would place the sensors in more visible locations if they displayed the data, especially as a graph over time or in comparison to other locations such as parks:
An employee noticed the sensors and contacted the police, who in turn summoned the city bomb squad.
Even though sensors were labeled with text detailing them as a locally approved research project, they were confiscated.
Although the police were not initially sympathetic, we negotiated resuming the study and returned sensors to participants the same day, after several discussions with local authorities.
During the interruption, batteries dislodged from the main board of two units .
However, participants continued to use the sensors, initially not realizing that two were broken.
P3 and his children attached them to telephone poles using a ladder and nails:
Three parents  and their four children  participated in the study.
Participants have been friends for several years, meeting at neighborhood functions, children's play-dates and activities.
Participants bike , walk  and drive or take buses , and a shared concern involves roads and transportation.
Specific issues range from streets that are not bike-friendly to a "lack of an attractive mass transit and the shrinking amounts of mass transit".
When asked how their community could work towards resolving these issues, participants deferred to other groups:
P1: There is a bike advocacy group- and they work intimately with city planning department.
It's the mayor's office frankly, that stalls things... somehow things don't get done in quick fashion P3: I get the feeling that that's something that a public works would do...
P1 was interested in collecting more data , placing the exhaust sensor at a street intersection and a bus stop; the dust sensor by his house and in a public park in a "meadow rife with pollen and plants"; and the VOC sensor in an alley, by a dumpster at a paint factory 
Parents tended to check the website daily at the beginning of the study, but were later disappointed by the nonworking sensors: "I stopped checking once I found out things were not functioning properly" .
Parents were especially interested in placements chosen by others in their group, and less concerned with the data, "particularly because I never saw a high reading anywhere, so it didn't seem like the reading itself would be interesting" .
Participants did notice higher exhaust values in some neighborhoods .
P3 was also interested in temperature data but could not find out "when the hottest time of the day is".
Photographs of participant sensor placements: dust sensor attached to bridge by bicyclist , participant's daughter attaching VOC sensor to street pole , and exhaust sensor outside a children's hospital placed by activist .
Conversely, P1 explicitly asked for permission to place the VOC sensor at a paint factory .
Participants were concerned with visibility, wanting people to "see it  or be interested in it" , while at the same time avoiding sensor loss .
They suggested cameras to record public reactions to the sensors, to "see what people actually do":
Participants were in agreement about the common issues affecting their group, including inability to find jobs , lack of affordable housing, and a poor  recycling program .
When asked if they would consider pursing actions to resolve these concerns, participants felt resigned and powerless:
We recruited five male participants  from a local shelter.
The shelter offers a shared dormitory, a common `TV' area and shower facilities for a maximum of 60 days per person per year.
Occupants range from people who temporarily lost housing, to individuals traveling through the state, or living in different shelters across  over the past decade.
Consequently, some of our participants are new to the shelter while others have known each other for years, and their routines vary greatly:
Although participants discussed specific locations 
Instead, individuals took whatever sensor was available as they left the shelter .
H4 `ended up' with the VOC sensor, placing it in a tree in the park frequently visited by the homeless for the entire week:
Participants accessed the website several times.
Since the shelter controlled computer access to prevent illicit, participants explored the data together.
They appeared to fluidly navigate the website, clicking on peak graph values to locate corresponding points on the map.
However, sharing a computer made data individual exploration difficult  and participants were mostly interested in their own sensor .
Overall, participants were surprised to see low/moderate readings from the sensors:
The group has previously worked to combat eviction, police brutality, gentrification, poverty and military recruitment.
Participants were hesitant to disclose specific tactics, but examples range from door-to-door work, "cooking food and serving it to people for free", to rallies and lockdowns .
H4 wanted to avoid drawing attention to himself and the VOC sensor he placed in the park: "somebody may have asked me, like you know, this isn't your property this is private property."
H3 and H5 placed the exhaust senor in visible spots near bus stops: "right in  everybody, where the buses pull up, right near the post, boom it's there" .
While H2 did not use the sensors, he also indicated wanting to draw attention to them:
And they would've probably moved  themselves... and so that could be moved around like- just having more people into it."
Participants decided on a set of placements for each sensor and took turns moving them to these locations within the group, based on individual routines and schedules.
For instance, P1 placed the exhaust sensor in a tree in a park, and P3 and P5 retrieved it the following day, placing it on a street pole near a children's hospital.
The VOC and dust sensors were initially at P2's house.
The VOC sensor was then moved "by a door in an alley, near the iron workers apprenticeship" for a few days and then brought to an urban community farm collective .
The dust sensor was moved between a busy downtown square and a public park.
Participants tended to check on their sensors , and most locations were motivated by finding contrast:
Participants did not feel compelled to act on the data , and H3 also pointed out that sensor values were not high enough to "pursue anything".
If given the opportunity to broadcast the information, they collected the homeless suggested showing it downtown , as well as to college campuses:
They're the future bosses, the fortune 500 companies, congressmen, senators, congress women, mayors, whatever... they need to know a lot of this stuff, better to get knowledge of it now than when a student becomes a senator, or whatever."
Most participants looked at the website once or twice during the study, and tended to remember some specifics .
Participants commented on micro-level data for different areas:
We recruited a community of six activists  who recently moved to , but have known each other through an anarchist network, coordinating and meeting at various activist events over the past 3-4 years.
Participants share a strong dislike for the police, as well as public spaces that do not afford gatherings .
Participants also liked being able to compare data from different locations simultaneously .
The graphs were considered less useful, as participants skimmed different tabs .
Like we went down to  and we were like `Look, you've been trying to get an idea of what's in your air for like years now and now we have a way for you to check it and it's free.
Do you want to check your air quality?'
And they were like sure, that sounds good."
Other groups were interested in comparisons: bicyclists looked for a "dependence of time", tracking "humps" that correlated to rush hour; parents and activists compared locations 
Moreover, participants, especially activists, wanted a longer-term deployment.
Do sensors become convivial tools?
The group wanted to share their data with people from the neighborhoods where they placed the sensors , as well as other activist groups , and those most affected .
Participants also wanted to broadcast the information at the children's hospital:
Bicyclists and parents split the sensors  using them independently and tracking each others' placements on the website.
These uses reflect approaches for addressing group concerns: bicyclists prefer independent acts  to "beautify the area", while parents defer to "advocacy groups" for changes in urban development, roads, etc.
The homeless are a community by circumstance rather than choice, with each person having "some type of business to go to, to get up outta here".
Participants' sentiments of powerlessness and resignation  in response to mutual concerns 
Conversely, the activist community revolves around group action- free food distributions, rallies, lockdowns, etc., to resolve issues from a "list that we've all agreed on" .
Consequently, they adopted the study as a conjoint practice, moving communally-shared sensors and discussing data as a group.
Our findings highlight a range of group appropriations and interpretations of our system, and we emphasize adoptions of sensing systems as reflections of community structures, values and concerns.
Like a campaign or something like that".
We intentionally chose low-end sensors and did not pursue precise calibration procedures, positioning our system as a tool that can be implemented by non-experts.
Consequently, our website visualizes relative measurements across time and space , and all four groups commented on the scale, wanting to know "what it means", how harmful the levels are for their health, etc.
However, lack of absolute values did not deter participants from exploring, reflecting on, and reacting to the data.
To varying extents, our study exposed all four groups to issues of security, privacy and authority.
Participants navigated tensions between authorship and theft, placing sensors "higher up but completely visible" or entirely concealing them in trees or "behind a corner".
From asking for permission and explaining the study, to placing sensors covertly , to assuming ownership of space , to ignoring `suspicious' looks or defying authorities altogether , communities reflected on notions of private, public, and authorized space.
For parents, these tensions were explicitly foregrounded by a police intervention, .
Increased surveillance as encouraged by the Department of Homeland Security warning to "be vigilant, take notice of your surroundings, and report suspicious items or activities to local authorities immediately"8 has shaped and constrained artistic, academic and whimsical endeavors over the past decade .
Our experience with the police reveals interesting considerations for public sensing: while theft and vandalism were major concerns across all four groups, the only sensors damaged during the study were due to police intervention; and despite suspicious glances and police presence, participants continued to pursue overt and public sensor placements- near hospitals, factories, bus stops, etc.
We cite these findings not as reflections on law enforcement, but as points of engagement with issues of perceived safety, privacy and expressions.
Participatory sensing places new tools in the hands of ordinary citizens, inevitably exposing the general public to unfamiliar technologies and contexts.
The boundary between `evocative' and `threatening' remains unexplored, and the police  may offer valuable insights for this domain.
While we readily carry personal electronics and talk of a ubiquitous computing future, publically-placed technologies and sensing is fraught with a myriad of challenges - namely those embedded within a culture of fear.
Future research can focus on design factors such as enclosure shape, color, texture, and sensor legibility to lessen such public concerns.
Instances of group sharing might be welcomed  or rejected .
Digital spaces can make intentions and consequences more transparent, empowering groups to collaborate towards desired outcomes.
Such technologies can serve as instruments of persuasion for community concerns, linking people through their actions  as opposed to comparisons of individual behaviors.
Whether to explore the `social aspects', inspire interest of "people musing over these things", or to broadcast air quality in front of a children's hospital with "a display board", and bring "more people into it", participants wanted to use sensors to reach the general public and transform space.
We emphasize sensing beyond hardware, and the inclusion of stakeholders in sensor appearance and interaction design.
Groups such as homeless, for instance, may prefer inconspicuous casing to avoid attention during the act of placement, with the ability to remotely trigger a display that broadcasts data to the general public; other communities may build visualizations to target specific stakeholders 
More broadly, there appears to be a large opportunity for open source platforms to empower communities to create visual and material form factors, altering output modalities based on context.
In doing so, groups could further leverage sensors as tools of engagement with and transformation of space.
We note, however, that as any instrument, sensors can have unforeseen and unwanted outcomes: for instance, devaluing neighborhoods or small businesses through tampering with sensors to artificially manipulate readings .
Future systems must take these potential unintended consequences into account, for example by making visualizations and functionality transparent to direct stakeholders, policy makers and the general public.
Our earlier work  with probes suggested sensor data as a `social currency'- a potential for communicating concerns within and across communities of stakeholdersand findings from the deployment of our fully functional system suggest a range of opportunities for visualizing this information.
On one level, our participants were interested in data within their own groups: from tracking where their friends put sensors to comparing measurements between neighborhoods, or exploring trends over time, stakeholders expressed a need for community-specific interfaces.
For groups such as bicyclists, personal devices can present georeferenced community data, while more independent stakeholders  might prefer information from their individually-placed sensors, and tighter-knit groups  could adopt visualizations that engage them as a group, facilitating data exploration as a conjoint practice.
Moreover, participants' desire to broadcast sensor data to other communities reveals a space for engagement between and among different social groups.
For instance, while the presence of `hobos', raised safety concerns for bicyclists/students, the homeless considered students to be the "future of this country" and a receptive audience for sensor data.
How would students' perceptions of `hobos'
We introduced a novel system of air quality sensors, designed to be left and moved throughout public spaces.
Our fully-functional sensors report air quality along with weather and light data to a server that displays it on a public website in real time.
Our deployment with four groups of stakeholders- parents, bicyclists, homeless and activists, supports our system as a tool for community expressions and activism.
