Persuasive games are an effective approach for motivating health behavior, and recent years have seen an increase in games designed for changing human behaviors or attitudes.
However, these games are limited in two major ways: first, they are not based on theories of what motivates healthy behavior change.
This makes it difficult to evaluate why a persuasive approach works.
Second, most persuasive games treat players as a monolithic group.
As an attempt to resolve these weaknesses, we conducted a large-scale survey of 642 gamers' eating habits and their associated determinants of healthy behavior to understand how health behavior relates to gamer type.
We developed seven different models of healthy eating behavior for the gamer types identified by BrainHex.
We then explored the differences between the models and created two approaches for effective persuasive game design based on our results.
The first is a one-sizefits-all approach that will motivate the majority of the population, while not demotivating any players.
The second is a personalized approach that will best motivate a particular type of gamer.
Finally, to make our approaches actionable in persuasive game design, we map common game mechanics to the determinants of healthy behavior.
Despite this growing interest in game-based interventions for behavior change, current persuasive games suffer two major limitations: first, although research has shown that interventions that are informed by theories and models tend to be more successful than those based on intuition , most persuasive games to date are not based on the theories of what motivates behavior change .
This makes it difficult to evaluate what persuasive approaches worked and why they worked.
Even when the theories are mentioned, it is usually unclear how the theoretical determinants  were translated into game mechanics .
This makes it difficult for designers of persuasive games to apply research findings from successful persuasive game interventions in their own game designs that may target a different behavior.
The second limitation is that most persuasive games adopt a one-size-fits-all approach to their intervention.
Various research on gameplay motivation has shown that treating gamers as a monolithic group is a bad design approach  - only considering what works for one individual may actually demotivate behavior change in others.
In this paper, we resolve these two weaknesses by proposing two theory and data-driven approaches for developing persuasive games to motivate health behavior change - one that is an all-purpose solution, and one that is personalized for the game play style of the target users.
Our design guidelines are based on a quantitative study of 642 gamers, where we surveyed their eating behavior and the associated determinants of healthy eating.
We employed Confirmatory Factor Analysis  and used Partial Least Square  Structural Equation Modeling  to develop a model of healthy eating determinants for various gamer types.
Our study is based on the seven gamer types  identified by the BrainHex model , and the health determinants  identified by the Health Belief Model  , one of the oldest and the most widely employed models of health behavior promotion.
Our models reveal several differences in the impact of various determinants on the seven gamer types' likelihood of healthy behavior.
Recent years have witnessed an increase in lifestyle-related health problems .
As a result, research efforts have focused on ways of encouraging healthy behavior change.
In one approach, researchers have investigated what motivates people to change their behavior.
In another approach, persuasive games for health - which are designed as interventions with the primary purpose of changing a user's behavior or attitude in an intended way  - have been used to promote health behavior change.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Based on the results of our models, we propose two approaches for designing persuasive games: a `one-sizefits-all' approach that will appeal to the majority of gamer types, while not disadvantaging any, and a personalized approach that tailors persuasive games for healthy behavior change to gamer type.
To make our findings actionable for designers of persuasive games, we suggest mappings of the determinants of health behavior to common game mechanics that can be employed in persuasive game design.
To the best of our knowledge, this study is the first to link research on the psychology of player typologies  with the psychology of health behavior change  to find patterns in gamers' motivation that can inform the choice of game mechanics for designing games that will motivate behavior change.
It is also the first to suggest data-driven and gamer type-relevant game design approaches that are actionable for designers and developers of persuasive games for motivating health behavior.
Our paper shows that having a personalized persuasive profile of what motivates different gamer types, and mapping these theoretical motivators to game mechanics, provides a crucial theoretical and methodological bridge between research on what motivates health behavior change  and research on designing games for health .
These six health determinants identified by HBM together provide a useful framework for designing both long and short-term behavior change interventions .
HBM focuses mainly on health motivators; therefore, it is most suitable for addressing problem behaviors that have health consequences .
HBM has been adapted and successfully applied in the design of many persuasive games for health .
In this section we present an overview of behavior change theories, with a focus on the HBM.
This is followed by a review of persuasive games for health behavior change and the underlying theoretical determinants.
We conclude by presenting a brief overview of gamer types with an emphasis on the BrainHex model.
Health behavior theories assist in understanding health behavior problems, developing interventions based on salient determinants that affect behaviors, and evaluating the effectiveness of the health interventions.
The most effective persuasive interventions for behavior change usually occur when the intervention is behaviorally focused and theory driven .
It follows to say that persuasive games can be made optimally effective if they are also informed by these theories .
According to Kharazzi et al.
Several health behavior theories have been used to inform persuasive intervention designs, such as the Theory of Planned Behavior , the Transtheoretical Model , and the Health Belief Model .
However, the Health Belief Model , developed in the 1950s to investigate why people fail to undertake preventive health measures, remains one of the most widely employed theories of health behavior .
Persuasive technology aims to bring about desirable change in attitude and/or behavior without using coercion or deception ; persuasive games are persuasive technologies that use game-based approaches in their intervention design.
Studies have shown that games can be an effective approach for effecting behavior change in an intended manner .
Various terminologies and definitions have been given to games designed for purposes other than entertainment.
For instance, the term serious games for health has been used to define games that are designed to entertain, educate, and train players, while attempting to modify some aspect of the player's health behavior .
Bogost used the term persuasive game to describe video games that mount procedural rhetoric effectively .
However, for the purpose of this paper, we define persuasive games as games that are designed with the primary purpose of changing a user's behavior or attitude using various behavior change theories and strategies .
Persuasive games have been applied in many domains including education, sustainability, and health.
In the health domain, persuasive games can broadly be categorized into two main areas: persuasive games for health promotion and prevention and persuasive games for disease management.
Preventative health behaviors include behaviors that are undertaken by individuals for the purpose of preventing illness, detecting early illness symptoms, and maintaining general wellbeing .
Examples include healthy eating, being physically active, and performing breast self-exams.
LunchTime is a slow-casual game for motivating healthy eating .
Players play the role of a restaurant visitor, and the goal is to choose the healthiest option from a list of food choices; points are awarded based on the relative healthiness of the choice.
The point reward can be likened to a perceived benefit associated with the healthy choice .
In contrast to LunchTime, OrderUP!
The decrease in cumulative points  portrays how eating unhealthy meals decreases one's general wellbeing and makes one susceptible to various health problems.
Studies showed that playing the LunchTime and OrderUP!
Escape from Diab is an adventure game on healthy eating and exercise, with the main goal of preventing kids from becoming obese and developing diabetes and other related illnesses .
Escape from Diab employed several strategies to impact players' health belief and motivate behavior change.
These included modeling, goal review, and feedback - increasing self-efficacy, problem solving - impacting skills to overcome perceived barrier, and selfmonitoring - impacting perceived susceptibility, severity, and cue to action.
Finally, another successful application of perceived barrier, benefit, susceptibility severity, and selfefficacy can be seen in the strategies implemented in a smoking cessation application called Smoke?
The player controls MC by deciding the course of action to increase MC's chances of quitting successfully.
By so doing, players learn how to overcome perceived barriers associated with quitting smoking.
At the end of the game, players observe the benefits associated with their decisions and how their decisions have affected MC's life negatively - susceptibility and severity.
Players also learn and increase their self-efficacy.
The results from the evaluation of the game-based interventions show a varying degree of success at achieving various health objectives.
However, it is not always obvious which of the persuasive approaches employed made the games successful.
For example, a game called Re-Mission was designed to improve cancer treatment for young adults and adolescents .
The task of the players of Re-Mission is to control a nanobot name Roxxi.
Roxxi moves through the body of the cancer patients destroying cancer cells and tumors with chemotherapy and radiation - depicting the perceived benefit of chemotherapy.
The result of the evaluation of ReMission revealed that patients who played Re-Mission showed increased knowledge and self-efficacy in relation to cancer management than patients in the control group.
SnowWorld is a virtual reality game developed to provide a means of pain management for burn patients .
The game manipulated the perceived severity of the pain by immersing players in a virtual world where they fly through an icy landscape of cold rivers and waterfalls with gently falling snow.
The evaluation of SnowWorld showed that it was effective in reducing pain perception among patients.
Watch, Discover, Think, and Act  was designed to educate children with Asthma on various triggers, signs, and corresponding actions for asthma self-management .
It models game challenges after asthma challenges.
The game employed cue to action, perceived susceptibility, perceived severity, barrier and self-efficacy.
The game challenges a child to monitor asthma symptoms and environment triggers , discover if asthma exists and possible causes , and then think and take action .
WDTA also increased the players' feeling of capability  using symbolic modeling and rehearsal.
In summary, a typical scenario in disease management games is that players take care of and help a game character control symptoms and manage diseases in various settings.
This increases the player's self-management skills, related knowledge, and self-efficacy.
This review of games used for health-related purposes shows that games can be strategically designed to affect important health beliefs among players.
However, most of the existing game-based interventions suffer two major limitations: firstly, there is often no predetermined mapping of the behavioral determinants from human behavior theories to game mechanics.
The majority of existing persuasive games do not even specify the theories that inform their design - for those that state the theories; it is not clear how the various theoretical determinants are translated into game mechanics.
This makes it difficult to evaluate what persuasive approaches worked and why they worked.
Secondly, they use a one-size-fit-all approach even though research has shown that players differ in both behavior and motivation .
Persuasive games have also been used to help patients improve health-related self-management skills.
These include teaching them how to manage certain illnesses, helping them comply with treatment directives by delivering health-related information, modeling and simulating health behavior, and providing opportunities for players to rehearse health behaviors in relation to a specific health condition/illness .
Consequently, attempts have been made to classify gamers into various personality types commonly referred to as gamer types.
One popular classification is Bartle's four gamer types  ; however, this model was based on intuition.
It has not been validated with empirical data, nor has it been shown that the four types are independent.
Bartle extended his model to 8 types for play within virtual worlds  but this classification has also not been validated with data.
Yee  performed factor analysis of survey data from 3000 players of massively multiplayer online role playing games  and revealed that players have three main  motivations: achievement, socialization, and immersion.
These motivations are grounded in data, but do not define the primary play style of a gamer, which is how we want to tailor games.
The BrainHex model of seven gamer types  is a relatively new model, but is based on neurobiological foundations; in addition, it has been validated with large numbers of participants .
The BrainHex model identifies 7 types of players.
Achievers are goal-oriented and motivated by the reward of achieving long-term goals .
Therefore, an achiever often gets satisfaction from completing tasks and collecting things .
They enjoy struggling against impossibly difficult foes before eventually achieving victory and beating other players .
They exhibit forceful behaviors, channel their anger to achieve victory and thus experience fiero .
Daredevils are excited by the thrill of taking risks and enjoy playing on the edge.
The enjoyment of game activities such as navigating dizzying platforms, rushing around at high speeds while still in control characterizes the Daredevil.
Masterminds enjoy solving puzzles, devising strategies to overcome puzzles that defy several solutions, and making efficient decisions.
Seekers enjoy exploring things and discovering new situations.
They are curious, have sustained interest, and love sense-simulating activities.
Socializers enjoy interacting with others.
For instance, they like talking, helping, and hanging around with people they trust.
Socializers are trusting and easily angered by people who abuse their trust.
Survivors love the experience associated with terrifying scenes and the thrill of escaping from scary situations.
BrainHex is of interest because of the theory on which it is based.
It describes each gamer's play style and clearly connects this to the types of preferred gameplay elements.
Our study was designed to elicit participants' responses to surveys that would assign a gamer type and weightings to the six determinants of healthy behavior identified by the HBM.
We were specifically interested in the relationship between the six health determinants  and health behavior as they apply to decisions around healthy eating behavior.
Research has shown that good eating behavior can prevent - or at least reduce the risk of - many diseases including obesity, heart disease, and diabetes .
Therefore, eating behavior is a focus of many persuasive games .
In this section, we first describe how we developed the research instrument; this is followed by data collection methods and validation of our analyses.
The online survey consisted of questions on participants' demography, questions of the HBM determinants, and questions for classifying gamer type.
The questions used in measuring the six HBM determinants were constructed based on guidelines developed by Abraham and Sheeran , and have been validated on healthy eating by Sapp and Jensen  and Deshpande .
All of the HBM variables were measured using participant agreement with a 7-point Likert scale ranging from "1 = Strongly disagree" to "7 = Strongly agree".
These HBM determinant questions included:  seven questions measuring perceived benefit  - e.g., eating healthy diets most of the time would be beneficial to me;  seven questions measuring perceived barrier  - e.g., eating a healthy diet is costly/hard;  two questions measuring perceived susceptibility  - e.g., If I don't eat healthily, I will be at high risk of some dietary-related diseases;  two questions measuring perceived severity  - e.g., the thought of ending up in the hospital due to dietary-related diseases scares me;  four questions measuring cue to action  - e.g., I would pay more attention to my meal choices if friends and family members suggest it;  three items measuring selfefficacy  - e.g., I am confident that I could eat healthily within the next two weeks if I want; and  five items measuring likelihood of behavior - e.g., I intend to make healthy meal choices most of the time in the next two weeks.
We also included the 28 BrainHex questions  to classify the participants into various gamer types.
We recruited participants through posted announcements in high traffic websites and forums.
This is in compliance with the study ethics approval and to ensure that the participants were of legal age to make decisions independently .
Participants were all computer or video game players to ensure accurate classification and mapping to the gamer types.
This is similar to BrainHex  where masterminds, seekers, conquerors, and achievers are the dominant gamer types.
This distribution is similar to , which shows that the average age of digital game players is 30 and 63% of players are younger than 36 years.
After configural invariance was established, we also assessed and established metric  and scalar invariance  by first running bootstrap analyses using a resample size of 1000, and generating the standard error  for each item weight in each group.
Next, we ran PLS algorithm for each group and recorded the actual weight.
We calculated t-statistics and corresponding p-values to see if there were significant differences across the groups  using the weight, SE, and sample size in each group.
Items that were significantly different were dropped for all groups.
We repeated this analysis until the results were stable and we repeated the same process for indicator loadings.
We also examined latent score differences across groups.
This process established measurement invariance and ensured that our data were suitable for multi-group comparison.
We report here the common set of indices recommended for model validity and reliability in PLS.
We used SmartPLS 2  to analyze the model.
Indicator reliability can be assumed because Cronbach's  and the composite reliability that analyze the strength of each indicator's correlation with their variables are all higher than their threshold value of 0.7 .
Convergent and discriminate validity can be assumed as all constructs have an Average Variance Extracted   above the recommended threshold of 0.5 and greater than the variance shared with other variables .
The measurement models yielded an acceptable value of all indices for PLS model validity or reliability.
To determine the validity of our survey instrument we performed Principal Component Analysis  using SPSS 19.
Thus, the data was suitable to conduct factor analysis .
Each question loaded onto their corresponding factors and the corresponding factor scores  were all >.70.
HBM is comprised of six determinants of healthy behavior - SUS, SEV, BEN, BAR, CUA, and EFF.
To verify that our data replicate the six factors in healthy eating behavior, we conducted Confirmatory Factor Analysis  using Partial Least Square  Structural Equation Modeling .
PLS is especially recommended for theory formation and verification .
Moreover, PLS-Structural Equation Modeling has less stringent requirements concerning data distribution assumptions  and can accommodate small sample sizes as opposed to covariant-based SEM.
In the CFA, the six factors were included as latent  variables, and each was hypothesized to have a direct effect on health behavior - the dependent variable.
Prior to comparing our models, we tested for measurement invariance across the seven gamer types.
This is important because the psychometric properties from the samples must be demonstrated to have the same structure to establish that the groups had similar interpretations of our instrument's items.
Failure to establish measurement invariance would suggest that we measured different phenomena across the groups, therefore making comparison between groups meaningless .
A proper comparison of the models cannot be achieved without establishing that the models' estimates are significantly different.
To access for significant structural differences between the gamer types, we used the pairwise comparison approach recommended by Chin .
Specifically, we used PLS algorithm in SmartPLS 2 to separately estimate path coefficients  for each group.
Then, we used bootstrap resampling technique to calculate standard error  for each path.
With the , SE, and the sample size, we calculated t-statistics and the corresponding p-value to test for significant differences between path estimates of different gamer types.
We controlled for familywise type I error  using Bonferroni adjustment.
Our result shows that only 39 of the 126 pairwise comparisons were not significantly different.
This high percentage of significant differences shows the moderating effect of gamer type.
Our results agree, and define these differences further by suggesting that achievers, daredevils, and socializers care about what they stand to lose  while conquerors, seekers, and survivors care more about what they stand to gain in relation to health behavior .
The structural models determine the relationship between the determinants and health behavior.
An important criterion to measure the strength of the relationship between variables in structural models is to calculate the level of the path coefficient  and the significance of the path coefficient  .
Path coefficients measure the influence of a variable on another.
The individual path coefficients and their corresponding level of significance obtained from the seven models are summarized in Table 1.
HBM theorized that the perceived seriousness  of the consequences of developing a health condition could positively influence an individual's behavior.
From the results of our model, severity is in fact a significant positive motivator of health behavior for masterminds only.
This is in line with their gaming style of making sound decisions.
However, increasing the perceived consequences of unhealthy behaviors can demotivate achievers and daredevils from changing the unhealthy behavior and adopting the healthy alternative.
This result is in line with previous research that found severity as a weak predictor that might even lead to behavior avoidance .
This is probably because increasing the magnitude of the perceived consequences associated with unhealthy behavior might make it appear unreal and uncontrollable to achiever and daredevil.
They seem to care more about the perceived risk and not the magnitude of that risk .
Similarly, the effect of perceived severity is not significant for conqueror, seeker, socializer, and survivor.
Therefore, portraying the consequences of unhealthy behavior might not necessarily increase the chances that they will change their behavior.
HBM proposed that increasing an individual's perceived risk  associated with a particular health behavior could be an effective way of motivating health behavior change.
Surprisingly, the results from our model show that risk perception is only an important motivator of behavior change for achievers, daredevils, and socializers.
In fact, designing a persuasive game to increase the perceived risk associated with a health behavior has no effect on the likelihood of behavior for conquerors and masterminds and can actually deter seekers, and survivors from performing the healthy behavior.
The potential risks associated with unhealthy behaviors is illness and in the extreme case, death.
Susceptibility can be seen as a potential loss of a healthy and disease-free life.
This is often modeled as loss of object or material possession of value  in games  with the hope that players will be motivated to perform healthy behaviors to reduce or avoid the associated risk.
Surprisingly, perceived benefit is a differentiator between achiever and other gamer types.
As proposed by HBM, benefit influences the likelihood of health behavior performance positively for conquerors, daredevils, seekers, socializers, and survivors.
However, benefit has no significant impact on masterminds, whereas it influences achievers negatively.
The negative association of benefit with achievers contradicts the HBM prediction ; however, it supports some other findings that benefit does not statistically influence the likelihood of healthy eating .
A possible explanation is that adopting a healthy behavior is a lifestyle that spans over a lifetime with no quantifiable benefit.
An achiever - although goal oriented and motivated by long-term achievement - is more focused on completing tasks and collecting something .
Therefore, they are demotivated from performing tasks that have no foreseeable date of completion and collection of accrued benefits.
Breaking health behavior into intermediate goals with intermediate and quantifiable benefit might motivate achievers better.
As expected, barrier significantly influences all the gamer types negatively with the exception of daredevils and seekers who do not show significant reaction to perceived barrier but are significantly motivated by benefit.
Therefore, creating successful persuasive games targeting daredevils and seekers will likely require designers to increase the perceived benefit more than lowering the cost  of adopting the healthy behavior.
People usually weigh the benefit and cost to decide on their line of action.
We discuss how our findings can be applied to the design of persuasive health games for the broadest audience, to appeal to the majority of players without demotivating any.
Our results show that self-efficacy is perceived as positive by achievers, masterminds, seekers and socializers and does not negatively impact other gamer types.
Therefore, to appeal to a broad group of players, persuasive game designers should include game elements that address selfefficacy.
For example, the player-related mechanics of ownership, loyalty, and pride relate to self-efficacy, while the game elements of repeating simple actions and cascading information will build self-efficacy within the context of playing the game.
Urgent optimism should be an effective approach, as long as the game can create in players the belief that they will succeed.
The determinants of cues to action and perceived benefits only have a negative relationship with one gamer type each.
Given the even distribution of gamer types, including these two determinants in persuasive games for broad audiences would only have potential negative effects on a small group of players while being beneficial for the majority of users.
Therefore, games designers should include mechanics that support cue to action and demonstrate the benefits of behavior change to appeal to a majority of the population.
For example, most reward-based mechanics  can reinforce the benefits of healthy behavior, while behavioral momentum and blissful productivity are in line with the positive message of perceived benefit.
Mechanics that structure play  give players an idea of how to change their behavior in stages and with reminders .
Our results showed that perceived barriers have a negative impact on most gamer types, and no effect on daredevils or seekers; no gamer type was motivated by perceived barrier.
Therefore, game designers should avoid game elements that allude to barriers to the adoption of healthy behavior.
There are several game mechanics from our list that should be avoided or applied very carefully.
Disincentives and extinction of rewards are two mechanics that might not be effective with any gamer type.
This is in line with recent work showing how negative reinforcements might not be as effective for behavior change as positive reinforcements .
In addition, some mechanics have to be carefully applied to avoid reinforcing barriers.
For example, quests, which support cue to action , must not present so many barriers that the player is demotivated.
Cue to action - which can be thought of as any event or stimuli that triggers the performance of a target behavior - is positively associated with health behavior for all gamer types except for survivors  and daredevils .
This implies that extensive use of various cues to action  will be effective at motivating health behavior performance for most gamer types.
The negative influence of cue to action on the daredevil's likelihood of health behavior is the major differentiator between daredevils and other gamer types.
One possible explanation is that daredevils are thrill seekers and are not interested in reminders to maintain good behavior.
As expected, self-efficacy is the only determinant that does not influence any gamer type negatively.
However, its influence is only significant for achievers, masterminds, seekers, and socializers.
This implies that designing to increase an individual's confidence in his or her ability to perform the health behavior will motivate a positive behavior change for most gamers while not harming others.
Persuasive game designers should therefore use various mechanisms  to promote self-efficacy.
Based on an analysis of related work on game mechanics, we identify a number of ways in which the HBM can be integrated into games by mapping the six determinants  to common game design mechanics.
Because there is no definitive list of mechanics and categories, we executed an affinity mapping exercise on existing lists of game mechanics , resulting in the 7 categories of mechanics shown in Table 2.
We then mapped the mechanics to the determinant that best matched.
For example, for the mechanic quest, within the category game elements, we chose cue to action and barrier.
Quests are tasks that players must complete, providing both guidance on what to do next  and limits to progression in the game .
Although designing for the broadest possible audience is a good practice, there are situations in which personalizing game experience for a particular user might be appropriate.
For example, consider the task of building a voluntarilyplayed persuasive MMORPG .
Explanation Controlling something, "your" property Feeling of joy and ownership after accomplishment Striving for what other players have Positive connection with game element leading to ownership Community has to work together to overcome obstacle People grow closer after playing together Certain information is shared, certain information is kept private Game elements which are more enjoyable or only accessible with others Cross-platform gaming Virtual / physical representation of accomplishment Leaderboards to display highscores Rank or level of player Players receive points for actions, can level up, gain new abilities Distribute physical goods to reward players Distribute virtual items to reward players Variable and fixed intervals Give players opportunity of winning stuff Give players free gifts Measurement of success of in-game actions Taking reward away Punishing player to trigger behavior change Not punishing player as long as desired behavior is shown  In-game reward for overcoming challenges to reinforce desired behavior, e.g.
Although mechanics related to cue to action and selfefficacy can be applied to these two gamer types as noted in the previous section, achievers and socializers are both positively incentivized by susceptibility.
Because we can assume that a large proportion of the MMORPG players will fall into one of these two types, it is appropriate to use mechanics related to susceptibility when designing MMORPGs.
Thus, mechanics such as loss aversion and countdown could be applied in this context.
Consider also the mastermind, who enjoys solving puzzles and devising strategies - there are specific types of games that are based on strategic problem solving.
Mastermind is the only gamer type positively influenced by severity, so games personalized for masterminds can effectively use mechanics that promote severity.
For example, the negative reward of disincentives, loss aversion, and extinction could work well for this gamer type.
The MMORPG example shows how persuasive games could be personalized for a particular game genre, by using our results alongside the established links between the kinds of games enjoyed by each gamer type .
There are myriad ways in which persuasive games could be personalized based on our results, and we have included two examples here to demonstrate the relationship between our findings and the corresponding game mechanics.
Like other persuasive technologies, persuasive games for health aim to change behavior.
Therefore, researchers have advocated the use of health theories  to inform the design and evaluation of persuasive games.
However, many game designers may not have the background to effectively interpret and apply theories in their design.
Our work can close this gap by translating the psychology of health behavior to familiar and actionable game mechanics and design approaches.
For example, if a game aims to evaluate the effect of self-efficacy in motivating health behavior, it might be necessary to eliminate all other game mechanics that do not affect self-efficacy.
Considering the mapping of health determinants to game mechanics will be useful in deciding the game components to include and evaluate.
Moreover, with the help of our models, persuasive game designers can easily evaluate and interpret the effectiveness of their games with respect to the underlying theoretical determinants being manipulated.
This suggests a need for a list of persuasive profiles comprised of determinants that motivate various gamer types to adopt healthy behavior.
Future studies should therefore examine the impact of the various health behavior theories and associated determinants on each gamer type.
Finally, we aim to apply our findings in persuasive game design and evaluate whether a game design that is grounded in both theory and data can motivate behavior change.
There are limitations of applying the results of our model to game design mechanics.
First, as noted previously, there is no definitive list of game mechanics; we sourced mechanics from multiple resources, but our list is by no means exhaustive or definitive.
Second, we mapped the game mechanics into categories using an affinity mapping exercise.
These categories are helpful for distilling the results into actionable lessons; however, the process is subject to interpretation.
Third, we apply the results of our models at the level of a population .
As with all population-based personalization, our results will apply to the majority of the population; however, there may be outliers who do not respond in the predicted manner.
Fourth, we make our findings actionable by providing examples of how our model results can be incorporated into persuasive game design.
This process is not prescriptive of good game design - although our results can provide an advantage in choosing the best persuasive strategy to apply in a persuasive game, applying our findings will not ensure that a game is engaging, motivating, or fun to play.
Finally, our work inherited one of the limitations of player typologies - partial membership - although membership is in a single type, a player could be, for example, mostly achiever, but also highly mastermind.
While our work has benefited from the large-scale study of gamers' eating behavior, we cannot assume its validity in other health behavior domains  Therefore, our model should be applied with caution in other health behavior domains.
However, the underlying principle of mapping determinants to game mechanics and tailoring to gamer types can be applied in any health behavior domain.
Although gamer type has been proven as a reliable characteristic for tailoring persuasive game interventions, other characteristics, such as sex, age, and culture  might moderate the impact of the six HBM's determinants on health behavior.
Persuasive games that are informed by behavioral theories tend to be more successful than those based on intuition.
However, there has been little research on how to translate theoretical determinants to game mechanics and how to tailor health determinants to various gamer types.
This has resulted in an increasing adoption of a designed-byintuition, one-size-fit-all approach to persuasive game design.
Our work is a step towards providing practical ways of applying and tailoring theoretical determinants of health behavior in persuasive game design.
We conducted a cross validation of the influence of the six determinants identified by HBM on healthy eating and developed seven different models of healthy behavior .
Our models revealed some differences between the seven gamer types and we discussed these differences from the perspective of health behavior and persuasive game design.
Through our study, we exposed the limitations of the current approaches to persuasive game design, and presented design opportunities for both a one-size-fit-all and a personalized approach to persuasive game design that is grounded in both theory and data.
This study is the first to link research on the psychology of player typologies  with the psychology of health behavior change  to find patterns in gamers' motivation that can inform the choice of game mechanics in designing games to motivate behavior change.
Our data-driven and gamer typerelevant design approaches are immediately actionable for designers to build effective persuasive games for motivating health behavior change.
The first author of this paper is being sponsored by the NSERC Vanier Canada Graduate Scholarship.
Many thanks to Dr. Ebele Osita and Fidelia Orji for their assistance with the data collection and to the reviewers for their insightful comments.
This paper describes a first iteration of a process to bridge theoretical research on what motivates healthy behavior and research on designing persuasive games for health.
Our results should be validated in other health behavior domains  to investigate possible changes in the influence of the determinants.
