The video recording makes record-keeping easy, reduces social distance during the design session, and may give rise to informal documents."
The session proeeedsbyakind with the low-tech with the PICTIVE video "design ofbrainstorming,
This paper describes our initial experiences teehnique works, and several Bellcore projeets and products to which it has been applied.
KEYWORDS: Participatory Design, Design Process, Users, Software Engineering, Prototyping INTRODUCTION This paper describes an experimental PICTIVE, Initiatives through Video Exploration.
One technique for doing this is to insure that users have early exposure to the target implementation technology -- even if this must be done through coarse-granularity, relatively static meek-ups .
Critique of Software Rapid Prototyping The PICTIVE technique provides a different kind of meek-up -- a tine-grained, dynamic paper and pencil concretization of what the system will eventually look like and how it will behave.
Unlike Proto-ACE , extensively PICTIVE opportunity" however, earlier the work of Bodker et al  or the tracking of Dykstra and Carasik mock-up is intended to be by the users.
Requirements documents are notoriously unsuccessful in providing useful information to guide the implementors' design decisions, We hope to provide the video equivalent of which may be communicated from the a design document,
Unlike the mock-up work surveyed and explored by Nielsen , PICTIVE is intended less as a means for the evaluation of an already-designed interface, but rather for the creation of the design of the interface.
PICTIVE was begun in reaction to conventional software rapid prototyping environments, in which developers have a disproportionate design impact because of the implicit politics and skills embodied in the technology .
That is, non-computerusersarerelativelydisempowered by the complexity of current software rapid prototyping environments, The PICTIVE techniques were designed to be used by people who were not necessarily programming professionals, so that line- or production- users -- and not 1.
For the redesign of a computer-generated printed report, we constructed modifiable components of that report on large sheets of easel-pad paper, and users redefined these report subsections on blank sheets of colored construction paper that were attached to the easels with removable tape.
Don't invest much ego in the specifics, howevec it is highly probable that they will change as your collaboration progresses.
Remembec you are `The Expert' on the system and its environment, and you will contribute your unique knowledge expertise to the cooperative design session."
Some of the user roles may require greater expansion -- e.g., to include multiple categories of users, such as readers of computergenerated reports, and support and installation theme is pursued in .
Procedure In general, the PICTIVE session proceeds through the mutual education in one anothers' perspectives that Bodker et al.
Each participant brings her or his expertise , basedon job function andbackground, to bear on the group's shared design problem.
If successful, the resulting design is not "driven" by any single participant, but represents a synthesis of the differentparticipants' different views.
So far, we have not seen a need for a designated leader or coordinator; however, we anticipate that it may be necessary to designate one of the participants to watch an agenda  and keep the group on track.
The resulting design was quiteunliketheinitial ideas of users or of developers, containing both greater user-support functionality and more interesting implementation challenges.
One outcome of the collaborative design activity was an emerging "social communications fabric" that reflected both user views and developer views, and that provided what appear to be novel attributes in areas of interpersonal collaboration and competition, information filtration, privacy, and elective anonymity in interpersonal communications .
People appear to have an enjoyable time with the apparatus and with each other.
Shared Concrete Views of an Accessible Common Problem Space.
Unlike some otherrequirements-gatheringtechniques, PICTIVE may be used in a way that obviates abstractions.
Users can work out their ideas directly, without needing interpretation or intervention by other members of the design team.
Operating Companies to make the printed reports more joboriented.
The resulting design was a consensus of the views of the different representatives, and was well-received by users and developers.
One user representative asked, "Why didn't we do this  two years ago?"
For innovative technologies, PICTIVE is probably not useful until the technology has been developed to the point that it is ready to be applied to a practical problem.
WHY THE PICTIVE TECHNIQUE Assessments Although no formal assessment has yet been done from a user point of view, users' comments positive.
It is not necessarily draftspersonship, but is rather informal artd imprecise .
We look forward to further studies of why this mode of communication works so well.
Video as a Social technology has participants that session, while at process relatively participants' Record.
The use of video as the recording several advantages.
First, it reassures their views are going into record of the the same time making the record-keeping effortless.
PICTIVE uses video primarily as a record of the social events during conversations about a concretization of the system.
This is different from the use of video as a prototyping medium as explored by Vertelney .
In Vertelney's work, the video is shot as a completed interface design .
This works adequately for informal record-keeping and knowledge acquisition, but the recordings are not usable for formal presentations, or even to help to introduce new participants to the technique.
A second problem is the lack of structure in the video data.
A typical PICTIVE session produces a two-hour uninterrupted videotape.
The design process for a single projector product usually produces many of these two-hour sessions.
These are difficult to index, and they are labor-intensive to scan for relevant information.
We are exploring technology to provide fine-grained indexing, real-time notations, and knowledgebased support for reviewing and organizing our records.
We have promising --but preliminary --data to indicate how well the technique generalizes to other users, such as clerical and craft personnel.
We may also find that other users may object to the video recording techniques, andwe may need to modify our record-keeping accordingly.
Computer support for cooperative design.
In CSCW88: Proceedings of the Conference on ComputerSupported Cooperative Work.
In F'DC'90; Conference onParticipatory Design.
Seattle WA: Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility, vi.
