Research literature has shown that pen tilt is a promising input modality in pen-based interaction.
However, the human capability to control pen tilt has not been fully evaluated.
This paper systematically investigates the human ability to perform discrete target selection tasks by varying the pen stylus' tilt angle through two controlled experiments: tilt acquiring  and tilt pointing .
Results revealed a decreasing power relationship between angular width and selection time in Experiment 1.
The results of Experiment 2 confirmed that pen tilt pointing can be modeled by Fitts' law.
Based on our quantitative analysis, we discuss the human ability to control pen tilt and the implications of pen tilt use.
We also propose a taxonomy of pen tilt based interaction techniques and showcase a series of possible pen tilt technique designs.
A trend in pen computing is towards fully utilizing these extra degrees of freedom.
Rigorous studies have been conducted to investigate users' ability to control pen pressure  and rolling .
Among the various characteristics of a pen, tilt has unique properties compared to pen pressure and rolling: the tilt anlge of a pen is tightly related to the workplane-orientation , and the pen barrel can visually indicate the tilt angle of a pen anytime during pen use, which could be beneficial for eyefree interaction.
Thus, pen tilt is a promising input modality .
In spite of its potential, the human ability to control pen tilt has been overlooked and it has become a timely issue.
Comprehensive evaluation will help guide developers/ researchers to design effective tilt-based interfaces.
We, therefore, systematically invesitigate the human ability to control pen tilt through two controlled experiments:  tilt acquiring and  tilt pointing.
According to the aforementioned previous works, current pen-tilt-based interaction techniques can be classified into two types:  Tilt acquiring: users adjust the pen to a designate tilt angle either before or after placing the pen tip on the surface , and  Tilt pointing: users tilt the pen from one angle to another only after the pen tip is in contract with the surface .
Based on the study results, we discuss the implications for designing pen-tilt-based user interfaces.
The pen is favored over other input devices such as keyboards and mice in mobile computing environments due to its portability, outdoor accessibility, short-time learning curve, and ease of manipulation.
Consequently, research into pen-based interaction has intensified in recent years .
Typically, only x-y pen tip movement is used for interaction, but this unnecessarily limits the communication bandwidth between pen and computer, and restrains users from taking advantage of the great expressiveness of a pen.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
The tilt of an interactive device has been widely explored as an additional input channel.
Research literature has presented plenty of compelling interaction techniques based on the physical manipulation of a small screen device such as a PDA.
Earlier work by Fitzmaurice et al.
They explored the potential of the tilting action as a natural way to issue commands, e.g., to scroll up or down.
During operation, only one hand was required to both hold and control the device, which was especially useful for field workers.
TiltType  and TiltText  are text entry techniques for mobile devices.
The tilt direction and angle of a mobile device were used to aid character selection from a range of given candidates.
Rekimoto and Sciammarella  proposed the ToolStone that can sense physical manipulations of the device itself such as rotating, flipping or tilting to expand the functionalities of a single input device.
Wigdor and Balakrishnan  proposed a new technique, TiltText, for entering text into a mobile phone: the phone could be tilted in one of four directions to choose which character on a particular key to enter.
Similar work has been done by Partridge et al.
Tilt and orientation have also been used to allow spatially aware display.
They also introduced and explored many issues relating to Rotating User Interfaces  including applications and toolkits for pen-based computing systems that take into account work-plane orientation, angle of rotation relative to the user around the axis perpendicular to the user's work surface.
By investigating the factors that could influence tilt control, they concluded that users could comfortably control at least 16 levels on the pronation/supination axis.
In addition to the studies and techniques exploring the tilt of interactive devices in which sensors were mounted on the screens , there was a sizable amount of research focused on pen tilt.
Kuroki and Kawai  observed that people hold three physical tools  differently and proposed that the use of tilt information for pen interfaces should be based on this observation.
Oshita  designed a virtual human figure movement manipulation system that used not only pen pressure but also pen tilt to control a virtual human figure.
Tian and colleagues  showed that using pen tilt information could improve the stimulus-response compatibility and their "Tilt Cursor" utilized pen tilt to extend selection capability.
Futhermore, Zhou and Ren  showed that tilt input performed relatively better than pressure input for cursor control.
Despite the sizable amount of research integrating pen tilt into normal pen interfaces, no literature quantitatively investigated the human ability to control pen tilt in acquiring and/or pointing tasks.
This paper is aimed at shedding some light in this area.
A Wacom Cintiq 21UX interactive LCD graphics display tablet and a wireless stylus with an isometric tip were used in the experiment.
The Cintiq 21UX can detect the tilt angle of the stylus in the range from 30 to 90.
90 tilt angle means that the stylus is perpendicular to the tablet surface.
The experimental program was designed in the Java Environment and ran on a 2.13 GHz Intel Core2 CPU PC with Windows XP Professional SP2.
Figure 1 is the schematic diagram of the experimental tool.
As a result, the tilt angle range in our experiment is from 30 to 150 .
The pen tilt angle was mapped uniformly to a circumferential angle with a radius of 300 pixels on the screen.
Pen tilt was utilized to guide the rotation movement of a pink cursor around a fixed point, either clockwise or anticlockwise.
A set of equal and consecutive sectors which presented the targets' angular width were drawn by dashed lines around a fixed point on the screen.
Subjects were seated in front of the display tablet which was placed in the horizontal plane.
The display edge was parallel to the subject's torso.
In our pilot studies, we found that the preferred display-table angle varied for different users.
Thus, we decided to place the tablet horizontally to eliminate potential effects caused by different display-table angles.
The horizontal angle is also a common tablet usage, e.g., where users flatten a tablet laptop and place it on their laps or on a desk.
A further regression analysis of angular width x target tilt angle on selection time showed strong fits to the power relationship of MT = a*Wb with a correlation of R2 > 0.98 where MT is selection time, W is angular width, and a, b are empirical constants.
Figure 2 illustrates the results.
During each trial, one of the target sectors was highlighted in red.
The pink cursor indicating the pen tilt angle was displayed once the pen was in contact with the tablet surface.
Subjects were instructed to land the pen on the tablet surface with the appropriate amount of pen tilt to guide the pink cursor to the desired target.
The tilt cursor indicated the pen tilt angle at any time the pen was in contact with the tablet surface.
For example, if a user landed the pen with the tilt angle of 80, the tilt cursor jumped to 80.
When the pink cursor entered the target sectors, the target sector color changed to green.
The subject confirmed the selection by pressing the space bar with the non-dominant hand on the keyboard.
Subjects were told to strive for both accuracy and speed.
If an incorrect selection was made, a failure "ding"' sound cue was given to the subject.
A within-subject full factorial design with repeated measures was used.
The target tilt angle refers to the angle between the middle line of the target sector and the 0 degree line .
A Latin Square was used to counterbalance the order of the appearance of the targets.
To explore the learning effects, 5 blocks of trials were completed by each subject.
Each block consisted of 24 target acquiring tasks repeated once.
Presentation of trials within a block was randomized.
Moreover, there was a significant interaction effect on selection time for target tilt angle x angular width .
On average, participants selected the targets in the shortest selection time when the target tilt angle was 57.
The second shortest selection time was achieved when the target tilt angle was 79.
The target tilt angle of 145 produced the longest time.
This result is consistent with the finding from our pilot studies in which participants were asked to naturally and comfortably place the pen tip on the tablet surface.
Pilot studies revealed that the comfortable and natural range for pen tilt was 58.8 with an SD of 8.6.
In Experiment 1, we also observed that participants encountered trouble selecting targets with target tilt angle 35 because the pen was obstructed by the hand when the pen tail was oriented towards the participant's arm.
Even when the angular width of a target increased to 10, the selection time was still very long, indicating the strong influence imposed by hand obstruction.
The significant target tilt angle x angular width interaction for time indicates that the adverse impact of hand occlusion was obviously reduced when angular width increased.
Selection error rate was defined as the percentage of trials in which subjects made erroneous selections.
Subjects committed the fewest errors  when angular width was 30, and the most errors  when angular width was 5.
The significant interaction effect of target tilt angle x angular width on time indicates that with the increase of angular width, subjects tended to commit a similar number of errors for different target tilt angles.
When rotating the pink tilt cursor to select a target, subjects sometimes crossed the target more than once.
Number of crossings, NC, is defined as the number of times the pink tilt cursor enters or leaves a target for a particular trial, minus 1.
As illustrated in Figure 4, a narrower angular width leads to a higher number of NC.
In particular, subjects managed to select the target without extra crossings when angular width was 30.
Analyzing NC by target tilt angle, subjects crossed the target with the least NC when target tilt angle was 145; the largest NC occurred when the target tilt angle was 101.
These results indicate that NC increases as the pen becomes perpendicular to the tablet surface.
Pairwise mean comparisons showed significant differences between block 1 and each of the other blocks .
However, no significant differences were found between blocks 2, 3, 4 and 5 in pairs, indicating that participants reached a steady performance after the first block.
No significant main effect was found for block on Error rate.
Figure 5 illustrates the results.
One main objective of this study was to investigate the comfort zones for pen tilt.
We highly recommend these ranges as "comfortable zones" for pen tilt.
Within these ranges, the selection times are all less than 1 second with error rate<=10% and NC<=1.
Once the angular width drops to 10, the error rate drastically increases to above 20%.
Utilizing the tilt angle within these "comfortable zones" will lead to shorter performance time and lower error rate.
Since our purpose is to investigate how users naturally tilt the pen, participants could freely choose either of these two approaches during the experiment.
Interestingly, most of the pen tilt adjustments fell within the approach #1, especially for tilt angles within .
This is probably because approach #1 allowed participants to see both the pen tip and visual objects most of the time.
The pen tip is occluded when the tilt angel falls within  in approach #2.
The subject had to tilt the pen to select the second target.
The subject could not select the second target without correctly selecting the first target.
Subjects were told to strive for both accuracy and speed.
An error was defined as selecting the second target wrongly.
If an incorrect selection was made, a failure "ding" sound cue was given to the subject.
A within-subject full factorial design with repeated measures was used.
The independent variables were angular widths, ID , and tilt directions .
To ensure that the targets were symmetrical along the vertical line of the tablet and the ID values were relatively decentralized, we designated the following values of angular widths and angular distances .
The ID values were calculated according to ID = log2 .
Figure 6 is the schematic diagram of the tilt pointing experimental tool.
Pen tilt was utilized to control the rotation movement of a pink cursor around a fixed point, either clockwise or anticlockwise.
As in Experiment 1, the pen tilt angle was mapped to the circumferential angle of the pink cursor in a one-to-one manner .
A set of equal and consecutive sectors presenting targets with various angular widths were drawn using dashed lines around the fixed point on the screen.
During each trial, two of the target sectors were highlighted in red and yellow respectively.
Subjects had to land the pen tip in the input area and apply the appropriate amount of pen tilt to rotate the pink cursor into the first desired target, the red one.
When the pink cursor entered the first target, the target sector color changed to green.
The subject confirmed the selection by pressing the space bar with the non-dominant hand on the keyboard.
A Latin Square was used to counterbalance the order of the appearance of angular widths and angular distances.
To explore the learning effects, 5 blocks of trials were completed by every subject.
Each block consisted of 24 target acquiring tasks repeated once.
Presentation of trials within a block was randomized.
Before the formal experiment, subjects were allowed to perform a warm-up practice session until they could understand the task and perform it correctly.
Selection time is elapsed time from the moment when the subject confirmed the first target selection correctly until the time when the subject executed the second target selection by pressing the space bar on the keyboard.
Similar to the results of the first experiment, the narrower the angular width, the more time subjects needed to select the target.
The subjects generally tilted the pen from the left to the right side  faster than from the right to the left side .
Post hoc pairwise comparisons showed significant differences between all angular width pairs .
The experimental results showed a sight learning effect for tilt pointing.
Selection time decreased as the number of blocks increased.
Repeated measures analysis of variance showed a significant main effect on selection time for block .
Pairwise mean comparisons showed significant differences between block 1 and each of the other blocks .
However, no significant differences were found between blocks 2, 3, 4 and 5 in pairs, indicating that participants reached a steady performance after performing block 1.
This result showed that the leaning effect was minor and participants could quickly learn tilt pointing operations.
Moreover, there was a significant interaction effect on selection time for tilt direction x block .
Subjects achieved a better learning effect in tilting to the left than in tilting to the right.
In block 5, subjects used almost the same time to accomplish the target selections.
For error rate, repeated measures analysis of variance showed no significant effect on error rate for block.
Moreover, there was no significant interaction effect on error rate for tilt direction x block.
Moreover, there was no significant interaction effect on NC for tilt direction x block.
Figure 8 illustrates the results.
As shown in Figure 7, linear regression of the experimental data MT by ID showed high correlations with Fitts' law.
In both left and right pointing, R-Squares were greater than 0.94.
We also performed linear regression of MT by ID separately with each angular width.
R-Squares were all greater than 0.90.
These results show that pen tilt-controlled target pointing tasks obey Fitts' law.
For right-handed subjects, left pointing was a closer fit to Fitts' law than right pointing.
The error rate was defined as the percentage of trials in which the subjects made erroneous selections of the second target.
Results indicate that narrower angular widths lead to higher error rates.
However, there were no significant effects on error for tilting direction, angular width x direction and ID x direction.
At the end of the experiment, a questionnaire was administrated to gather subjective opinions.
Participants were asked to rate tilting direction, angular distance and angular width on 7-point Likert Scales regarding difficulty, stress, and fatigue.
The final preference ratings were based on the average value of the answers given by the subjects .
Repeated measures analysis of variance showed a significant main effect on angular width .
The angular distances were classified as "far", "middle", and "near".
These results can help designers improve design, e.g., to adjust the number of items in a pen-tilt-based pie menu.
We note that a direct input device was used in our experiments.
The results might vary slightly in different situations such as with the use of indirect devices and in mobile postures.
Furthermore, though absolute mapping was used in the experiment, , we believe that the human ability to control pen tilt will not be changed even when using a relative mapping function.
However, using different mapping functions like  in pressure studies should be investigated in future work.
Experimental results indicate that users can control pen tilt well when angular widths are equal or above 20.
Regarding selection time, subjects selected the target within 0.8 second for tilt angular widths of 20 and 30, but very close or above 1 second when tilt angular width is 10 or 5.
For error rate, subjects committed less than 10% errors for angular widths 10, 20, and 30 in the 5th block.
The average NCs were less than 1 except for angular width 5.
In the 5th block, the NCs for all target tilts were less than 1.
Right pointing  leads to better performance than Left pointing  in terms of selection time, error rate, and NC.
Though the tilt-based pointing task in Experiment 2 was different from the traditional pointing tasks, interestingly, experimental results indicate that the tilt pointing task can also be modeled by Fitts' law in both left pointing and right pointing.
Thus, the related applications and theories of Fitts' law could be widened to include tilt pointing tasks.
How to conform the target selection in both tilt acquiring and pointing tasks is a key issue.
At the design stage of the study, we conducted a series of experiments to decide the target selection technique.
This method is a poor fit for the "tilt pointing" task because the user had to select the first and the second targets in succession, in which case he/she had to keep the pen tip in contact with the surface.
We also asked the subjects to evaluate the five selection techniques according to fatigue, difficulty, nervousness, and preference on a 7-point Likert scale.
Key-Pressing was ranked best, followed by Quick-Release, Barrel-Button-Click, Dwell, and Stroke.
Because our purpose was to investigate the human ability to control pen tilt, it was necessary to minimize the factors that affected the results.
Thus in this study, we regarded the space bar selection method as optimal.
We note that pressing a button may not always be available in real applications which only involve one-handed operation, thus other selections method should be considered.
Experiments 1 and 2 investigate the user's ability to control tilt acquiring and pointing tasks respectively.
The experimental results lead to the following important implications for pen tilt based interface design:  The results reveal the comfort zones  for pen tilt in both target-acquiring and target-pointing situations.
Since users can achieve high performance in these zones, we recommend their use for common pen tilt interaction.
For example, if pen tilt angle is used to trigger mode switches, these angles should be distributed within the range , and the angular width of each mode should be at least 20 wide.
If pen tilt is used to control a virtual human figure  or for 3D navigation , using tilt angels within the "comfortable zones" could lead to better performance.
The results give guidance to the continuous pen tilt space discretization.
Study results show that users performed tilt pointing tasks with good performance when the angular width was equal or above 20.
Therefore, to obtain high performance, the angular width of a discrete unit should be equal to or above 20.
An alternative is to confirm the selection by pressing the pen tip.
However, since a tablet can not reliably detect the pen pressure at a large pen tilt angle and exerting force on the pen tip could affect the tilt angle which might compromise the experiments, we did not use this method in our experiments.
To avoid bias caused by handedness, we deliberately choose right-handed participants in our experiments.
Since the structures of left and right hands are symmetrical, we expect that findings in our studies also apply to left-handed users by symmetrically adjusting the coordinate system.
For left-handed users, most of the conclusions still hold if the tilt angle range  is mapped to the azimuth angle range .
Investigating how handedness affects the human ability to control pen tilt is one of our future research directions, but it is not within the scope of the current paper.
As an additional input modality, pen tilt can be used in both discrete selections, e.g., choosing an item from a list or a pie menu, and consecutive variant manipulations, e.g.
Moreover, in a concrete pen based interface, pen tilt changes can be mapped either to displace a cursor in the interface, or to change the angle/orientation of a target, or to adjust the granularity of a manipulation of a parameter.
Taking into account the factors mentioned above, we developed a taxonomy of pen tilt utilization which describes the characteristics of the pen tilt techniques we proposed .
Pen tilt can be used to manipulate a parameter with varied precision.
A slider is an object in a GUI with which the user sets a value by moving an indicator.
The slider can be augmented with pen tilt  so that the sliding action is produced by varying the pen tip x-y coordinate position, and the granularity of the sliding is adjusted by controlling pen tilt.
As indicated in the experimental results, pen tip displacement could be found when the pen is tilted.
In order to achieve accurate manipulation, a special procedure to reduce the influence of displacement is recommended.
This mechanism can be used to adjust the granularity of a control such as the number of steps in scrolling, or the speed of the fast forward function in a video replay.
For example, in map navigation, the reader can easily navigate the map to either coarse or fine scale by adjusting the pen tilt.
A pie menu is divided into different sectors and each sector is mapped to a certain range of pen tilt angle .
By changing pen tilt angle with the pen tip in contact with the tablet, users can switch between different menu items.
Moreover, the pen tilt could also be used in a marking menu  to extend the number of available items.
As the pen tilt angle changes, its projected shadow varies accordingly.
We proposed a projected cursor whose size changes according to the pen's tilt angle .
The cursor size shrinks as the pen is tilted towards the line perpendicular to the tablet surface, while the size of a cursor expands when it is tilted towards the tablet surface.
This cursor is useful for selecting multiple targets, or for specifying an area.
Also, the cursor size provides user visual feedback about the pen tilt angle.
In drawing tasks, a large pen tilt angle results in a "hard" pen mode in which stroke width is consistent.
A small pen tilt angle invokes "soft" pen in which stroke width varied according to pen pressure.
Our experimental results show that a target angle near 90 is difficult to acquire.
Since hard pen mode is seldom used in pen design, we suggest mapping this area  to "hard pen" mode.
Through the manipulation of a 3D object with pen tilt, more intuitive interaction may be achieved .
For example, a 3D object could be rotated according to variations in pen tilt.
If the azimuth angle of a pen is also used to control the azimuth angle of the rotated target, the user can manipulate multiple degrees-of-freedom simultaneously.
Since users can tilt a pen without moving the pen tip position drastically, using pen tilt can ease the sub-objects creation process in the drawing of an organizational chart or a flowchart.
For example, we can slide the pen tip downward to create subordinates or left & right to create colleagues.
During a pen sliding process, we can also tilt the pen to determine the number of sub-objects .
Because our experimental results indicate that an angle of more than 20 in width is identifiable, the pen tilt space  can be divided into six regions at most thus reflecting the maximum number of sub-objects in one instance of pen tilting.
If more sub-objects are needed, we can use a multiple-tilting method: after the first tilt is finished, the pen can be slid upwards over a threshold distance and the pen can be tilted again to continue sub-object creation.
This paper presented two controlled experiments, pen tilt target acquiring and pointing, that empirically investigated the human ability to use pen tilt to perform discrete target selection tasks.
Results revealed a decreasing power relationship between angular width and selection time.
This paper also verified the applicability of Fitts' law in the pen tilt pointing experiment.
Results also indicate that 20 degrees of angular width presented the optimal performance regarding selection time, error, number of crossings, and number of tilt divisions.
The human ability to control pen tilt and the implications of pen tilt utilization are discussed.
In addition, a taxonomy of pen tilt based techniques along with a series of possible pen tilt scenarios is given.
This paper presents a general understanding of pen tilt utilization, which may be useful in pen-based user interface design.
This study has been partially supported by Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research , Microsoft Research Asia Mobile Computing in Education Theme and Exploratory Software Project of IPA .
