Touch interactions have refreshed some of the `glowing enthusiasm' of thirty years ago for direct manipulation interfaces.
However, today's touch technologies, whose interactions are supported by graphics, sounds or crude clicks, have a tactile sameness and gaps in usability.
We use a Large Area Tactile Pattern Display  to examine design possibilities and outcomes when touch interactions are enhanced with variable surface friction.
In a series of four studies, we first confirm that variable friction gives significant performance advantages in low-level targeting activities.
We then explore the design space of variable friction interface controls and assess user reactions.
Most importantly, we demonstrate that variable friction can have a positive impact on the enjoyment, engagement and sense of realism experienced by users of touch interfaces.
Tactile effects are generally limited to clicks and buzzes that can convey a great deal of information  but lack realism.
This paper examines design possibilities and outcomes when touch interactions are enhanced with variable surface friction.
We use a Large Area Tactile Pattern Display   which creates a friction-reducing `squeeze film' of air on a touch sensitive display's surface through imperceptible high-frequency vibrations .
The prototype consists of a glass plate with bonded piezoelectric actuators atop an LCD screen.
A 57x76 mm touchscreen is created with laser-based measurement of finger position.
Friction effects are produced by varying vibration amplitude in response to finger movements.
As recognition of the impact of emotion on design grows , designers seek natural, realistic and organic  means of interaction.
In 1983, Shneiderman  observed the `glowing enthusiasm' resulting from graphical user interfaces that allowed users to directly manipulate objects.
The iPhone's success suggests a similar role of engagement and delight, presumably through the directness and realism of touch interfaces.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
The ability to vary friction raises interaction possibilities which are interesting from both performance and emotional standpoints.
Activities such as pointing and dragging may become more efficient: high friction objects might `grab' the finger, reducing overshoot and errors, while low friction surfaces should ease sliding movements and reduce finger judder.
Emotionally, variable friction may increase perceived realism and subjective satisfaction.
In this paper, we report experiments measuring both effects.
The specific contributions of our work are as follows: 1.
Performance data showing that variable friction can improve performance in touch interactions; Qualitative and quantitative evidence that friction enhanced widgets can positively impact users' emotional response to touch interactions; An exploration of friction-enhanced interface design.
After providing background, we describe two studies  examining the impact of variable friction on target selection performance, without and with surrounding distracters; S3 characterizes the effect of friction on biomechanical control.
We then present design concepts exploiting variable friction and examine users' subjective responses .
Finally, we discuss our findings and conclude.
But it fails when the earbuds are out, and lacks the useful physical constraint of a real click.
Likewise, visuo-haptic effects such as `sticky widgets', a manipulation of mouse control-display gain, can improve selection performance by curtailing overshoot in the closedloop phase of motion and enlarging the motor space .
Variable friction may further improve performance by making the finger actually stick to the target.
Touch interfaces are also subject to the biomechanics of finger sliding on glass, which produces asymmetric stickslip .
Bending reduces contact angle, increasing the force required to maintain movement , then the finger springs forward .
Proximal or sideways dragging is resisted skeletally with a relatively constant contact angle.
Lowering friction should reduce judder for even distal movements.
Recent systems have exploited non-feedback touch to address issues like `fat finger' occlusion, accuracy and the need to feel edges.
Physical metaphors have inspired new, more fluid gestures .
Others have elaborated strategies for particular control actions: Potter et al.
Increasing the tactile feedback available during this contact stream could be even more beneficial.
There are now many examples of interaction design for tactile feedback in touch-surface devices, e.g.
Nearly all rely on vibration.
An interesting alternative is electrovibration, which produces sensations of friction or vibration using periodic electrostatic forces .
Vibrations can also be applied with passive  or actuated pens .
Pokespace relies on forces for its gesture set, and found reduced visual demand in augmented widgets tested in a similar manner to our Study 4 .
Generally, speed and accuracy have improved when haptics is included in pointing tasks .
This result is nuanced, however: in absence of knowledge of user's destination, feedback may also be encountered for non-target elements, which can introduce obstructions and slowdowns .
Furthermore, user preference does not always follow targeting utility .
The LATPaD varies the friction felt by the fingertip at the touch surface.
Its operating principle, a squeeze film of air produced by 26 kHz piezo-actuated vibrations, lowers the friction coefficient of a glass surface from ~1.0 to ~0.15.
Unpublished experiments indicate that the just-noticeabledifference in friction is about 30-40%; thus the LATPaD's dynamic range provides several distinguishable friction levels.
Other models demonstrate this effect on larger and smaller plates of arbitrary shape and a range of materials.
Still in early development, our prototype has several limitations.
The piezo actuation is compact, but the optical position sensing uses a larger housing.
The piezos produce audible noise when active.
The vibrational mode used produces nodes where friction reduction is weaker .
Development continues, focusing on these issues.
Within 23 years, programmable friction is expected to be deployable in a form factor similar to current touchscreens with uniform feedback and no audible noise.
The illusion of physicality, with both its utility and aesthetic, disappears with the withdrawal of image or sound.
In ongoing work, we are defining the design space where variable friction offers value by filling these gaps.
It has guided the design of Study 4, by indicating both the extent of the space to be sampled and opportunities within it.
S1 concerns the speed and accuracy of target selection with and without variable friction.
Based on the theoretical ability of variable friction to halt the finger on target, we hypothesize: H1.
Variable friction across the surface, with high friction over the target, will improve selection speed and accuracy.
A secondary consideration is the overall level of friction during targeting.
Any benefit of varying friction could be explained solely by faster inter-target movement caused by the more slippery surface, rather than by differential friction at the target.
The study controls for this effect, leading to the second hypothesis: H2.
There will be no significant difference between selection speed and accuracy when using a constant low level and a constant high level of friction.
Friction only matters during sliding surface contact.
Thus traditional Fitts' Law  `tapping tasks', where most or all movement occurs above the surface, are unlikely to be influenced by friction effects; we therefore analyzed drag-based selections that are issued when the finger lifts off the surface.
This is a common modality on touch devices, particularly when targets are small .
Furthermore, a lift-off selection modality has been seen to be more accurate than others for touch input in some contexts .
We controlled for movement direction , with the aim of revealing movement dynamics rather than testing a specific hypothesis.
Participants completed 30 training selections with a 36 pixel  wide target .
Ten were completed with each interface condition with the same order of exposure as for experimental trials .
To reduce any possible influence of the LATPaD's audible sound, participants listened to white noise through Direct Sound Extreme Isolation EX-29 headphones throughout.
Each participant then completed 336 experimental trials  covering three factors: interface, direction, and target width.
The three levels of interface were constant high friction , constant low friction  and variable friction .
In HF and LF, LATPaD oscillations were always turned off or maximally on, respectively.
In VF, friction was high  over the target, but low  everywhere else.
We did not test inverse variable friction  as it does not offer the psychophysical advantages of `finger trapping' promised by VF.
The device was physically rotated when changing direction axis  so that movement remained within an optimal friction region.
The control and target lines were shifted slightly towards the n or w side of the screen to avoid interference from the raised screen rim.
Figure 2 shows the interface for north-direction selections for the four widths.
Participants were given written instructions on how to interact with the LATPaD.
They then tried the device for one minute by rubbing a finger across a checkerboard with high and low friction.
They were given the exact procedure for each of trials, which consists of the following steps: 1.
A thin blue `control' line and a red `target' line appear on the display.
Acquire control line by touching and remaining stationary on it.
For any movement off the control line or off the surface, the trial is repeated.
Free control line and begin.
After holding for 0.2 second, an audible beep is heard and the control line is freed to move.
The clock starts on movement.
Drag control line over target.
The target turns green to confirm the over-target state, and in some conditions friction changes over the target.
Lift-off to select by raising the finger off the target.
The target turns back to red briefly and the control line disappears until the next trial.
The experimental trials  were administered as blocks of 14 trials, each block sharing a direction axis , interface level  and target size .
The first 4 trials of each block were discarded to allow for strategy adaptation.
Initial direction was randomized for each block, then alternated on the direction axis.
Blocks sharing a direction axis were administered consecutively to minimize physical device rotation; then grouped by interface level to allow questionnaire assessment.
Block sets were counterbalanced such that all combinations of 2!=2 direction axis orderings and 3!=6 interface level orderings were used for one participant.
Finally, block target size was randomized within same-interface sets.
After each of the 6 sets, participants were asked to comment on the interface used and respond to 5-point Likert-scale questions : "I performed well / needed to concentrate to accomplish the task / felt confident in my ability to hit the target / felt frustrated / enjoyed interacting with the touchscreen."
After completing all trials, participants were asked to rank the interfaces  and for final comments.
Interface was referred to by order of appearance, reinforced with a numerical label on the side of the display during use.
Analysis of count of trials per block containing an error shows no significant effect of interface , with similar means of 0.82 errors with VF, and 0.7 and 0.81 for HF and LF respectively.
The relatively high error rate is due to the use of small targets, and as expected, there is a significant effect of width , with errors increasing from 0.14 errors per block with 48pixel targets to 1.8 with 6-pixel targets.
There was a significant effect of direction  with the s movement being the most error prone  and n being the least .
Source of VF performance advantage.
There are several possible explanations for the performance advantage with variable friction: users may move more quickly, resulting in a shorter target approach; they may respond more quickly to the over-target state, resulting in a shorter dwell time over the target; or variable friction may `trap' the finger on the target, reducing overshoot.
To understand which of these are at play, we conducted three more one-way ANOVAs  with dependent variables of approach time , dwell time , and entry count .
Consequently, it seems that the largest effect of target acquisition with VF is that it increases users' confidence in moving towards the target, allowing them to approach more quickly without compromising ability to stop abruptly on the target and select it accurately .
Participants were asked to rank each interface condition after both e/w and n/s trial blocks.
The dependent measures are selection time, number of errors, time between entering the target and lifting off it, and number of overshoots.
We also analyze the goodness of fit to Fitts' Law models  and subjective responses.
In summary: variable friction  improved targeting performance over HF without compromising accuracy, thus we accept H1.
The constant low friction conditions  produced similar results as HF, so we also accept H2.
Posthoc comparison using Bonferroni correction confirms differences between VF and both HF and LF , but not between HF and LF.
Figure 3 suggests that VF performance deteriorated less rapidly across increasing Index of Difficulty than the other conditions.
This explanation is supported by the Fitts' Law analysis, which showed strong models for all conditions .
The lower slope for VF corresponds to an Index of Performance  of 7.26 bits/s,
Previous work has demonstrated that tactile feedback can negatively influence performance in the presence of distracter targets .
This is a critical limitation, as most practical deployments will involve distracters.
Therefore we tested the hypothesis that: H3.
Variable friction will not adversely affect targeting performance in the presence of distracter targets.
In summary: the results show no effects of interface  for dependent measures of time or errors, thus we accept H3.
There were no significant main effects or interactions involving interface for either task time or errors.
S1 trials  with n/s directions and 24-pixel targets were also compared to S2 .
A three-way ANOVA for factors interface, direction and number of distracters revealed no significant effects.
The participant's interface rankings were similar to S1: a significant preference for VF, but nonsignificant responses to other questions.
The 12 participants from S1 proceeded immediately to S2.
The task was identical to S1 but the space from the control line to the target and beyond was populated with distracters of the target's width.
All distracters produced the same visual and tactile effects as the target, i.e.
Distracter density is an important variable for H3, so three levels of distracter separation were used: 5, 20, and 40 pixels .
Targets and distracters were 24 pixels in width.
The number of distracters placed before the target varied from 1 to 3; one distracter was always behind the target.
We tested only one direction axis, and selected n/s for a greater range of biomechanical effects.
To characterize physical effects occurring at friction borders, we conducted a third shorter study with the same participants immediately after S2.
Participants tried to achieve a target drag velocity in repeated bidirectional strokes across the display by following an audible metronomic tempo.
Friction patterns  were produced in the middle of the strokes, including constant levels, step changes, and single or sequential pulses with the same extent, number and separation as S1 and S2's targets and distracters.
Each participant performed 168 trials in six blocks.
The first six trials of each block were discarded to allow speed adjustment.
The order of patterns was randomized within blocks and each pattern shown once.
A block held twenty-two target selections ; three blocks were performed per interface condition.
The direction  was initially randomized for each block and then alternated.
The number of distracters and their spacing were selected randomly for the first four trials .
Finger position and velocity trajectories were plotted against friction state and inspected visually for all 1584 trials.
An effect of variable friction is clear in many trajectories.
Figure 6 shows the best examples, where a step increase or decrease in friction leads to a temporary deceleration or acceleration of the finger.
This suggests that finger velocity is affected at least under certain conditions.
A sticky target with variable friction may therefore be truly sticky.
File, folder and recycle bin icons are arranged in a 3!4 array ; target icons enlarge 20% when a file hovers over them .
Initially low, friction increases abruptly over folders and oscillates at 37.5 Hz over the recycle bin, producing a bump and buzzing respectively .
The File Manager study task involved moving eight files labeled 1 to 3 into folders.
The game consists of bouncing a ball against a round cursor around the finger and breaking bricks .
Some require multiple hits to be broken; others produce special effects - releasing a second ball or making the ball bounce erratically.
The ball is launched by compressing a spring, with gradual increase in friction to simulate resistance .
For ball impact , friction abruptly increases as the ball nears the cursor.
Erratic bouncing  produces the friction oscillation used on the File Manager recycle bin.
The Game study task was to play the game, with ten difficulty levels.
Words are selected by dwelling with a cursor extending above the finger, avoiding occlusions.
While dragging a word, collisions with adjacent words result in visual compression up to 30%, after which words remain fixed .
A word swaps with its neighbor when the cursor reaches a position where it can be relocated.
Swiping left or right flips pages .
When dragging within a line, friction increases with compression, and drops abruptly after a swap, creating a popping sensation .
When dragging between lines, friction effects fade in and out across lines, with a brief friction pulse in-between.
Page swaps trigger a tick via an abrupt increase in friction.
The Text Editor study task consisted of `fixing' sentences by reordering words within pages - e.g.
Four exemplar widgets were designed to provide good coverage of tactile sensations and of communication functions that variable friction might support.
Users set the alarm time using wheel widgets and the alarm sound using a combo box .
The wheels produce strong ticks by abruptly increasing friction as items near their center .
The combo box produces similar ticks but with friction peaks between targets .
The Alarm Clock study task involved setting the time and sound to a value displayed at the bottom of the screen.
Participants interacted with each of the four applications twice, with and without variable friction.
Each interaction was limited to 2 minutes to provide exposure without boredom.
Each application was presented first for # of the participants, and the order of the other applications was randomized.
Half of the participants experienced all applications first with variable friction, the other half without.
Participants were instructed to focus on experience rather than performance.
A User Engagement Scale  was used after each condition .
A tactile feedback questionnaire  was completed after each interaction with variable friction .
Once both friction conditions were completed with an application, a comparison questionnaire  was administered, followed by a short interview .
This procedure was repeated for all four applications, and followed by a final questionnaire .
The User Engagement Scale used a 7-point Likert scale and all others a 5-point scale .
The User Engagement Scale  was adapted from a validated 31-question questionnaire developed to assess six aspects of engagement: Focused Attention, Perceived Usability, Aesthetics, Endurability, Novelty and Felt Involvement .
Ten of the 31 questions were adapted, spanning all aspects:
I was absorbed in my interaction task.
I felt in control of my interactive experience.
I found this application confusing to use.
I liked the visual and tactile effects used in this application.
This application appealed to my visual and tactile senses.
I would recommend this application to my friends and family.
I would have continued to interact with this app.
I felt interested in my interaction task.
This interactive experience was fun.
I felt involved in this interaction task.
The tactile feedback questionnaire  was completed for the main tactile features of each application: hour/minute wheel, AM/PM wheel and sound combo box for Alarm Clock; folders and recycle bin for File Manager; launcher, normal and erratic bounce for Game; movement within or between lines and page swapping for Text Editor.
Participants were asked if they noticed the feature, and if so rated whether the tactile feedback was  weak,  natural,  informative,  annoying,  matched the visuals,  felt good, and  was preferred.
The comparison questionnaire  asked if tactile feedback  was preferred,  made the task easier to perform,  the application more enjoyable,  the interface more realistic and  made them more confident.
Interview questions  asked participants  to describe the sensations,  what they liked and didn't like about the tactile feedback, and  how they would improve it.
The final questionnaire  asked  if participants would turn this type of feedback off on their phone, and  if tactile feedback improved their experience.
The data for eight participants were rejected due to protocol irregularities and hardware or software complications that may have affected subjective responses.
Eleven were students, only four from engineering and computer science.
Ten used touchscreen phones or music players once a week or more.
The participants' comments and questionnaire responses demonstrate that friction can improve the subjective experience of touch interactions.
They also provide insights into potential negative effects, which need to be addressed by design.
We begin with interview responses and comments, and then report questionnaire results.
Several comments show that variable friction enhanced the participant's sense of realism: "When I was moving the words against something, I could feel something squeeze back."
Comments also show that variable friction increased awareness of the system state, some suggesting a reduced dependence on vision: "I think it gives me accuracy,  if I closed my eyes I would be able to predict the amount of scrolling that I do."
Importantly, several comments showed that participants liked the friction effects: "This is nice... it makes things a lot more interesting."
Nine of the twelve participants were predominantly positive in their comments about variable friction for one , two , three  or four  of the applications.
The remaining three were predominantly negative or neutral.
Negative words used to describe variable friction included "unpleasant", "weird", "creepy", "annoying" and "itchy".
The tactile feedback was often described more neutrally using physics-related terms such as "resistance", "friction", "slippery" and "sticky".
Negative comments were often aimed at the limitations of the applications but also suggested potential pitfalls of variable friction such as " in the way of trying to move"  or inducing fatigue through overuse .
Interestingly, there was little cross-participant consistency in assessing which applications and effects were positive additions.
Similarly, participants differed in their assessment of feedback strength, with two stating that stimuli were too weak and one too strong.
This suggests a need for friction effects to be very carefully designed and customizable by end users.
A majority of participants also spontaneously discussed variable friction's integration in commercial devices and voluntarily shared their impressions for 5-15 minutes after experiment completion.
Weak noticeability is explained by rare use  or subtlety .
Means for 67/77 contribution assessments of friction effects made by each participant reflected positive opinions .
Negative assessments were most common in Game.
None of the participants expressed a strong preference for constant high friction in any of the questions.
The questionnaire responses tend to amplify the overall positive response to variable friction effects.
Responses for variable friction were positive or neutral, except for control  in Alarm Clock, confusion  in Alarm Clock and Game, and liking  in Game; none statistically significant.
We first investigated performance for variable friction effects and found measurable benefits without harm.
S1 shows that variable friction  significantly improves targeting performance.
S2 verifies that variable friction is no worse than normal friction when distracters are present, crucial since pseudohaptic or haptic targets can decrease targeting performance in the presence of distracters .
Yet movement time does not rise, even with distracters, because approach stages are faster .
We then focused on user experience, not performance  - engagement, enjoyment, directness, perceived utility - and found through our S4 application samples that variable friction can enhance the emotional aspect of using a touch interface.
This approach freed us to explore many design concepts and highlights what may ultimately be the most crucial factor in improving upon passive touch interfaces.
In the following we reflect upon generalizing these results to real-world use and understanding their value.
This includes examining generalizations of our current set of widgets to other uses.
For example, the Alarm Clock wheel was among the most popular, and we will examine how it can be deployed in support of related uses, such as scrolling.
We will also investigate interaction techniques that minimize the use of low friction and hence actuator activation and power consumption, such as reduced friction on targets.
The LATPaD is currently a bulky prototype.
However, the critical components for producing variable friction are the small, thin piezoelectric actuators visible in Figure 1a and there are no major barriers to miniaturizing the technology to the scale of current mobile devices.
Rendering nonuniformities are also expected to be resolved in the near future, and were successfully avoided in our S4 designs.
The LATPaD's variable friction effects are only felt when sliding against the display surface; S1-2 therefore used dragging tasks to maximally expose participants to the effects of interest.
The lift-off selection used here is common on mobile devices, including the iPhone's text entry keypad.
However, when approach occurs in the air, friction effects would only be felt during the final acquisition.
This has been shown to reduce targeting performance with pen-based vibrotactile feedback .
We need to better understand how variable friction can benefit other selection modalities, but feel that first analyzing the most effective interaction for friction was appropriate.
In its infancy, the design of interactions with tactile feedback is prone to naive uses and excesses.
We hope to launch a discussion of best practices for variable friction, extending a design space with heuristics such as these: Sliding not tapping.
To be effective, friction-augmented interfaces must work around the notion of sliding, with appropriate metaphors and visual representations.
The Text Editor, for example, associated friction with word compression to give meaningful feedback during dragging.
Shaping friction to increase expressiveness.
To compensate for the limited human sensitivity to friction variations and the current display range, expressiveness can be enhanced by varying friction `attack', modulating it to create textures and patterns, and tying sensations to visual representations.
Stop only for a purpose.
Some users felt that friction variations seemed occasionally to slow them down.
Strong feedback should have an equally strong purpose.
We tend to maximize tactile signal strength to ensure feedback is felt and performance improvements are measurable; but this can lead to unpleasant sensations.
Vibrotactile  feedback can provide selection performance improvements similar to variable friction, at least in single target conditions .
Variable friction and VT actuators, however, produce sensations that are very different.
Friction tends to feel more natural and provides continuous feedback during sliding; vibrations are ideal for discrete clicks and textures, including tapping confirmation .
Variable friction can physically alter finger velocity, whereas VT can communicate a larger range of informative sensations , even without sliding.
These two tactile modalities are complementary and in theory can be produced with the same actuators.
Programmable friction displays vary the friction felt while sliding against a touch sensitive display.
Through a series of studies and design explorations, we have demonstrated the strong potential of programmable friction interfaces.
Most importantly, participants preferred our exemplar designs to traditional touch interactions and reported a variety of positive effects, including increased engagement, a sense of realism and reduced dependence on vision.
In addition, our examination of programmable friction showed significant performance advantages for drag-based selections and no adverse effects when distracter targets are present.
This is the first analysis we are aware of for interaction with variable friction displays.
These quantitative and qualitative results show exciting possibilities; the technology is on a development path 2-3 years from commercial realizability.
There is great potential for more investigation: further performance analysis, design exploration and then deployment in mobile handhelds and laptop touchpads.
The exemplar applications and widgets examined in S4 were developed through an iterative design process, and were successful in generating subjective responses.
We took guidance both from the beginnings of our design space and from our intuition and iterations.
