How much history of the dialogue should a chat client include?
Some chat clients have minimized the dialogue history to deploy the space for other purposes.
A theory of conversational coordination suggests that stripping away history raises the cost of conversational grounding, creating problems for both writers and readers.
To test this proposition and inform design, we conducted an experiment in which one person instructed another on how to solve a simple puzzle.
Participants had chat clients that showed either a single conversational turn or six of them.
Having the dialogue history helped collaborators communicate efficiently and led to faster and better task performance.
The dialogue history was most useful when the puzzles were more linguistically complex and when instructors could not see the work area.
We present evidence of participants adapting their discourse to partially compensate for deficits in the communication media.
To formulate joint tactics, they move through a virtual world observing their own environment and what others are doing, while they exchange chat messages that scroll across their display.
At NORAD, air defense officers evaluate threats to the North American airspace by monitoring displays that show the distribution of aircraft over North America, while simultaneously text chatting with air traffic controllers at airports around the country.
Collaborative software that integrates visual information and text-based chat for tightly-coupled interactions has been deployed for medical teams, research teams, design teams, performing artists, students and their teachers, among others .
What should the design of these communication systems look like?
Consider the simple question of how much dialogue history a chat client should display.
Even on large computer screens, space is scarce.
Space devoted to dialogue history or linguistic persistence takes away from the visual work area .
In an attempt to mimic the transient nature of spoken conversation, Viegas and Donath created a text-based chat client in which participants can see only a single utterance for each "speaker", which fades with time .
Apple's iChat client  spends screen space on avatars of the participants, limiting the space available for displaying the history of the dialogue.
These designs contrast with other commercial designs, such as AOL's Instant Messenger or IBM Lotus Sametime, which provide a resizable window, and show as many utterances as fit.
The standard way to make design decisions like these is through user testing and iterative design.
Designers base their initial design on formal task analysis, prior practice or intuition, and then modify their designs based on user testing.
We argue that, for designs involving computermediated communication, existing theory can provide good guidance for design.
In this paper, we explore the way that Clark's contribution model of communication and Brennan's model of language as hypothesis testing can provide guidance for the design of computer-mediated communication systems.
It is increasingly common for people to collaborate by jointly viewing a dynamic work area, while communicating via real-time text chat.
Using collaboratories, scientists at research labs scattered around the world discuss rapidly changing visual data from expensive instruments monitoring solar storms, network traffic, biological and geological samples .
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Visual copresence is the visual environment mutually known to be available to the interlocutors.
If a pair were constructing the same puzzle side-by-side, the helper could use a deictic reference and say, "Take the red piece and put it next to that one," because he knew that both he and the worker had the blue piece visually present in the work area, and he could infer that the worker would properly decode this reference.
In contrast, the helper would be unlikely to use this deictic expression if giving instruction over a telephone because he would not know what was in the worker's field of view at the time of the utterance.
Previous research by Kraut, Gergle and Fussell  has shown that conversations about linguistically complex objects are more efficient when interlocutors have visual copresence.
Both speakers and listeners change their conversational strategies to be more explicit when visual copresence is absent.
The key insight from this discussion is that efforts required in coordinating and maintaining coherence throughout the discourse and the ease with which pairs can form common ground are critically dependent on the features of the media.
When people work together to solve a problem, they contribute different perspectives.
In order to coordinate their activities, they need a common set of goals and a shared language to discuss them.
Work by Herb Clark describes the collaborative process by which conversational partners work together to develop this shared understanding .
This process is based on building shared knowledge or common ground.
Common ground is comprised of the mutual knowledge, beliefs, attitudes, and expectations of the conversational partners , and the process of reaching common ground is referred to as grounding.
Brennan extended this model by proposing that speakers continually form and test hypotheses about what a conversational partner knows at any moment both to plan utterances and to revise them after they have been delivered.
Clark and Brennan argue that different communication media have features that change the costs of grounding.
For example, the media may change the time speakers have to plan an utterance, the evidence from which speakers can infer a listener's state of understanding, or the listener's ability to provide feedback to show understanding or ask for clarifications .
Two sources of common ground that are often affected by media and provide important evidence to interlocutors in a dyad are linguistic copresence and visual copresence.
Linguistic copresence is the mutual involvement that the interlocutors have of the conversation up to the present point, which allows them to infer what each other knows of the conversation.
In a synchronous medium, like a telephone conversation, speakers can assume that references mentioned in recently preceding turns are jointly known to listeners and to themselves.
Consider a case where one person  is describing to another  how to position pieces in a jigsaw puzzle.
If the helper told the worker in one speaking turn, "Take the dark blue piece and put it in the center of the work area," the helper could say in the next turn, "Take a red piece and put it next to the blue one".
The helper can use the phrase "the blue one", with its definite article and pronoun, confident that the worker would understand it because the antecedent had occurred so recently in the linguistically copresent dialogue.
However, if the antecedent had occurred further back in the spoken dialogue, the speaker would not necessarily make this assumption given the ephemeral nature of spoken language.
Indeed, the speaker may not remember which objects had been previously mentioned.
In contrast, written dialogue makes previous speaking turns visible and provides linguistic history as a reminder and as evidence to infer that the listener would probably understand the reference.
In this paper, we examine the way that two resources for grounding--a persistent dialogue history and a shared visual space--interact with features of a collaborative task and with each other to influence task and conversational performance.
Our goals are to answer practical design questions about conditions under which a dialogue history is valuable and more theoretically informed questions about the ways different conversational resources trade-off in the grounding process.
Although we examine the theoretical questions in the context of a text chat system, we believe our results inform more general comparisons among a wider range of communication media with different persistence qualities.
Recent work on persistence of text chat emphasizes its value for facilitating social awareness and knowledge sharing.
According to this view, an archived conversation preserves the history of a project and is a "boon to asynchronous interaction..."  .
Besides providing a resource for long-term information sharing, persistence also plays a critical role for grounding in real-time chat conversations.
Herring hinted at this when she suggested, "Without textual persistence... CMC would no doubt be more interactionally incoherent and a great deal more limited in its uses" .
However, she did not specify the mechanisms by which textual persistence plays a role in conversational coherence.
Thus, it provides an external representation of information likely to be in common ground and jointly understood.
Increasing the amount of history should increase the salience of shared information and decrease memory load for the conversational partners.
When the dialogue history is reduced , pairs will be less certain what prior aspects of the conversation are remembered and understood.
Therefore, pairs should be less likely to refer to prior aspects of the conversation .
They might compensate by putting more idea units in a message, which may result in slower performance.
In addition to changing the grounding process, a larger dialogue history provides a means for pairs to parallelize communication and action.
Clark and Marshall  describe conversation as a sequence of offerings and acceptances in which speakers offer an incremental contribution to the dialogue and listeners provide evidence about their understanding.
For example, in the puzzle scenario previously described, helpers generally offer descriptions of a puzzle piece, and elaborate and clarify the descriptions until they have evidence that the worker has accepted the description, either through a verbal response  or through an action .
By using the dialogue history as a buffer, a pair can minimize delays produced by slow typing .
For example, a helper can type instructions while the worker is performing actions.
A handful of researchers have investigated how dialogue history changes grounding and task performance .
Work by McCarthy & Monk is most relevant.
They examined dialogue history and shared visual space in a referential communication task.
They manipulated dialogue history by giving subjects a chat window with either 6 lines or 30 lines  of history.
Their research found no influence of these differences in conversational resources on task performance.
Their task-- redesigning a banking hall--may not have been sensitive enough.
They did find, though, that the larger dialogue history enabled the pairs to reference utterances further back in the discussion.
In addition, people performing a joint task can use a shared visual space as evidence about the evolving state of the task in relation to an end goal.
For example, in a puzzle task with a shared visual space, helpers can see when workers have finished a subtask , without the workers having to announce this explicitly.
Among other benefits, this information about the state of the task aids the helper in planning how to proceed towards the goal, what instructions to give next and when to give them, and how to repair incorrect actions .
The following hypotheses summarize this discussion: H1.
Dialogue history, which provides a representation of the elements of the prior conversation that are in common ground, should make grounding more efficient and improve performance in a referential communication task.
Shared visual space, which provides a representation of the elements of a visual environment that are in common ground, should make grounding more efficient and improve performance in a referential communication task.
A shared visual space makes visible information that a conversational partner would not otherwise be exposed to.
In contrast, a dialogue history only provides reminders of information that both members of a dyad had previously been exposed to.
The effects of dialogue history and shared visual space on grounding, however, should occur only when the linguistic task is difficult.
When the task is easy, interlocutors should place all the information they need into a current utterance, without reference to the history of the dialogue or to the external visual environment.
In particular, because dialogue history serves as a reminder of aspects of a conversation that interlocutors have been previously exposed to, it should be valuable as a resource for grounding primarily when other sources are weak .
Just as a dialogue history provides a visible representation of elements of the conversation in common ground, a shared visual space provides a representation of the elements of the physical environment in common ground.
In the puzzle task, for example, a helper can see what objects are visible to the worker and can refer to these by efficient deictic expressions .
In addition, the helper can see the actions that the worker performs in response to an utterance and use this visual information as evidence about whether the worker understood the utterance or not.
Using these mechanisms, the shared visual space is a resource for grounding that makes the conversation more efficient .
We conducted an experiment to examine the influence of dialogue history and shared visual space for conversational and task coordination.
Participant pairs played the role of Helper and Worker in the puzzle game introduced by Kraut et al.
The Helper directed the Worker on how to complete a simple jigsaw puzzle so it matched a target.
They communicated by text chat.
The text chat showed either one speaking turn or six.
The Helper could either see what the Worker was doing in real time or could not see the Worker.
The pieces were either easy or difficult to describe.
In both interfaces, multi-line entries could be created using a `Shift-Enter' keystroke, and messages could be sent either by pressing the `Enter' key or by clicking on or tabbing to the `Send' button.
Sixteen pairs of professionals and students from the Cambridge, MA area participated in the research.
They were selected to have typing skills and significant prior use of chat or instant messaging software.
They were paid for their involvement and the average group took approximately 1 hour to complete the study.
The participants were randomly assigned to play the role of Helper or Worker, and the groups were gender balanced across conditions.
Eight pairs participated in the SVS condition and eight in the No SVS condition, and the levels of Chat Persistence and Task Complexity were counter-balanced across trials.
Pairs solved four puzzles within each experimental condition for a total of 16 puzzles.
Shared Visual Space: We manipulated whether or not the participants viewed the same work area.
The displays were programmed as shared Visual Basic applications.
In the Shared Visual Space condition , Helpers could see the Worker's work area in real-time, while in the No Shared Visual Space  condition they could not.
The basic structure of the Worker and Helper displays can be seen in Figure 2.
The left-hand side of the Helper's display either contained the view of the Worker's work area  or was black .
In order to better understand how the pairs performed in different conditions, we explored several features of conversational structure.
The first part of this analysis looked primarily at the conversational efficiency of the communication.
The length of utterances, total number of words, and other quantitative measures examined the coarse communication differences between conditions.
The second part of these data explored the conversational structure in the various communication conditions.
We performed a qualitative exploration of the ways in which the form of the conversation changed across the different features of media.
Lexical Complexity: We varied the ease with which lexical tokens could be generated and used to describe the pieces by changing whether the blocks were static and easy to describe solid colors  or plaids that were difficult to describe and required more effort for grounding.
The pieces were chosen randomly for each experimental condition from a palette of easy to describe Solids or hard to describe Plaids.
We used a mixed model analysis of variance to predict puzzle completion time.
Chat Persistence , Lexical Complexity , Block , and Trial  were repeated factors, and Shared Visual Space  was a between-pair factor.
We included all 2-way and 3-way interactions in the analysis.
The manipulation of Lexical Complexity had a large impact on the speed with which the pairs could solve the puzzles.
Consistent with H2, a Shared Visual Space had a very large impact on the speed with which the pairs could solve the puzzles.
Consistent with H1, dialogue history had a small but reliable impact on performance.
Consistent with H3, the effect of dialogue history on performance was substantially smaller than the effect of the shared visual space.
Interaction between media characteristics and lexical complexity.
Consistent with H4, the impact of both shared visual space and chat persistence on performance was larger when the verbal task was more complex.
The Shared Visual Space x Lexical Complexity interaction showed that the shared visual space was more useful when the blocks were difficult to describe Plaids rather than easy to describe Solids =22.56, p<.001.
Together these results suggest that features of the communication channel that improve grounding have the greatest impact for lexically complex tasks.
Features in the communication media that improve grounding compensate for each other.
Consistent with H5, the Shared Visual Space x Chat Persistence interaction shows that the larger chat history improved performance only when the pair had no shared visual space =12.34, p<.001.
While these data tell us about the speed with which the pairs performed the puzzle task in various media conditions, they tell us little about the way the media changed conversational efficiency and structure.
Table 1 presents data on the conversational efficiency.
It shows the number of utterances and words per puzzle and number of words per utterance when pairs had a shared visual space or not and when they had a large or small dialogue history.
When the pairs did not have a shared space, they were much more detailed when first identifying a piece.
The shared view also allowed pairs to precisely time their utterances and cut short descriptions as soon as they saw the last utterance was understood.
In excerpt , the Helper describes a piece in short installments.
As soon as she received visual confirmation that the Worker had the correct piece, she censored the next description midsentence and replaced it with "yah that's right":
Effect of shared visual space on efficiency and structure.
While this led to more words per utterance--or larger messages when there was no shared space--the difference was not quite significant =2.90, p=.11.
Why could pairs complete their puzzles with fewer utterance and words when they had a shared visual space?
With it, Helpers could infer Workers' comprehension directly from their actions.
This allowed them to provide shorter, more incremental descriptions and to cut short descriptions as soon as the Workers gave behavioral evidence of understanding.
H: the first block we ned has one white stripe at the very top.. with a thinner yelow stripe about a cm below it W:  W: ok ,got it H: the other one we need has a thin yellow stripe, then a thick white one 1 cm below, then another thick white one ~3 cm below, then another thin yellow stripe 1 cm below W: ok. does that have a faint blue stripe in the center?
Figure 5 illustrates that when they had a shared visual space, pairs more tightly integrated text and action, replaced written utterances with actions, and cut short and redefined statements.
The black vertical lines indicate the instant a message was sent.
The colors preceding the black vertical lines represent the person who issued the utterance .
The colored horizontal bars indicate the turn gap , which varies with the time spent formulating and typing the message, the overall size of the message, waiting for the precise time to send the message, and the recency with which a partner has messaged.
The top panel in Figure 5 shows the timing in a typical shared visual space trial, while the bottom panel shows the timing in a typical trial without a shared visual space.
Excerpt  demonstrates how the pairs used behavioral action to ground their utterances.
On the left is a case where the pair had a shared visual space.
The Helper provided the next piece of instruction after noticing that the Worker had moved the correct piece.
The Worker gave no verbal acknowledgements.
In contrast, on the right, where there was no Shared Visual Space available, the Worker needed to be more explicit about her actions and understanding.
Another thing to notice is when the pairs had a shared view, they produced incremental contributions.
The Helper hypothesized the minimal information required and provided it.
The shared view space provided evidence about whether or not the Worker understood.
It is striking to note the rhythm with which messages were sent when the pairs had shared visual space .
Rather than wait for the Worker to respond, the Helper issued the next statement while the Worker executed the last.
The shared visual space provides Helpers with an indication of where the Worker is in the task and allows them to generate their next message ahead of time so it is available as soon as the Worker has selected or positioned the correct piece.
When there is no shared space , the rhythm slowed down for two reasons.
Effect of persistence on efficiency and structure.
This demonstrated that pairs changed the form of their communication to adjust for the media--they produced smaller messages and sent them more frequently.
Doing so allowed actions and text generation to be parallelized, aided memory and cognitive processing, and improved the precision in timing utterances.
Figure 6 illustrates how a pair used persistence to parallelize their efforts.
The Helper queued their descriptions of pieces in order to maximize group efficiency.
The rectangles on the Helper row represent the time spent describing a puzzle piece.
The second row shows the time spent reading / comprehending the message  as well as time spent moving the pieces into the space and acknowledging that actions have been completed .
When they had no persistence, the Helper typically waited for each message to be read and acted upon by the Worker before issuing the next statement.
This was much less efficient than overlapping descriptions and actions.
The dialogue history also helped overcome practical memory limitations.
When the pairs had a shorter dialogue history, the Workers frequently needed to re-request information because they forgot the details of a prior utterance or because of an intervening clarification.
In excerpt , the Worker asks the Helper to repeat a placement-related instruction, since it was no longer available in their shared dialogue history:
H: yeah, you know what its brown W: alright, where's it go again?
Our findings demonstrate the importance of two resources for conversational grounding--a persistent dialogue history and a shared visual space--and show how these resources interact with task properties to affect conversational efficiency and performance.
Persistence and shared visual space were especially helpful for pairs when they were discussing lexically complex material.
The results further demonstrate that the value of persistence is greater when pairs do not share visual space, suggesting that for tasks with visual elements, shared visual space is the most efficient grounding mechanism.
The study illustrates the value of basing the design of new media on previously existing communication theory.
Clark's theory of conversational grounding  was used to generate testable predictions about the effects of persistence and shared visual space on communication and task performance, and these predictions were confirmed in our experiment.
Similar predictions about how media properties will shape interaction can be generated in advance for a wide range of communications technologies, potentially shortening the design-evaluate cycle considerably.
If a dialogue history had been available, the Worker could have glanced back and found the placement information.
Another strategy commonly seen when persistence was available was the production of shorter sequential contributions.
This allowed pairs to cut short surplus descriptions.
The findings have important implications for the design of new media to support collaboration on visual tasks.
For such tasks, providing a shared view of the work environment can be highly beneficial.
At the same time, we have shown that systems to support collaboration on visual tasks need to reserve sufficient screen space for dialogue history.
Thus, designers need to carefully consider the trade-offs between a task's visual and verbal requirements in order to determine the best strategy for allocating screen space.
Furthermore, our results suggest that using part of the dialogue box for icons and images, as is done in iChat , may have a negative effect on some tasks.
When making the conscious decision to limit dialogue history, designers must remain acutely aware of the task and environment into which such designs are placed.
Although we have provided strong evidence concerning the value of persistence and shared visual space, future work is needed to clarify how these grounding mechanisms interact with task properties.
First, we studied only two variants of persistence.
It is possible that a longer dialogue history would prove even more valuable to collaborators.
Second, we studied only one way of integrating the dialogue box with shared visual space.
The design space for integrating these elements requires further examination.
Third, we studied only two types of visual stimuli; future studies will need to examine how other aspects of the task  influence collaborators' needs for dialogue history and shared visual space as well as the trade-offs between them.
