This paper examines accessibility issues of surface computing with older adults and explores the appeal of surface computing for health care support.
We present results from a study involving 20 older adults  performing gesture-based interactions on a multitouch surface.
Older adults were able to successfully perform all actions on the surface computer, but some gestures that required two fingers  and fine motor movement  were problematic.
Ratings for ease of use and ease of performing each action as well as time required to figure out an action were similar to that of younger adults.
Older adults reported that the surface computer was less intimidating, less frustrating, and less overwhelming than a traditional computer.
The idea of using a surface computer for health care support was well-received by participants.
We conclude with a discussion of design issues involving surface computing for older adults and use of this technology for health care.
The introduction of computer display systems into doctor-patient interaction presents opportunities to develop interfaces that are appropriate for older patients.
While many older adults use traditional computer workstations, new interaction devices may be more suitable for the challenges inherent in older adulthood.
Large multitouch surfaces seem particularly appropriate for older adults.
Touch interaction is thought to have a low-barrier of entry.
Interacting with digital media is accomplished in a direct and natural way without the encumbrance of a keyboard or mouse.
We regularly use our bare hands to manipulate physical objects in the world, and touch interaction draws on this experience.
The horizontal form factor of a tabletop is also familiar and affords sitting with other people while interacting with shared media simultaneously.
Finally, projection permits enlarging visual information.
While these characteristics of surface computing seem wellsuited for older populations, it is unclear how the physical nature of interaction, the setup of the device, and system novelty may affect older users.
This paper examines the accessibility and appeal of surface technology for the older adult population within the context of health care support.
In a laboratory study we assess the following:  whether the implementation of current surface gestures and interface elements match the expectations of older users,  how well older adults are able to physically perform actions on the multitouch surface,  the range of accessibility issues that may affect interaction, and  how older adults feel about using a surface computer for health care support.
This study is part of a larger initiative to explore the role of surface computing in health care support for the older adult population.
The long term goal for this research is to design and install a surface computer for use within the health care center of a retirement community; however, a critical first step in this process is to understand the appropriateness of surface computing for this context and population.
Globally, the proportion of people over age 60 compared to younger population segments is growing at a rapid rate .
As we age, we experience an increase in health care issues that require ongoing medical attention.
Managing medical care is challenging for everyone, but this is particularly difficult for older adults with declining physical, visual, hearing, or cognitive abilities.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Multitouch surface technology is increasingly available.
The decreasing cost of projection technology along with the growing availability of multitouch software toolkits encourages research on surface computing.
Commercially available multitouch technology  enables exploration of surface computing in settings outside of the lab such as offices, schools, retail stores, ho-
The proliferation of surface technology makes it important to understand how older adults, a large, growing, and yet relatively unaddressed user group, interact with and react to such technology.
While a range of research studies examine surface computing for general audiences, only a few studies examine the technology for older adults.
The older adult participants were able to learn to use SharePic and enjoyed using the tabletop display.
The authors present a set of a priori principles for the design of a tabletop application for older adults, most of which focus on the task of photo sharing but some are applicable to other tabletop applications .
They tested the tabletop game against a traditional board game and report that older adults found the tabletop game more engaging.
Identifying best practices for the design of surface computing and subsequent interaction is a persistent research question.
A key contribution toward this effort is work by Wobbrock et al.
This work has important implications for accessibility of tabletop technology, as gesture-based interaction should be flexible and accommodate variations in touch input.
The authors state, "...the number of fingers rarely matters and the fingers, palms, or edges of the hands can often be used interchangeably."
Indeed, older users with declining physical abilities are likely to need a range of alternatives for interacting with a touchsensitive display.
Recent research has also examined reading text  and text entry  on a horizontal display, yet this work focuses on the abilities of younger users.
Enlarging visual information on a multitouch surface may be an advantage of the technology; however, software design should account for age-related change in visual abilities such as requiring more illumination for reading, decreased sensitivity to color and contrast, and issues with glare and depth perception .
Furthermore, it is currently unclear what text size is ideal for reading items at different locations on the surface and whether reading text on the horizontal display is problematic with bifocal lenses.
Loss of hearing is another common consequence of aging.
About one-third of Americans between the age of 65 and 74 have severe hearing problems, and about half of Americans who are 85 and older have severe hearing loss .
Individuals with hearing loss rely on interpersonal cues to understand face-to-face conversation .
How might the shared digital workspace support communication challenges due to hearing loss?
Finally, aging often results in a decline in memory.
Changes in memory can be observed in how people encode new memories as well as the short-term maintenance and manipulation of information involved in working memory .
One memory loss condition is Mild Cognitive Impairment , which effects approximately 5.4 million Americans over the age of 70 .
While aging in general decreases memory capabilities, people with MCI may more often misplace things, forget to go to important events and appointments, and have trouble coming up with desired words.
General changes in memory necessitate that surface interaction is easy and quick to learn, a characteristic of surface technology that is assessed in the present study.
Whether or not a multitouch surface computer is an appropriate interaction device for older adults is a relatively unexplored question.
To begin evaluating the potential advantages and drawbacks of the technology for this population, we present a brief review of challenges inherent in aging and the implications of each for surface computing.
One of the most notable characteristics of aging is a change in one's physical or motor ability.
Older adults experience an overall slowing of movement as well as difficulty with fine motor activity and coordination .
Arthritis, a chronic and degenerative disease, is highly prevalent among older adults in the United States and is the leading cause of disability .
Physical limitations due to arthritis and general effects of aging stand to impact how well older adults are able to interact with a large, and perhaps physically demanding, multitouch surface.
For example, are older adults comfortable reaching across the display?
How do they manage fine motor movement on the touch-screen?
Is touch interaction manageable for individuals with hand tremors?
Loss of or reduced vision is common for older adults, and 6.5 million Americans over the age of 65 have a severe visual im-
As we grow older, we experience an increase in health care concerns.
According to the Center for Disease Control , arthritis, heart disease, cancer, and diabetes are chief chronic diseases among older adults .
They are persistent conditions that require regular medical attention.
Managing a chronic medical condition is a familiar yet challenging task for many older adults.
Various computer display systems have been explored to help a patient self-manage their condition and care needs .
Many medical facilities are now transitioning to digital medical record systems.
While this undoubtedly changes practices for health care teams , the introduction of digital record systems also affects medical interactions for patients .
For example, the doctor may have a computer workstation that displays the patient's medical history.
This can change the interaction between physician and patient in multiple ways.
For example, the physician must now attend to both patient and workstation and the patient may need to look over the doctor's shoulder to ensure the accuracy of their chart, verify a prescription, or view other data.
As electronic medical records become more integrated into the process of meeting with a doctor, there is a need to explore computer interfaces that facilitate sharing this information.
The form factor of a tabletop display provides medical staff and patients with a shared workspace where they may lay out and manipulate medical materials such as patient charts, xray images, and other visuals pertinent to conversation.
In August 2009, this idea was put into practice at the Microsoft Medical Media Lab located within a Washington D.C. hospital.
At this hospital, doctors may use a Microsoft Surface to share x-ray images with patients.
Our research agenda involves installing a similar system at a health care center of a local retirement community.
Results reported in this paper guide the design of the system we plan to deploy.
We devised a series of basic activities to assess the following forms of interaction with the multitouch table: select, move, resize, rotate, pan, draw, read text, and enter text.
We focus on these forms of interaction because they are pervasive in tabletop application design.
The functionality and implementation of the gestures was guided by Wobbrock et al.
For example, users expect to rotate an image by touching on a corner of the image and moving in a circular direction , therefore the rotate gesture in our study was implemented in this way.
To assess the learnability and ease of performing each action, one gesture was presented per activity.
Multiple gestures were not activated at the same time .
We implemented seven basic applications using a DiamondTouch table  and the corresponding Flash development toolkit.
This is a large  top-projected capacitive tabletop system with a display resolution of 1280x1024.
Figure 1 illustrates interface designs and gesture-based in-
The design of each activity was intentionally minimalistic so that we were able to assess how much and what type of support older users would need to successfully perform each action.
All tasks were set in the context of health care support.
Ideas for tasks were derived from observations made during our ongoing field work, feedback from health care professionals, and our research team's prior experience designing technologies for health care support.
The goal of each activity was to solicit a particular type of interaction from the participant in a task that was realistic but not too personal.
For example, our field work and conversations with health care professionals revealed that older adults often forget which medications they are taking.
To test the pan gesture, we presented participants with a basic application that allows them to look through a series of medicine brands and pill shapes.
All activities were determined and designed in a similar fashion.
We conducted a usability study involving 20 older adults  to understand the accessibility and appeal of surface computing.
All participants came into our laboratory to participate in the study.
Table 1 presents background data for each older adult participant.
In our sample of older adults, 18 had corrected vision, 10 had arthritis, and one person had severe hand tremors.
To better understand the interactions of older adults, 10 young adults  performed the same set of tasks and gave feedback on interaction.
All young adults had prior experience with computers, but none owned or had extended experience with a multitouch device or tabletop.
Computer experience for participants and whether participants figured out each action on their own , needed a hint about interaction , or required a demonstration of the action .
Touch-screen experience:  prior experience with devices such as point-of-sale systems and bank automatic teller machines and  prior experience with devices like the iPhone or Microsoft Surface.
Observations and data below focus on older adults except where noted.
A researcher followed a written script to guide participants through a series of tasks.
The first task involved getting the participant comfortable in an adjustable office chair and situated at the table.
The participant then manipulated paper information cards spread out on the table surface .
The goal of this first activity was to ensure that the participant was comfortable at the table while interacting with the entire surface.
After the paper-based task, each participant completed seven brief activities  on the multitouch surface.
The ordering of activities was randomized between subjects.
Then she asked the participant how they would perform the task 
Participants were given a hint if necessary .
If the participant still had trouble figuring out the action, the moderator gave them explicit instructions and demonstrated the action for them.
The participant was encouraged to try the action several times.
Then the participant rated on a seven-point Likert scale the level of difficulty for figuring out the action and the level of difficulty for physically performing the action.
After completing all activities, we used a structured interview to examine each participant's reaction to surface computing as well as ideas for using this technology in a medical setting.
Participants performed activities individually, but if two or three participants came to the study together, we allowed them to do the structured interview as a group to encourage discussion.
Two researchers were present for all sessions and took detailed notes.
Each session was video recorded by two cameras, one mounted directly above the table and another positioned in the corner of the testing room.
The majority of older adults independently figured out how to perform touch-based interaction with the surface computer  and found the various forms of interaction physically manageable.
The idea of using surface computing to support health care interactions was also well-received by participants.
After performing each task, participants rated the ease of learning and ease of performance for that particular task .
Some types of interaction  were harder for participants to figure out than to physically perform.
Self-report data for ease of learning  and ease of performing  each type of interaction.
Data was collected via a seven-point Likert scale .
On average, older adults rated all interactions as "somewhat easy" or better for learning and physical performance.
Graph on the right indicates individual participant data  for time to figure out each task.
Error bars show standard error.
Figure 3  illustrates the time it took each participant to figure out each action.
Importantly, the average score by older adults for ease of learning and ease of performance for all tasks is "somewhat easy" or better, and the average time it took older adults to figure out each form of interaction was less than 10 seconds.
While participants did not complete an activity that explicitly examined selecting, they performed the select gesture on a variety of objects within several activities .
Observations throughout the study indicate that selecting was straight-forward and physically manageable for participants.
For smaller buttons , participants typically used a single finger to select.
Occasionly participants used two or three fingers grouped together to select larger buttons  such as the paint color in the drawing activity.
Finally, the prototypes in this study are basic in terms of visual design, and subsequent designs should provide visual confirmation that a button or object was selected.
We anticipated that some participants would have difficulty reaching objects in the far corners of the display, but this was not an issue as their position at the table enabled full range of motion across the surface .
Most often participants used one finger for this action, but occasionally people used two fingers or a whole hand to move an object across the display.
A couple participants experienced hand tremors while dragging, but these participants were still able to successfully move objects across the display.
One complication participants with hand tremors experienced is that an additional finger  would occasionally touch the surface and make the object jump around under their hand.
The move gesture was examined by asking participants to arrange images of foods along a continuum depending on how each item affects cholesterol levels.
Food images were scattered throughout the top region of the display to examine issues of reaching and moving across the surface.
Participants were asked to resize an x-ray image .
Only eight participants used two fingers or hands to enlarge the image on their first attempt.
Seven participants first tried to enlarge the image by tapping on it, and eight  tried enlarging the image by dragging one corner of the image outward with a single finger .
One lady  asked, "I don't see any buttons.
Another woman  said, "I'm expecting this to work because on my computer you can pull out from a corner to make the window larger."
An implementation that combines moving and dragging would likely help participants realize that dragging with a single finger moves the image instead of resizing it.
At the beginning of the study, participants were told that the computer is a touch-screen and that some activities might require more than one finger or hand; yet some participants were hesitant to involve a second hand in this task.
Six participants needed a hint that this activity involved more than one finger or hand.
When participants did use two hands to resize the image, they tended to place their fingers on the edges of the image and move outward horizontally.
Most people did this with two index fingers, but some people used several fingers or their whole hands to "spread out" the image.
Some participants suggested adding a visual cue  to help people understand that a two-finger action is required.
Once participants figured out how to enlarge the image , it was trivial for them to determine how to shrink the image .
Rotate tied with resize as the most difficult to learn , and rotate was rated as the most difficult to perform .
Regardless of how participants started rotating, they were all able to independently figure out how to rotate the image.
However, almost everyone had problems stopping the image in the exact orientation they wanted.
For example, one man  summarized this common problem, "More damping would be helpful.
This is a little jumpy.
Overall, rotating by touching on the corner of an image was not intuitive for everyone, and the implementation requires smoothing and slowing to enhance usability with older adults.
To examine a rotate gesture, we presented users with a graph of blood pressure levels over a period of time, but the image was initially oriented toward the moderator.
We asked participants to turn the graph/chart toward themselves so they could view it.
Rotation was possible by touching on a corner of the image with a single finger and moving in a circular direction, and nine participants immediately touched a corner with a single finger and began rotating the image.
One participant first touched an edge and attempted rotate.
The other ten participants first used their whole hand or two hands to rotate the image before realizing that a single finger on the corner was the desired action.
One lady  said, "My instinct was to turn it like a regular paper, physically with two hands."
Participants performed a right and left pan gesture to look through various brand packaging and pill shapes for ten overthe-counter medications.
This activity started with four brands of medicine on the display, two of which were partially off the screen to provide a cue that content extended beyond the current view .
Participants could use any number of fingers to pan.
On average participants rated the ease of learning for panning as "very easy" , but ironically participants took the longest time to figure out the action .
Physically performing a panning gesture was not a problem for participants .
Several participants who quickly understood this form of interaction referenced their experience with traditional windowlike scrollbars.
For example, one lady  commented, "This is easy for someone who has computer experience because we scroll all the time."
As another woman  contemplated the task, she said "On other computers you can scroll up or down," and then successfully performed the horizontal pan gesture.
Five participants needed a hint or explicit instructions to understand the panning action.
Some participants who had difficulty figuring out the panning metaphor said they wanted a clear indicator that off-screen content exists .
While all participants were immediately successful at drawing with their finger, seven people touched a paint color and attempted to drag the colored circle up to the figure .
It was not clear to them that they were able to select a color, release their finger, and then draw with that color on the diagram.
One reason for this is likely the implementation of our prototype, as it was minimalistic and did not provide users with feedback about which color was selected.
The point of this activity was to examine the feasibility of drawing with a finger tip, and all participants understood the concept of drawing with their finger and were able to perform this action with ease .
After performing this task, a man  said, "I would say it's extremely easy.
Finally, several participants could not find the space bar, so labeling it as such would be helpful.
Overall, the virtual keyboard was suitable for brief text entry, and once participants figured out how to use the keyboard, all said that it was fine for this task compared to a traditional keyboard.
Participants viewed a text description of the side effects of generic aspirin and were asked to adjust the text  to a comfortable size for reading.
This activity had a "larger" and "smaller" button at the bottom of the display that participants used to increase and reduce the text size.
Average preferred text size for reading text close to the user is 1/4"  and for reading text far away is 5/16".
Figuring out how to change the text size was not problematic for participants ; however, some participants said the horizontal orientation of the display made it difficult to read text .
Nine of 20 participants said that they wanted the display to tilt slightly so that reading text would be easier.
Participants liked the idea of dynamically adjusting the text size, and future designs should consider this option.
About half of participants brought two pair of glasses to the study.
One woman  who brought bifocals and magnifying glasses read text on the display with each pair of glasses, and stated, "it works fine with bifocals."
Other participants wearing bifocals echoed this sentiment.
The goal of situating this laboratory-based study within the context of health care was to explore a variety of application ideas with older adults.
It is important to note that participants' success with a particular form of interaction did not appear to interfere with their ability to understand the proposed scenario, as the rotate gesture was most challenging yet the application idea was rated second highest and all ideas received an average score of "somewhat useful" or better .
The top three ideas include reading through medication side effect information with your doctor, viewing a graph/chart of your medical history , and drawing on a diagram of a human figure to discuss pain management with your doctor.
Viewing a shared description of the side effects of a medication received high ratings from participants.
They liked the idea of reviewing text-based information with a doctor to point out areas of concern.
Also, participants stated that they liked the adjustable nature of the text in this activity.
The medical chart viewer was well-received as participants wanted to have a shared visual representation of their medical history.
Regarding drawing, participants thought the application would be useful for clarifying to the doctor exactly where pain is located.
One lady  said, "...it specifies exactly where the pain is and that's a lot easier than saying `doctor, I feel it over here or over here'... it's very graphic, a good idea."
We examined participant reactions to and ability to use a virtual keyboard through an activity that simulated a signin terminal in the reception area of a medical center.
The QWERTY keyboard was designed larger than necessary to ensure that participants could accurately touch each key.
Entering text on the virtual keyboard was straight-forward for all but four participants.
In fact, many participants began entering their name before the task was explained to them.
Participants who had difficulty figuring out this activity looked for a stylus to write their name.
One man  said, "I'd look for a wand for signing in."
Over half of participants recommended that the keyboard be made slightly smaller so that touch typing is possible and to increase the contrast of the letters on each key.
For example, one lady  looked at the display and said, "Ok, this is a typewriter but the spacing is not right."
After typing her name, she explained, "I would say that's not easy because I'm used to touch typing.
If it were like a keyboard it would be very easy."
Typing errors most often occurred when peo-
An important aspect of surface computing for the older adult population is how the technology affects people's perceptions of their ability to interact with a computer.
To assess this, at the beginning of the study participants rated their agreement with six statements pertaining to computers in general.
After using the surface computer for about 30 minutes, participants rated their agreement with the same six statements pertaining to this particular experience.
Figure 8 illustrates the results.
For older adults, the difference between positive statements about general computing and the surface computer was not statistically different.
However, older adults tended to disagree more strongly with negative statements about their experience with surface computing .
One man  who rarely uses a computer explained, "I'm not intimidated by this because I can use my hands and move things around...
I can play with it and figure it out."
In summary, the surface computer appears to be less intimidating, less frustrating, and less overwhelming than participants' usual experience with computers.
Interestingly, young adults' attitudes toward general computers compared to the surface computer were not statistically different for positive or negative statements.
Comparing interaction between older and younger adults reveals several important similarities and differences.
First, many younger participants had the same expectations for interaction as the older participants .
However, young adults quickly tried various ways of interacting until they figured out the desired gesture.
Only one young user said they could not figure out an action  and requested a hint, whereas older users were more likely to wait for a hint rather than exploring until they figured out the action.
There was also a certain reticence or hesitancy in interaction for older adults.
This can be observed in the way they touched the display lightly with a single finger tip, as if to minimize impact to the system.
Another difference is that even though young adults in this study had minimal exposure to a multitouch device, they had high expectations for the quality of interaction .
In fact, younger users rated the ease of performing rotation lower than the older adults .
Finally, younger users bring to bear computer experience that may work against them with the simplistic interaction presented in this study.
For example, four young users had initial difficulty with the text entry activity because they wanted to ensure that the cursor was in the correct spot before entering their name.
There was no cursor to manage in this scenario, which confused some younger users but went unnoticed by all older users.
While touch-based interactions were relatively easy for participants to figure out and perform, we discuss several ways in which interaction can be improved to better accommodate the needs of older adults.
Touch interaction is manageable and preferred.
Overall, we were surprised by how well older adults performed each type of interaction.
Participants enjoyed multitouch interaction and called it "fun" and "engaging."
We suspected that certain actions, specifically panning, might be tiresome for participants, yet all but one person said they prefer to use their hand to pan across the surface compared to having buttons to scroll through options.
We encouraged participants to perform each gesture multiple times, especially actions that have a high level of arm movement such as the pan and move gestures.
While our data do not assess whether these gestures will fatigue users over time, not a single older adult mentioned that an action might become tiresome.
Nevertheless, future work in which such a system is placed in a real world setting for extended use should address these aspects of interaction.
For many participants, the interaction with virtual objects on the multitouch surface was intuitive.
However, providing more explicit cues for interaction would help facilitate initial learning and perhaps subsequent use of the technology.
For example, many participants did not immediately know whether an object was selectable, dragable, resizable, and/or rotatable.
Indicating this functionality visually would aid usability.
While enlarging and shrinking an image was trivial once users figured out the action, the two finger  resize gesture caused initial confusion for over half of users.
One way to indicate a multitouch gesture is by adding visual touch points  to the side of a resizable image.
The rate at which virtual objects adjust based on subtle hand movements, particularly during resizing and rotating actions, needs to be slowed down.
Participants appeared to be more concerned with accuracy in manipulating objects than the speed of interaction.
This was observed in the way many participants spent time carefully adjusting the rotatable chart so that it was exactly horizontal and faced them perfectly.
Subsequent multitouch systems for older adults should include easing or damping in interaction.
Objects that snap in place  would help older users avoid the challenges of fine motor movement required to align an object.
The ability for the interface to allow whole-handed and multifinger input is critical.
This is particularly important for individuals with hand tremors or arthitis.
In fact, one lady  with arthritis in her hands said the technology "would be very good for people with arthritis or who have hands that don't work right."
The drawing activity required a single finger for interaction, and this was challenging for some participants who accidentally touched the display with other fingers.
Dragging allowed input through any number of fingers, but the image jumped around when other fingers unintentionally touched the display background.
For this example, the gesture recognizer could mitigate the impact of additional unwanted fingers contacting the display during an action.
A fingertip is a blunt and imprecise input device, and the effects of imprecision with touch input are exasperated for older adults with limited dexterity.
Three people in this study  suggested that we enable interaction through a stylus.
One man  who experienced hand tremors said, "I would be more comfortable if I had a pen in my hand...
Consider a tilted or adjustable display.
Almost half of participants  suggested that the surface should be at an angle to improve usability.
Canted would be so much easier... My vision is not wonderful.
If it were raised at a 30 degree angle... it would be much easier for me," commented one lady .
Another lady  explained, "I think it should be at an angle so the doctor can see it better and also the patient can see it better...the patient would have to sit along side the doctor."
I would expect it to be on an angle...almost like an easel," said another woman .
While participants were keen on tilting the surface, the tradeoffs in terms of usability and cooperative work should be considered carefully .
Display size may be intimidating.
Many participants liked the large display for sharing information with medical professionals, but a few participants mentioned that the size of the display may be intimidating in a doctor's office.
The patient might feel intimidated by the size of the screen," commented one woman .
Some people said that a smaller display, about half the size of the current surface computer, would be sufficient and less intimidating.
The most appropriate size for a display needs further exploration, as smaller multitouch surfaces are less expensive and increasingly available .
The size, height, and adjustability of the surface computer are important to consider in the design of subsequent systems for older adults.
Positioning at the surface is critical.
Our study examined a 75 cm by 60 cm horizontal surface computer.
Reaching the far corners of this surface was not problematic for any participant.
No participant complained about back or neck pain during the 30 minute session of use.
Furthermore, observations of participants' posture in the chair and movement at the table did not indicate issues of discomfort.
A primary reason for this is the setup of the table and chair.
The thin form factor of the DiamondTouch table on a pedestal stand allowed people to position their legs under the table.
Participants were able to adjust the chair height to a comfortable position for interacting throughout the surface.
The lack of leg room and low positioning of other tabletop models  may present problems for older users.
Overall, participants talked enthusiastically about using a surface computer in a medical setting and gave positive feedback on the idea.
Participants articulated, from a patient's perspective, how the computer would fit into the workflow of a medical visit.
Several people referenced their current experience with digital patient records.
One woman  recounted an experience where there were several mistakes on her record, but she did not notice because the notes were on the doctor's small computer display.
Her friend  replied, "You have to be practically on top of them and get in his space."
With respect to the shared nature of the surface computer, the first woman explained, "The opportunity to catch mistakes would be doubled when you have two people."
Having a shared view of one's medical records was perceived as a strong benefit of the surface computer.
Participants also expressed concern about using a surface computer in a medical context.
Several people mentioned that patients have a right to view their medical information, but at the same time, not everything should be modifiable.
Shared display systems for health care need mechanisms to control access to certain information.
One woman  was concerned that patients might "reach in and mess things up."
She said, "They'd almost have to lock it."
Another lady  commented on her willingness to interact with the shared computer surface, "It's owned by the doctor...We'd at least ask permission, or we'd have to be invited ."
Technologies such as the DiamondTouch that can detect individual users would be helpful for controlling access to various parts of the shared display in a medical setting.
Gregorie, J. and der Linden, M.V.
Effect of age on forward and backward digit spans.
Hardstone, G., Hartswood, M., Procter, R., Slack, R., Voss, A., and Rees, G. Supporting informality: team working and integrated care records.
Hinrichs, U., Hancock, M., Collins, C., and Carpendale, S. Examination of text-entry methods for tabletop displays.
Holmes, J., Powell-Griner, E., LethbridgeCejku, M., and Heyman, K. Aging differently: Physical limitations among adults aged 50 years and over.
Hootman, J. and Helmick, C. Projections of us prevalence of arthritis and associated activity limitations.
Lee, P., Feldman, Z., Ostermann, J., Brown, D., and Sloan, F. Longitudinal prevalence of major eye diseases.
Designing and evaluating the tabletop game experience for senior citizens.
Reading revisited: Evaluating the usability of digital display surfaces for active reading tasks.
Muller-Tomfelde, C., Wessels, A., and Schremmer, C. Tilted tabletops: In between horizontal and vertical workspaces.
Understanding patients: participatory approaches for the user evaluation of vital data presentation.
Slap widgets: bridging the gap between virtual and physical controls on tabletops.
Ageing and Life Course .
Wobbrock, J.O., Morris, M.R., and Wilson, A.D. Userdefined gestures for surface computing.
This paper reports results from an exploratory study involving older adults using a multitouch surface computer.
Older adults were able to perform all actions on the surface, but several aspects of software and hardware design need to be reconsidered to improve usability for this population.
The present study provides insights about older users' conceptual expectations and physical demands of various gestures.
Future work should examine the integration of individual gestures into a single application .
While this study examined touch input directly to the surface, light-weight physical controls  stand to benefit the unique needs of older users.
For example, individuals with hand tremors might find physical controls easier to manage than touch input.
Lastly, an evaluation of surface technology for health care support must be conducted in an authentic setting.
People act differently under emotional stress due to an illness or may be more limited when they are sick or hurt.
Other factors such as surface hygiene will be important when the device is installed in a medical facility.
Several participants were concerned that doctors are already limited by time, and the surface computer might slow down the medical interview process.
Ease of learning for novice users is crucial if the technology is placed in a time-critical setting such as a medical facility.
Our ongoing work involves installing a surface computer in an authentic medical setting to assess these issues.
Alzheimers Disease Facts and Figures .
American foundation for the blind.
Apted, T., Kay, J., and Quigley, A. Tabletop sharing of digital photographs for the elderly.
Technology devices for older adults to aid self management of chronic health conditions.
The center for disease control.
Craik, F. Memory changes in normal aging.
Dietz, P. and Leigh, D. Diamondtouch: a multi-user touch technology.
Gabrielli, S., Bellutti, S., Jameson, A., Leonardi, C., and Zancanaro, M. A single-user tabletop card game system for older persons: General lessons learned from an insitu study.
