Motion platforms are used to increase the realism of virtual interaction.
Unfortunately, their size and weight is proportional to the size of what they actuate.
We present haptic turk, a different approach to motion platforms that is light and mobile.
The key idea is to replace motors and mechanical components with humans.
All haptic turk setups consist of a player who is supported by one or more humanactuators.
The player enjoys an interactive experience, such as a flight simulation.
The motion in the player's experience is generated by the actuators who manually lift, tilt, and push the player's limbs or torso.
To get the timing and force right, timed motion instructions in a format familiar from rhythm games are displayed on actuators' mobile devices, which they attach to the player's body.
We demonstrate a range of installations based on mobile phones, projectors, and head-mounted displays.
In our user study, participants rated not only the experience as player as enjoyable , but also the experience as an actuator .
The approach of leveraging humans allows us to deploy our approach anytime anywhere, as we demonstrate by deploying at an art festival in the Nevada desert.
Such events have been simulated using motion platforms .
Motion platforms are able to move one or more users around and have been used to add realism to flight simulators  and theme park rides.
Unfortunately, the size and weight of motion platforms tends to be proportional to what they actuate.
As a result, motion platforms not only tend to be prohibitively expensive, but also large and heavy and thus stationary, limiting their use to arcades and lab environments.
For a long time, the key to immersion in interactive experience and games was sought in photorealistic graphics .
More recently, game makers made games more immersive by requiring players to physically enact the game such as with Wii  and Kinect .
With graphics and user interaction now part of many games, many researchers argue that haptics and motion are the next step towards increasing immersion and realism, i.e., applying the forces triggered by the game onto the player's body during the experience.
Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Haptic turk is a motion platform based on people.
The name is inspired by the 18th century chess automaton "The Turk"  that was powered by a human chess master.
The specific configuration shown in Figure 1 involves one player located in the center.
The player is enjoying an immersive experience, here a first-person simulation of flying a hang-glider, running on a hand-held device .
In the shown setup, the player can steer the hang-glider by tilting the iPad.
The main difference to regular video games is that the player's experience comes with motion--this motion is administered by human-actuators who manually lift, tilt, and push the player around.
Here there are four of them.
To get the timing and force right, all actuators receive timed motion instructions in a format familiar from rhythm games .
During the experience, actuators execute the motion instructions displayed on their respective device by moving the part of the player's body assigned to them.
At the moment shown in Figure 1, for example, the two actuators left of the player lift up their side of the player, causing the player to be rotated  towards the camera.
Haptic turk generates these motion instructions so as to feed into the player's experience.
As actuators perform their motion instructions, they therefore contribute to the player's experience, making it richer and more immersive.
A haptic turk experience may incentivize actuators to perform their best by measuring and scoring how well they match their motion instructions in terms of timing, position, and force--using the inertial measurement unit  in their mobile device.
However, we obtain a better player experience by scoring actuators as a group, as this encourages actuators to synchronize during cooperative moves.
But finally, several participants in our user study stated that they simply enjoyed supporting the player, suggesting that the act of providing an experience to the player provides all the necessary incentive.
This leverages the visual language of, for example, dance dance revolution .
As the bars reach the actuators' bullseyes at the top of the screen, the respective actuators execute the instructions.
Motion instructions take about seven seconds to reach the bullseye.
This is essential as it allows actuators to get ready so as to perform their motion on time, i.e., in sync with the player's experience.
We now illustrate the haptic turk platform at the example of the specific configuration from Figure 1  and a hang glider experience we call team flight.
The actual experience takes three minutes and contains 14 motion event groups .
We present selected scenes that allow us to illustrate the design elements.
The shown up/down bars in the two right columns reach the bullseye exactly at the moment the player enters the draft of the fan.
The up/down bars are labeled "1"; the two actuators right of the player therefore lift their side of the player to position "1", which is waist height.
This causes the player to be rotated or "rolled" to the left, as the player's hang glider is pushed sideways by the fan.
The two up/down bars have round heads, which demands actuators to move up abruptly, right at the moment the round head fills the round bullseye.
Actuators continue to hold the player at +1 height, then return smoothly to the relaxed position, as demanded by the bars' diagonal tails.
As illustrated by Figure 2, the experience starts out in calm weather and the player's hang glider is in a neutral, horizontal position.
Accordingly, the actuator displays are blank.
This instructs all actuators to stand upright, relaxed, shoulders dropped--a position that actuators can sustain with minimum effort.
We design our experiences to bring actuators back to this position frequently to avoid fatigue.
Note that the actuator displays show the timelines of all actuators so as the help actuators see "the big picture" and to synchronize their actions.
Up/down-bars: The player is approaching a big fan located on the right and the hang glider is about to get caught by the fan's draft.
Haptic turk reflects this by rendering up/down motion instructions.
Up/down bars are haptic turk's most versatile design element and they are used to render the vast majority of motion events.
Redundant color-coding makes the display more glanceable .
Large movements & anticipation: Figure 5 shows how haptic turk performs a large motion event.
Here the player enters a tornado, which causes the player's hang glider to shoot up into the air.
Haptic turk renders this by instructing all four actuators to abruptly lift the player to `+2' the chest level.
To make the player's experience even more intense, haptic turk instructs actuators to first lower the player slightly in anticipation and then to perform the vertical `+2' move.
In Figure 8, the player is entering the field of a very powerful fan that propels the glider quickly out over the desert.
Haptic turk emphasizes the onset of this movement with a horizontal move event, which actuators execute by taking a step into the specified direction.
After all, the shown implementation of haptic turk is mobile, allowing actuators to walk around during the experience.
The main technical challenge behind haptic turk is to get the timing right, i.e., to make sure that actuators provide force exactly at the moment required by the player's experience.
This is a challenge because actuators' are inherently subject to human response time and thus delay.
The mean response time for humans to react to a simple visual stimulus is 220ms , to which we add network delay and human movement.
This duration is substantially longer than the 50ms humans tolerate in delayed haptic feedback .
For pose changes, we found this delay to not cause too much of an issue as long as we simulate a vehicle that moves smoothly.
Hang gliders, for example, change their position only gradually in response to their pilots shifting their weight around.
Here, haptic turk simply displays a preview of the expected goal pose as soon as the player starts to steer; this gives actuators ample time.
The true challenge comes from instantaneous events, such as the forces resulting from a user colliding with an object.
Haptic turk addresses this challenge with two approaches.
The countdown not only adds drama to the game, but, more importantly allows haptic turk to give actuators advance warning.
This is essential, as it allows actuators to throw the player up in the air in synchrony.
Only certain game events can plausibly be fitted with a countdown.
For other events, such as those resulting from physical collisions, haptic turk creates timely responses through "anticipation".
Rather than waiting for the collision to happen, haptic turk continuously checks for the possibility of an upcoming collision.
Whenever, a collision is likely, haptic turk displays a possible bump event, allowing actuators to get ready.
We call this haptic turk's "presponse" mechanism.
Haptic turk probes the space the user is likely to reach in the next seconds using probe lines .
In team flight, for example, we send probe lines forward, as this is the only direction the glider can go.
Each probe line is as long as the player can travel in the 7 seconds that actuator displays project into the future.
At every frame, haptic turk counts how many probe lines predict a collision.
If a collision seems likely  haptic turk injects a motion event into the actuator displays .
It renders the motion instruction's opacity so as to reflect the probability of the event, so 70% opacity represents a 70% probability.
Haptic turk then continuously updates the actuator display.
Haptic turk cannot speed actuators up, but it can slow reality down--by adding a countdown.
We use this approach for all player actions where precision matters, either because they result in a high force or because that are performed by multiple actuators in synchrony.
The ejection seat button in the racecar of our racing game, for example, uses a three-second countdown before it fires.
At the same time, the expected collision probability and thus the opacity of the motion instructions will vary.
If the probability ever drops below a threshold , haptic turk removes the bump instruction--a "false alarm".
To enable probe lines, all the in-game objects have their own "colliders" and corresponding motion instruction.
The tornado in the hang gliding game, for example, has a cylindrical collider.
Probing it triggers the -1/+2 up/down bars shown earlier.
The haptic turk software is a general-purpose platform for creating motion experiences based on people.
In the examples shown above, we used one particular hardware setup based on mobile devices, one for each actuator.
This installation was designed with ubiquitous use in mind in that it only requires devices that users are likely to carry with themselves at all times.
In the following, we show other hardware configurations we have explored.
Finally, we may record haptic turk experiences and share them as "haptic turk movies".
People downloading the movie may then render the experience on any installation they have access to.
While this could be done by using any video format that allows for timed annotations , we feel that the most effective format is to overlay the actuator instructions directly onto the video stream .
This allows us to share on any medium that transports video, including web pages, file sharing services, and YouTube.
All designs shown so far use four actuators to keep the player suspended.
We initially had actuators hold the player directly , but then added the slingshots shown in Figure 17 to reduce actuator fatigue, increase player safety, and to soften potential proxemics issues.
The shown design we made from the seat cushions of foldable chairs , curtain bars, and linen ribbon.
Slingshots can be rolled up to carry.
Figure 15b shows one of our walk-up installations designed for use at tradeshows, museum exhibits, and art shows.
Walk-up installations do not require participants to bring anything and we designed them to minimize per-player setup time.
The shown version integrates player display and actuator display and projects onto the floor.
This version allows players to control the game using a simulated delta, which we implemented by attaching an iPod to a bar.
We also combined our walk-up installation with a headmounted display  as shown in Figure 16.
It allows users to look around in the virtual environment.
As the head mounted display is closing out reality, it delivers a higher level of immersion than any of the other installations.
We deployed this version at Burning Man 2013 .
Figure 18 shows some of the alternative mechanical configurations we have explored.
The shown designs  allow three experiences that require an upright player pose, such as car racing,  provide additional physical support to the player, thereby reducing actuator fatigue.
They allow playing with fewer actuators and/or people with a wider range of physical abilities.
The actuator interface presented earlier in the "walkthrough" section was the result of a series of iterations.
Figure 19 shows two earlier designs for context.
Our initial "level and arrows" design  caused split attention, but most of all it caused ergonomic issues: Since this display style only indicated the desired player tilt, but no absolute height, actuators tended to spend most of their time in non-neutral postures, resulting in substantial fatigue.
We consequently switched to a model that instructed actuators using a notion of absolute height .
The 2x2 layout also showed the actuator instructions of up to four actuators, allowing actuators to better synchronize.
Figure 19: Earlier versions of the actuator interface:  Initial version based on the metaphor of a two-dimensional level.
Only for bumping events did we use the time-line metaphor.
The thick bullseye highlights the actuator's timeline.
The interface, however, was limited in that it provided actuators with too little preview of upcoming events, which is a truly essential requirement for actuator displays.
We addressed this by lining up the four timelines at the top of the display and unifying all instructions to fit the timeline format--which brought us to the version shown throughout this paper .
It performed very well throughout studies and deployment.
Limitations of our approach include that it requires multiple people, is tiring, and that human actuators cannot rival a computerized motion platform in terms of responsiveness and reliability.
In particular, a real time unpredictable event is difficult to handle in our current system.
For example, if players controlling a racing game swerve and hit a wall, this hit is difficult to predict.
This makes the event difficult to haptically render by our system, as it does not leave enough time to properly prepare actuators for their action.
Haptic turk runs in to similar issues if multiple events become possible at a given moment.
In addition, there are all the risks that come with motion equipment in the first place, such as motion sickness and the risk of injury.
The approach may also raise proxemics considerations, the extent of which should be expected to vary across cultures.
We address some of these issues with the design of slingshots that reduce actuator fatigue, increase player safety, and soften proxemics issues, but these are certainly only a partial solution.
In exchange to the proxemics issues, haptic turk delivers not only force feedback, but also a human-to-human experience that lets people interact in a new way.
While we initially expected that competing to win the rhythm game would be the main incentive for actuators, the physical activity itself and, in particular, the social nature of the setup turned out to be the main driving force that made people participate in studies and experimental deployment.
The main contribution of this paper is a new mechanism for creating a motion platform--based on humans.
We present user interfaces and a system of motion instructions, three display and four mechanical configurations, interactive experiences, and two approaches to address lag.
The main benefit of our approach is ubiquitous availability.
This means that the actuators that formed a hang glider a second ago may now serve as a car or battle robot.
This way, haptic turk reduces the sharing of motion experiences to the sharing of data files.
In particular, the mobile versions of haptic turk could potentially reach millions of users by leveraging the existing install base of mobile devices.
Haptic Turk shares some characteristics with Wizard of Oz systems, such as the aforementioned Turk .
Researchers use the wizard of oz method to speed up prototyping  and to give users new experiences .
Haptic Turk is different from crowdsourcing, such as Amazon's Mechanical Turk , which focus on recruiting workers.
However, haptic turk could use crowdsourcing platform such as TaskRabbit , CommunitySourcing  and Friendsourcing  to help recruit actuators.
A wide variety of force feedback devices have been used to enhance the realism of virtual reality interactions including virtual object manipulation and motion simulation .
Motion simulators simulate motion by shaking, lifting or tilting players or groups of player sitting or standing on them.
They are intensively used in driving and flight simulation for both training and entertainment purposes .
Most of them are based on a Stewart platform , which has six degrees of freedom driven by six hydraulic cylinders as actuators.
HapSeat  achieves motion simulation with lower cost and a more compact form factor by actuating the user's head and hands.
The fact that users perceive motion mainly using their visual, auditory, vestibular, and kinesthetic systems  allows this project to limit actuation to armand headrests.
Researchers also showed that vibrotactile feedback may generate the illusion of self-motion .
Tactile Brush  uses this haptic illusion and renders vibrotactile strokes on the user's back using a grid of actuators in the chair.
Exoskeletons are wearable machines not only for amplifying users' motion but also providing force feedback.
There are different kinds of exoskeletons, such as  that use different actuators  to help users perform six or more degrees of freedom tasks either in the real or the virtual world.
They can provide large forces, but are also heavy and large because of their actuators and mechanical parts.
FlexTorque  offers an exoskeleton in a portable form factor; it provides force feedback to the arm of a user playing shooting games.
Mobile Haptics Lopes et al.
GyroTab  produces torque in a mobile form factor based on a gyroscopic effect.
Another mobile haptic device is POKE , which uses an air pump and silicon membranes on the front side to poke the caller's face remotely.
To run an experience, one person starts the haptic turk app as "host", which makes this person the "player" for the first round .
The actuators Velcro-strap their devices to the indicated part of the player's body.
We implemented the haptic turk platform and the experiences  in C# and JavaScript on the Unity3D engine .
We then deploy to notebook computers  and mobile devices .
By switching to the professional version of Unity3D, we obtained the ability to deploy to the oculus rift.
The actuators' mobile devices sample their accelerometers and gyros 60 times a second and assess actuators' performance by comparing these readers with the received motion instructions in terms on tilt, roll, and acceleration.
Haptic turk connects devices using WiFi.
Informal testing showed a mean latency of 32ms, which is faster than the earlier discussed 50ms delays that humans tolerate in a haptic response.
We ran the team flight experience on the walk-up virtual reality setup of haptic turk already shown in Figure 16, i.e., players experienced the world through a head mounted display .
Actuators saw their instruction on the computer screen in front of the player.
To assure that all participants enjoyed the same experience, we set the hang glider experience to autopilot.
This limited player's interaction abilities to looking around using the oculus rift, but assured that all participants encountered the same events.
It also allowed us to always complete the experience in a fixed amount of time , thereby creating a controlled experience also for the actuators.
We brought in participants in groups of 2, 3, or 4 and filled in experimenters so as to reach the 5 people required to play .
We then played one round of the team flight experience for each participant, so that each participant had the opportunity to be player exactly once.
With each new group, we provided two minutes of training during which we explained the handling of the slingshots, the actuator display and how high to lift the player for the four types of up/down bars, which track each actuator was expected to follow, and how to wear the oculus rift.
Participants played once as a player and 1-3 times as a actuator, according to their group size.
Within these constraints, player/actuator order was counterbalanced.
After all participants of a group were done playing and turking, all participants filled in questionnaires about their experience.
We then released the group of participants and brought in the next group.
Running a group of 2-4 participants took 10 to 15 minutes.
Overall, players preferred the large motion events.
Five players stated that they liked the intense motion resulting from lifting, shaking and bumping.
Another player stated that he particularly enjoyed whole-body movements, such as being lifted or being swung forward--more so than being tilted and rolled.
Along the same lines, three participants stated that they did not enjoy the extensive landing period in which they were tilted down.
One participant described tilting as uncomfortable.
Accordingly, when asked about the most impressive moment of their player experience, 11 participants picked the intense -1/+2 boost caused by the tornado.
One player expressed that "the changes in altitude were amazing and immersive".
Another player explained that he enjoyed the moment when he bumped into the blimp.
Players rated that the actuators "were pushing me at the wrong/right time" as 5.4 , i.e., they were satisfied with the actuators' timing.
As actuators, participants rated the experience as actuator as less enjoyable than as players, yet still on the "enjoyable" side .
Very obviously, the actuators' experience was strongly driven by their perception of players' experience.
Actuators felt that their performance contributed to player's experience  .
Five actuators said that they enjoyed seeing their players scream and giggle.
One actuator said "it's fun to play this with your friends and see their reactions as they fly."
And one simply stated "it's fun to watch."
One participant would have enjoyed an even better view of what the player is experiencing.
While we thought of the special effects role as being less exciting, one actuator said he would have also liked to take on that role.
The most likely reason for the lower score on enjoyment was fatigue.
One actuator mentioned that fatigue kicks in after two rounds of turking.
Another actuator said "The person we moved was too heavy for me and I was smaller than the other players so my arms end at a lower height."
Two actuators mentioned that lifting the player to level +2 repeatedly had caused fatigue.
To learn more about proxemics, we asked participants who they would play team flight with.
They indicated that they would play with friends  and family , but only 1/14 felt it was appropriate to play with the public.
Given that this study had forced participants to play with a group of mostly strangers, this suggests that subjective satisfaction may improve further if experienced in a closer circle of friends and family.
One participant explicitly said that she would enjoy playing haptic turk with her kids.
The human-human nature of haptic turk polarized participants.
While 7/14 participants responded that they would have preferred an experience administered by a mechanical motion platform, 5/14 stated that they preferred being actuated by humans .
This suggests that these participants found an enjoyable quality in the human element.
This is interesting, especially given that the actuators were assigned to them for the purpose of the experiment and not the friends or family that participants would have liked to play with.
In summary, our simple study provides some initial validation for the haptic turk concept.
Most importantly, participants very much enjoyed the player experience.
The actuator experience, while still enjoyable, could be improved by longer breaks and by giving the choice of who to play with.
Encouraged by the results of the study, we decided to try an experimental deployment of haptic turk and the team flight experience at an art festival in the Nevada desert .
Our goal was to learn more about the social dynamics of haptic turk--outside the lab.
We again opted for the walk-up VR haptic-turk set-up previously shown in Figure 16.
As shown in Figure 24, we adapted the set-up to the hostile desert environment by placing the projector in a box equipped with air filters, etc.
The entire installation  was transported, set up, and run by one of the authors, emphasizing haptic turk's potential to deliver motion experiences anytime anywhere.
There was no particular attract mode, but the projection showed the game running.
Whenever an attendee was interested in playing, they would convince their friends to turk for them.
Groups, however, were small--never large enough to play.
We then encouraged attendees to recruit strangers as additional actuators.
This typically took them a minute or two 
While most attendees recruited to be able to play, several attendees "gifted" the experience to a friend--oftentimes their boy/girlfriend--i.e., they recruited actuators, but then stepped back and let their friend take on the role as player while they actuated.
Given the constant competition for visual attention at the festival, it was essential for us to get started as quickly as possible.
To get started in about a minute, we assigned actuator positions, helped actuators into the slingshots, and taught them about how high to raise lower at the individual up/down bars.
We then filled in one actuator position ourselves, which allowed us to start right away and instead coach the other actuators as the experience was unfolding.
We ran the installation only at night.
While players wore the oculus rift, the projector projected a copy of the rift display with overlaid actuator display onto the desert ground, which served as actuator display .
As before, we ran the team flight experience in autopilot and without additional incentives for actuators.
On three nights, we ran about 100 attendees.
Player weights ranged from an estimated 100 pounds to a self-declared 200 pounds.
While the venue did not afford running questionnaires, we observed attendees and videotaped four of the runs for further analysis.
One player reported motion sickness.
None of the actuators mentioned fatigue this time.
The reason could be that, unlike our study, most attendees actuated only once, very few of them twice.
This suggests that the fatigue threshold for this particular 4-person setup is around 3-5 min for this particular young athletic audience.
We have presented haptic turk, an approach to having motion experience everywhere.
With haptic turk, we tackle this challenge orders of magnitude cheaper, more space efficient, and faster-to-deploy than the technical equipment it is inspired by.
By leveraging the existing install base of mobile devices, haptic turk has the potential to reach hundreds of millions of users.
As a side effect, haptic turk produces an interesting new social experience.
As future work, we plan on using haptic turk to apply force feedback to players' hands and to use haptic turk for virtual reality, rehabilitation, and for rapid prototyping haptic machinery.
We also plan on exploring how to give actuators a more active role, e.g., by allowing them to slip into the role of game world characters and to control game events.
