We present design insights for developing mobile services for senior citizens which have emerged through substantive engagement with end users and other stakeholders.
We describe the aims of the Mobile Age project, and the ideas and rationale for applications that have emerged through a co-creation process.
A trusted data platform is proposed along with apps that bring open data and mobile technology to work for an underserved population.
Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the Owner/Author.
Copyright is held by the owner/author.
Mobile Age1 is an EU project with several partner organisations and trial sites around Europe.
Each trial site is developing apps and services targeting older adults, principally to ensure they are beneficiaries of an increasingly digital society  but each with different focus.
The project aims to mobilise mobile technologies and open data for the presently underserved older adult population.
1 Introductions Describe personal experiences through experience of the use of mobile & web technologies.
4 Theme Prioritization Theme prioritization card sorting exercise.
5 Events A Document events attended, those not attended and reasons why.
6 Events B Exploration of existing events applications, and alternative interfaces.
7 Services A Focus on specific services that users access.
8 Services B Prompted Services discussions using an SLDC supplied list.
It is intended to develop a research partnership between partners, so we base our activities on a framework developed across domains involving the hard-to-reach in technology innovation projects .
This is delivered through a traditional "plan, act, reflect" action research process  across an overlapping four phase co-creation process formative, co-design, co-develop, and sustain engaging all partners in activities at each phase.
We are at the stage of entering co-development, heavily informed by partners and users in cycles of iterative development.
The process has so far comprised of interviews with the partners and end users, two idea generation sessions with AgeUK and SLDC representatives, and a series of 9 ideation and paper prototyping workshops with endusers .
One of the key challenges known at the outset of the project, which has been further illuminated through the engagement process, is to do with older adults' attitudes toward and competence with technology.
With a little time, money and energy, they described being highly discerning in terms of the tools they were willing to invest time in learning.
These tools were typically those deemed high win/low risk: greatest benefit to the individual balanced against concerns such as security.
In many cases, our participants expressed a preference for what they perceived as simpler ways of doing things--e.g.
This was not purely out of habit, though having known pathways towards achieving goals played a role in determining which tools seniors thought appropriate .
More importantly, non-digital tools were perceived to be more trustworthy: not in and of themselves, but because of the confidence of the user.
In other words, our participants tend to have greater confidence in their ability to use tools they had used for many years-- notably those rooted in larger systems of organisation that they understood.
With this in mind, the Mobile Age team identified several core, high-level design requirements for systems and apps for older adults:  The UI needs to be consistent, intuitive and sympathetic to users who require reassurance.
Avoid tech jargon; use plain English.
Anticipate anxiety provoking interactions and devise mechanisms to prevent escalation/rejection.
Ensure that value to users is high and risks are low; and communicate the value to potential users.
Use intelligent analytics and context awareness to push information at the right time, rather than rely on the user searching for it.
P2: "I still think about using the telephone.
I still think about writing.
I haven't gotten myself geared up, like  has, to actually look up a lot of things.
Or to look  government things....
I realise it's just getting over a hurdle, because sometimes I've been making a um, cooking something, a sauce, and I'm not sure what to do and I can't find the recipe in a book."
P2: "And I ring up my daughter."
I thought you were going to say go online."
P2: "Oh no, I'd never even think of going online, you know.
P5: "My mum lost her phonebook.
She spent months moaning at me about this lost phonebook, I said, `Mum, well why don't you just go online?
You know, you don't need a phonebook, just Google it.'
Having said that, we came to understand that there is no one "senior experience."
The participants at workshops are mobile, for example, as they are capable of traveling to the workshops; they may be especially volunteer-minded, with a desire to contribute time to research; and they likely have a higher than average interest in technology, knowing that this was the topic of the workshops.
In the end, we have so far taken our cues about what to develop from those who have participated- in doing so where possible we consider the value of interventions for those who were absent from the process through developing user stories.
The emergent themes were prioritized by users, and ideas inspired by those themes were explored with users, informing development of ideas taken forwards: Community shopping.
Participants expressed interest in online supermarket shopping, feeling that it would reduce their reliance on others and save them time.
They explained that they were prohibited from using it because their weekly shop would fall short of the minimum cost for delivery.
They were enthusiastic about the idea of pooling orders with neighbours-- particularly because it would create an opportunity to socialise with people which would otherwise be lost by not going to the store.
We chose not to pursue this because a similar app has been developed already , and we do not have a supermarket partner.
Recognising that our participants had varied technological ability and skills in other areas, as well as a seemingly universal desire to help each other, we conceived of a service that matched people with a need to people who could help fill that need.
Key features of the senior experience emerged through the interviews and formative workshop stages.
The dominant theme was loneliness: many participants were widowed / widowered and therefore lived alone.
They often shop purely for the social contact it afforded.
Volunteering was similarly valuable as a form of socialisation; but volunteering also fit in with a strong ethic of social responsibility, which was universal amongst our participants.
Their lives are busy and complicated, with most taking part in a host of activities to stay active, and memory decline was a universal problem; therefore, planning and organisation were critical.
Money concerns were prevalent, as seniors tend to live on limited pensions .
P2: "Talking about the government , one of the things, which I learned, was  they look as though they're government-- it happened to a friend of mine... , and she came , `You have to pay.'
Anyway, I queried this at the post office, and the post office said, `Oh, you've got scroll all the way down, and make sure you get the right one.'
And that is something we could have helped with."
I: "...Just making it easier for you to get to the right one?"
AgeUK, which advertises vetted services.
The main feature lacking from this leaflet, our participants explained, was the ability to read/contribute reviews of these individuals.
Participants often raised the fact that it can be difficult to know which sources of information, and which sites, to trust .
For example, it is not always clear which internet sites are genuine government sites.
While not a project we decided to take forward, the basic concept is evident in the platform we will be designing .
Despite the potential benefits of using online banking, older adults are resistant to using such tools ; and our participants are no exception.
They are deeply anxious about the security of such tools, and doubted their competence in being able to use them well enough to avoid losing their money, either by pressing the wrong button or being defrauded by hackers.
In particular, they noted the lack of an `undo' button, and a perceived inability to recover from mistakes.
One suggestion was for an interface that mediated contact with the bank's online system, e.g.
This could be a significant improvement on existing systems and might entice holdouts to begin using online banking.
Some of the above is not uniquely insightful, but nevertheless we plan to continue the co-creation process in the most promising directions to gain further insight into co-creating with older adults.
We plan to initially develop a trusted space umbrella platform that will support two initial apps.
At the moment, these are raw ideas, we will work with our end users to resolve the specific details of how they will work.
Trusted space  Trust in technology is a prominent theme that was discussed during the co-creation workshops.
This also translates to a reluctance to share personal information on social networks.
Mobile Age apps are therefore intended to be a trusted and safe space for older adults.
To that end, this platform will allow apps within this trusted space to share information between each other, when allowed by the user.
The platform will collate analytics data from the apps which will then be reused by the apps, and broker the sharing of personal data and context information between apps.
Social Events  The combination of mobile sensor context data, some limited personal information, weather forecasts, open public transport and traffic data has the potential to not only raise awareness of events, but most significantly to present information tailored to the individual's ability to get to an event.
We found many events are missed because people do not know how or if they can get to an event, or what the weather will be like - the effort of the logistics is great.
By knowing what transport the user has available and the schedule of a user, events can be presented not by location or time, but by the ability of that user to get to an event.
Examples of events could be coffee mornings, dance classes, village fairs, etc.
Our participants also informed us that it is difficult to know what is on due to the distributed nature of data sources - organizers tend to host and maintain their own lists of events.
Here we will work with project partners to integrate listing into their processes, build an API, and scrape key sources.
Whilst there are services available to assist with this, they are incredibly time consuming due to the repeated data entry required.
The benefits app will use context data and the platform personal data store to remove duplicate data entry, and aim to simplify the process of discovering eligibility.
Other similar apps for accessing government services have been discussed and may be explored, for example an app for "flooding help" - services for citizens affected by flooding to reduce the pain of repetitive paperwork tasks, and allowing the citizen to share information one time, automating much of the activity.
This information may be reused to allow the app itself to determine eligibility locally, without needing to share data until the point of application, retaining user control and agency in the data lifecycle.
Also, when a user's information changes, the user could be notified automatically that they may now be eligible to receive new or updated benefits.
The apps proposed here make use of the unique capabilities afforded by mobile technologies and open data, bringing those to an underserved population.
We initially allowed the exploration to go wider than mobile and open data, looking for the opportunities for these technologies, rather than imposing them.
One of the most compelling components to emerge from cocreation is the novel structuring and presentation of information by personal context in the events app.
The co-creation process has driven the emergence of these ideas and the development of the apps proposed here, which have the potential to support independent living leading to improvements in the experience of senior adults.
Lessons from our elders: identifying obstacles to digital literacy through direct engagement.
6th International Conference on PErvasive Technologies Related to Assistive Environments .
Pervasive healthcare: the elderly perspective.
2nd International Conference on Pervasive Technologies Related to Assistive Environments .
Older adults and technology use: Adoption is increasing, but many seniors remain isolated from digital life.
Technology and Older People: Evidence Review.
The impact of aging on access to technology.
Software engineering for `social good': integrating action research, participatory design, and agile development.
Older people, internet access and e-public service provision.
Past experiences, current practices and future design: Ethnographic study of aging adults' everyday ICT practices--And how it could benefit public ubiquitous computing design.
Eighty something: banking for the older old.
Actively engaging older adults in the development and evaluation of tablet technology.
