In order to address the increased privacy and security concerns raised by mobile communications, designers of mobile applications and websites have come up with a variety of warnings and appeals.
While some interstitials warn about potential risk to personal information due to an untrusted security certificate, others attempt to take users' minds away from privacy concerns by making tempting, time-sensitive offers.
We conducted an online experiment  to find out.
Our data show that both these strategies raise red flags for users--appeals to instant gratification make users more leery of the site and warnings make them perceive greater threat to personal data.
Yet, users tend to reveal more information about their social media accounts when warned about an insecure site.
This is probably because users process these interstitials based on cognitive heuristics triggered by them.
These findings hold important implications for the design of cues in mobile interfaces.
Users are constantly worried about both the security with which their information is protected and the fact that online services tend to collect excessive user data .
Past research tends to assume a rational user when studying online users' privacy concerns and information disclosure behaviors , arguing that users rationally assess the benefits and risks of disclosing information online.
We argue that online users are not always so calculating; they make quick judgments in the heat of the interaction.
These judgments tend to be based on heuristics, or mental shortcuts , which can be triggered by cues on the interface.
Even though online users may sometimes gauge benefits and risks before deciding whether or not to trust a service, it is unlikely that they would go through a thorough consideration before every judgment or action.
Given the temporal urgency of much of our online behavior, especially in a mobile context, credibility is often determined by surface level aspects of site design .
So in this study, we try to investigate the underlying psychological mechanisms of users' trust and privacy concerns with a heuristic approach.
Rapid advances in personalization technology have enabled online service providers to offer tailored recommendations of products and content based on users' preferences, browsing history, and location.
This serves to make online mobile services more ubiquitous than ever.
Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Sundar's  MAIN Model formally identifies the different kinds of rules of thumb or heuristics that may be operating when users make credibility judgments based on interface design aspects.
The present study assumes that privacy heuristics can be triggered by various `cues' on the interface, which will trigger users' perception of the interface as well as their information disclosure behavior.
For example, one recent study  found that personalization cues on a website not only engendered greater trust toward the site, but also seemed to provide justification for soliciting disclosure of personal information among users who are primed to be suspicious of the privacy of their information in online databases.
The uses and gratifications theory suggests that users seek gratification in media and technology use based on their needs .
Surrounded by a culture of fast food and services, this characteristic is even more salient for online users, who want to get their needs met instantaneously and have no tolerance for delayed gratifications .
Targeting this widely prevalent need for instant gratifications, online service providers create a plethora of time-sensitive deals and prize draws to expeditiously earn user engagement and commitment by way of registration and continued use.
Instant gratification, as a mental rule of thumb, privileges immediate, over delayed, satisfaction of needs.
Offers of instant gratifications are usually presented as cues on the interface, such as a button for obtaining a discount coupon instantly or a logo for an immediate prize upon registration at the site.
The rational model would lead us to expect layperson users to positively respond to such cues, even to the point of neglecting privacy and security concerns.
So, a reasonable hypothesis would be: H1: When instant gratification cue is present, participants will have more trust, more positive attitude, less perceived threat, more behavioral intention toward the website, as well as higher tendency for information disclosure.
Participants were recruited from Amazon's Mechanical Turk .
We limited participation to US residents with a HIT approval of over 90%, and paid each completed experimenter $1.
They were randomly assigned to one of the four conditions.
In mobile interfaces, banner or pop-up warnings are often seen when there is a potential threat to information security.
For example, the Internet browser may not be able to detect a security certificate from a trusted authority, or there may be unreliable websites trying to access users' information.
The intention of browsers and online service providers to offer such warnings is to remind users about potential security risks to their information in the website visited.
These security warning cues in a mobile interface may trigger a sense of perceived risk of the Internet environment, reminding them of the security heuristic that we all carry in our head .
A logical outcome would be a decrease in users' trust and positive attitude as well as behavioral intention toward the interface.
So we propose that: H2: When security cue is present, participants will have less trust, more negative attitude, more perceived threat, less behavioral intention toward the website, as well as lower tendency for information disclosure.
Considering the potentially contradictory effects of an instant gratification cue and a security cue, we also are interested in how the presence of both cues may work together in influencing both users' evaluation of a mobile website and their actual disclosure behavior.
To manipulate instant gratification cue and security cue, four versions of a fictitious mobile website, called "City Food Map," a location-based mobile restaurant recommendation service, were created.
The cue manipulations were embedded on the registration page , except for which the stimulus website was identical across the four conditions.
The instant gratification cue was operationalized by the presence or absence of an ongoing free prize draw.
The security cue was operationalized by the presence or absence of a securitywarning banner showing that a trusted security certificate could not be detected.
Upon obtaining their informed consent, study participants were asked to fill out an online pre-questionnaire eliciting their demographic information and power usage.
They were then instructed to click on a link  on their smart phone.
The manipulated interface cues were placed on the registration page; and the registration form required voluntary input on personal, contact, financial, and social media information.
After participants completed the registration, they were directed to a prototype food map page in a big city.
The website was designed such that participants could only go in one direction throughout the website.
On the last page, they saw a link to the postquestionnaire that asked about attitudes toward the website, perceived trust toward the website, behavioral intention to visit the site, and perceived threat to personal data.
Specifically, individuals expressed more positive attitudes, perceived less privacy threats, and had more future use intention toward the mobile website when there was no security cue.
These findings partly supported H2.
However, in terms of actual information disclosure behavior, participants disclosed more social media information  on the stimulus website when the security cue was present, which is contrary to what we hypothesized in H2.
In response to our research question, the interaction effects between the two cues on our dependent variables were not significant.
In sum, the results showed that embedding either an instant gratification cue or a security cue in a mobile interface tended to negatively impact users' perceptual evaluation of the website; however, adding a security cue could trigger more actual disclosure of social media account information.
Participants' attitudes toward the website were assessed with 10 items including "high quality," "likeable," etc.
Perceived trust toward the website was measured by 6 items such as "trustworthy" and "reliable"  .
Behavioral intention to visit the website in the future was ascertained with 4 items, such as, "I intend to use the service in the near future"  .
Perceived threat to personal data was measured with two items, such as "I am concerned that the site may have collected too much personal information about me"  .
The items in the registration form were categorized into four types, and the number of items answered was counted as the measure of actual information disclosure behavior for each category: personal , contact , financial , and social media information .
In addition, power usage  was measured by way of 12 items , such as, "I make good use of most of the features available in any technological device" .
Perceived threat, attitude, trust, behavioral intention and power usage were all measured on a 7-point Likert-type scale, with 7 being the highest score on these attributes.
Given that trust and perceived threat can influence overall attitudes and behavioral intentions, we tested the relationships between the two interface cues and other variables using a structural equation model , which yielded a good fit: 2 = 1304.51, df = 697, p < .001; CFI = .90; RMSEA = .063, 90% CI = .058 - .068.
In order to test the effects of the instant gratification cue and the security cue on users' evaluations of the website and their actual information disclosure behaviors, a series of analyses of covariance  were conducted, controlling for power usage, age, gender, and other demographic information.
Results suggested significant main effect for the instant gratification cue on participants' trust toward the mobile website, F  = 4.81, p < .05.
Specifically, presence of the instant gratification cue lowered individuals' trust toward the mobile website in contrast to the condition without the embedded instant gratification cue.
Instant gratification cue's effects on other dependent variables were not significant.
In sum, our study findings suggest that users are quite wary of the potential privacy and security risks in a mobile website that issues security warnings and calls for instant gratification.
The presence of these cues serves to reduce their trust, attitude, and behavioral intention toward the online service.
Interestingly, the security cue heightens perceived threat but also encourages greater disclosure of one's account and network strength on social media.
The results suggest that interface cues have a significant effect on users' attitude, trust, perceived threat, and behavioral intention towards the mobile website, as well as actual information disclosure behavior.
Specifically, the presence of an instant gratification cue , a commonly adopted technique in online venues to boost user engagement and commitment with the service, reduced users' trust and attitude toward the website.
Rather than triggering a tempting instant gratification heuristic, the prize draw incentive may have served to reveal the service provider's persuasive intent, especially given its flashy design.
This is especially likely given that our sample is more than ordinarily tech-savvy , quite experienced with such commercial appeals.
This negative reaction could also be due to the "intrusiveness heuristic" , given that the instant-gratification cue in this study was unsolicited.
The presence of a security warning led to significantly higher perceived threat to personal information, more negative attitudes toward the mobile service and a lower tendency for future use, but significantly more disclosure of information regarding their Facebook and Twitter accounts.
This inconsistency between attitudes and behavior may be seen as yet another demonstration of the much-touted phenomenon of "privacy paradox" , but qualifies it by suggesting that behavioral disclosure pertains more to public, rather than personal, information about oneself.
The distraction caused by the cue perhaps makes the users let their guard down for some, but not all, categories of disclosure.
Or perhaps it is a more conscious decision: When sensitized to security concerns, they are more likely to think about the consequences of providing each piece of information, resulting in a greater tendency to reveal that information which is already in the public domain.
Given the statistically significant effects of both cues used in this experiment upon a variety of psychological measures, an important implication for mobile interface design is that privacy-related cues have to be designed carefully and strategically in triggering appropriate cognitive heuristics.
Considering the chronically heuristic nature of information processing by online users, the visual display of an online appeal or the mere mention of security issues can both trigger a red flag.
While the current strategy of using intrusive interstitials to grab users' attention and communicate with them may be appropriate for warnings, designers may want to rethink this strategy for making offers and proposing opportunities to users.
Follow-up studies could explore other mechanisms for persuasive appeals and further investigate how specific privacy-related heuristics are linked to specific interface cues, as well as their effects on trust and information-disclosure behaviors.
