While past work has examined password usage on a specific computer, web site, or organization, there is little work examining overall password usage in daily life.
Through a diary study, we examine all usage of passwords, and offer some new findings based on quantitative analyses regarding how often people log in, where they log in, and how frequently people use foreign computers.
Our analysis also confirms or updates existing statistics about password usage patterns.
We also discuss some implications for design as well as security education.
These findings can help in the design of systems that facilitate password management.
Many studies have investigated how people use passwords.
Adam and Sasse conducted a study focusing on people's attitudes towards password authentication systems.
They found that if the authentication system did not mesh well with people's work practices, people tended to circumvent the authentication system, in effect undermining the security of the authentication system .
Inglesant and Sasse found that even if organizations enforced strict password policies on users, the policies did not guarantee security for certain attacks  while also frustrating users .
Shay et al., through a survey of 470 students, showed that the students were annoyed when university adopted a new password policy requiring more complex passwords, but at the same time, the students felt more secure .
These studies imply that choosing appropriate password policies is crucial to making password authentication systems more secure and usable.
There have been other studies including password usage outside of organizations.
Gaw and Feltman interviewed 49 undergraduate students and found that the students had 7.8 accounts on average, with three or less passwords .
Florencio and Herley deployed software to more than a half million clients over three months.
They reported that they observed about 25 online accounts per client.
The difference in the number of online accounts between Gaw et al.
In this paper, we present the results of a diary study investigating in what contexts people use passwords in their daily lives, examining password usage across all computers, services, and settings.
Our analysis also provides novel data, such as where people log into their accounts and how frequently they use foreign computers.
Text-based passwords are the most commonly used authentication system today.
There have been multiple studies investigating password usage, including people's selection of passwords , strength and memorability of user chosen passwords , and the number of passwords and accounts users have .
There are also studies investigating password usage in companies , as well as the effects of password policies on users' practices .
However, a relatively small amount of work  has investigated password usage in our daily lives.
In this paper, we present the results of a two-week diary study examining how participants used passwords in their everyday lives, spanning the entire day , as well as across all computers and services .
We provided small diaries to participants and asked them to carry the diaries throughout their day.
We asked participants to record each password event in their diaries when they log into their accounts using desktop computers or laptops.
Password events included typing passwords to log into online accounts and computers, unlocking screensavers, and logging into applications .
Even if an authentication system automatically filled passwords, we instructed the participants to record the password event, as long as the participants had to click some button .
In contrast, if a system automatically logged into an account, we asked them not to record the password event since some participants would have difficulty distinguishing if they actually went through an authentication process.
On the first day of the study, we asked participants to clear cookies in their browser to log out from all of their online accounts.
At the password events, the participants recorded contexts, including the participant's location, the purpose of the password event, type of computer they were using , and whether they used a password aide .
The study lasted for two weeks from July 1st to July 14th.
At the end of the study, we asked participants to complete a post-survey.
We compensated participants $20 USD.
The most common purpose of these events was to log into online services , followed by to log into computers , to use applications on computers , and to unlock screensavers .
The small ratio of "unlocking screensavers" implied that a small number of participants were using passwords to unlock screensavers.
In our postsurvey, we also found that only three participants had screensavers that required passwords to be unlocked.
These results implied that there are opportunities to design better user authentication systems for screensavers to facilitate its adoption.
We recruited 20 participants using a university recruitment web site.
Nine participants were male and 11 participants were female.
Twelve participants were university students, two participants were university staff, and six participants were domestic residents.
Their ages ranged from 21 to 59 with a median age of 29.
In the survey, we examined the participants' expertise levels by asking whether participants agree or disagree with various statements .
In general, the participants were comfortable using computers and estimated their expertise as average.
Figure 3 shows the relationship between the number of days and the average number of accounts per participant observed.
The dashed lines show one standard deviation.
In the first two days, we observed five accounts.
After that, the number increased to 8.6 constantly.
They also reported that they observed about 70% of the online accounts in the first 14 days.
Thus, we estimated that participants had about 11.4 online accounts.
This estimated number of online accounts is slightly larger than in Gaw et al.
We also let participants record their locations as well as the kind of computers used at password events.
Table 3 shows the locations and the number of password events observed at those locations.
84.3% of the events were observed at either home or office.
In contrast, only 6.9% of the events were observed in public places, such as libraries.
Even if we include school as a public place, the total is 13.1%.
Among the 20 participants, nine participants accessed their accounts only from home or office.
To facilitate analysis, we first categorized each account according to Google's categorization .
For the web sites not included in the Google's list, we manually categorized them using the same scheme.
Then, we coded these categories into eight broader categories as shown in Table 2.
Table 4 shows the type of computers that the participants used.
We defined "personal computers" as computers primarily used by the participants for personal purposes, and "work computers" as computers primarily used by the participants for work-related purposes.
Public computers were computers that anyone can access, such as those in libraries or in computer labs at universities.
Friends' computers were computers owned by participants' friends.
We observe that 93.9% of password events occurred on either personal or work computers.
There were 91  accesses from foreign computers .
Two participants accessed their accounts from foreign computers 45 times in total  and nine participants never accessed their accounts from foreign computers.
Naturally, those participants overlapped with those who accessed their accounts only from home or office.
Given that the vast majority of our participants only use their personal or work computers, and close to half of our participants do not login in public places at all, these findings suggest that if we can make the login process easier just for users' work and home computers, it can provide considerable benefit to a large number of users.
Furthermore, with the growing diffusion of location-based services, these findings suggest that we may be able to use one's current location at home or work as an additional factor in authentication.
Table 2 shows the number of accounts in each category, as well as the number of password events per category.
Email and messaging had the largest number of password events, with 40% of all password events.
Note that there were 33 accounts in this category, as some participants had multiple email/messaging accounts.
Email/messaging, university/company, and portals were the three most frequently used categories, consisting of 34.7% of the total number of the accounts while covering 59.9% of the total number of the password events.
Additionally, since many individuals access their accounts in similar contexts , authentication systems could utilize these contexts to modulate the level of authentication required.
These approaches could potentially improve the security of an authentication system without adding burden to users.
Further investigation would be necessary for password usages on these devices.
Finally, our study period could be short for some analyses.
In the analysis of the number of accounts, the number did not saturate in the study period.
Similarly, in the analysis of password aids, we may have observed larger number of infrequently used accounts, for which the participants might use different types of password aids.
In the post-survey, we asked participants what password aids they used to manage the accounts observed over the study period.
We also asked them to self evaluate how concerned they would be if someone obtained access to that account.
We missed three accounts due of lack of data in the survey.
Thus, we only had 169 accounts in this analysis.
Surprisingly, Table 5 shows that for 60.3% of the accounts, participants did not use any password aids.
First, according to the survey, all participants except one reused their passwords for multiple accounts.
Given that people chose not to use any passwords aids for important accounts, this suggests that people realized that writing down important passwords is risky, but did not realize that reusing passwords is also risky.
Although we do not know which passwords were reused , educating users about these risks seems prudent based on our data.
Second, the low rate of adoption of password aids suggests that there is still a lot of room for helping people, and examining barriers to adoption may be a fruitful approach to improving security.
Through a diary study, we collected 1,500 password events, which illustrated how participants used passwords in their everyday lives.
The analyses of the data provided several implications about user authentication systems.
We hope that this paper contributes to further investigation and development of user authentication systems.
Users are not the enemy.
Walsh, B. Ives, H. Schneider.
The Domino Effect of Password Reuse.
Password management strategies for online accounts.
A large-scale study of web password habits.
P. Inglesant and M. A. Sasse.
The true cost of unusable password policies: password use in the wild.
Leon, M. L. Mazurek, L. Bauer, N. Christin, L. F. Cranor Encountering stronger password requirements: user attitudes and behaviors.
S. Singh, A. Cabraal, C. Demosthenous G. Astbrink M. Furlong.
Password sharing: implications for security design based on social practice.
Choosing passwords: security and human factors.
Password memorability and security: Empirical results.
Security in the wild: user strategies for managing security as an everyday, practical problem.
Personal and Ubiquitous Computing  vol.
Human selection of mnemonic phrase-based passwords.
D. Florencio, C. Herley, B. Coskun.
Do strong web passwords accomplish anything?
Google 1000 most-visited sites on the web.
One of the biggest limitations in our study was participants' demographics.
Although our participants involved university staffs and domestic residences, 60% of the participants were university students.
Thus, our participants may not represent the general population.
Another limitation is that our study did not capture autologins using cookies or session information.
As a result, while our data helps estimating users' actual workload, it under-estimate the frequency of user authentication.
Moreover, our study was limited to password events using computers.
