MUDS and MOOS , typically still text-based, are shared, persistent, navigable virtual environments in which user-createdcharactersand scriptable objects can interact with one another in surprisingly rich and compelling ways.
MUDS now number in the hundreds,with tens of thousandsof membersworldwide .
The screenshot above was derived from LambdaMOO-one of the oldest, largest, and most wellknown online communities in use today .
LambdaMOO is a purely "social"--as opposed to fantasy/adventure or research/education -MUD .
Note how different the kinds of interaction suggested in the screenshot are from anything email or chat lines could easily afford.
A great deal of media attention--and social science research-has been focused on social MUDS recently, and some popular and even provocative claims have emerged.
For example, MUD "addiction"  is assumedto be a widespread phenomenon .
Identity--and gender--play with multiple characters has beenportrayed as the primary preoccupationof MUDding, perhapsto the point of promoting a `post-modem fragmentation of the psychological sense of self .
Researchreports in which such claims are made can be richly evocative, insightf%-and often deeply critical of traditional "objective" psychological research methods .
However, the generality of these claims are difficult to assess,both because they tend to be based primarily on qualitative, anecdotalmethodsand becauseof a tendency to use only a small sample of participants, selectedeither without regard to representativeness or with the explicit intent to highlight diversity rather than giving a senseof what is commonto the community as a whole.
In the researchproject to be describedhere, our aim was to characterize aspects of "life in LambdaMOO" as experiencedby a large proportion of members.
We chose to study LambdaMOO in part becausemuch of what's been claimed about social MUDS in general has been based on LambdaMOO  in particular.
This paper presentsmajor findings Corn a large research project designed to carefully characterize what "life in LambdaMOO"  is lie for many of its members.
A "convergent methodologies" approach embracing qualitative and quantitative, subjective and objective procedureswas used.
A rich, extensive database was produced,Corn which robust patternscould emerge,be consideredin context and assessed with some confidence.
These data should help inform the discourseon, and designof, online communitiesin the future.
It is very bright, open and airy here, with large plateglass windows looking southward over the pool to the lush gardens beyond.
On the north wall, there is a roughly-hewn stonework The east and west walls are fireplace.
An entrance to the kitchen... >You see the Cuckoo Clock, the Cockatoo, the Scrabble Game and a Map of LambdaNO here... >DreamWeaver, Hardcore & CeLeRY are here... >DreamWeaver looks your way and smiles warmly.
This is a simulated screenshotillustrating a kind of online interaction that thousandsof people experience every day when they log into a social MUD .
MUDS are a large and growing Internet phenomenon, reflecting one approach to the quest for greater personal connection and community on the Internet.
A rich, extensive database was created from which robust patterns emerged and could be contex&mlized and assessed with some confidence.
In each category, we focus on empirical findings which, in providing a close characterizationof "life in LambdaMOO" also serveto test somepopular `hype-otheses" regarding social MUDding.
All participants were active members of LambdaMOO, a social hWD created and maintained by Pave1 Curtis of Xerox PARC since 1990.
With over 7,000 members worldwide, it is perhapsthe oldest and largestMUDS extant Accessis freely available through a widely publicized tehret address.LambdaMOO has grown rapidly, developing its own social and "cultural" norms .
This was a large, multi-year, multi-study project.
The results presented here come from 3 major studies performed primarily in 1994-5, when LambdaMOO provided perhaps the most sophisticatedand freely accessibleform of online community available.
A wide variety of additional methods  were also used, but space constraintspreclude discussingthem all in this paper.
Online Srffvf3y For one week, all logins to LambdaMOO were given an invitation to participate in a research survey.
MOOers could freely accept, decline or delay participation.
Upon acceptance,they entered a "survey room" for uninterrupted survey admiitration.
30 questionsaddressed four categoriesof interest; various responseformats were used.
Personal Interviews The survey contained a call for local residentsto participate in a follow-up interview conductedby the author.
Twelve volunteers  participated in discussions conductedin an unstructured, conversationalmanner, with questionsaimed at evoking a rich sense of each person's experiencein LambdaMOO and their views on issuesin the categoriesof interest.
Sessions typically lasted 1.5-2 hours, and included a brief map-drawing task.
Character and usernameswere changedto protect pnvacy.
Logging Sfudy Public statusinformation on characterand room objectsfor the entire system was logged at approximately one minute intervals, 24 hrs/&y for approximately two weeks.
This procedure allowed precise characterization of "who was where when", including time logged on, user first-connect ,date,character  count and presenting gender.
To protect privacy, no data identifying individual users or the content of interactions were recorded Two logging studies mere conducted over an interval of several months; this report focuses on the dam from the second study, which included recording of idle times.
The major findings of this project are presentedbelow in terms of the 4 categoriesof interest: users and use, identity, sociality and spatiality.
Statistical analyses of the survey data include chi-squareanalysesaswell as analysesof variance .
Note that due to rounding errors, not all percentagestotal to exactly 100%; also, degreesof freedom for error terms vary since not all respondentsansweredall questions.All results in this project were analyzed for gender and experience effects .
For the survey analyses, genderwas given by direct report and estimatednumber of hours in characterserved as the experiencemeasure.In the logging study, user identities were not known, so we relied on character information to inform the gender and experienceanalyses.
The gendervariable used is the modal presenting gender  of all characters of a given user.
For easeof analysis and clarity of presentation, experience level was divided into quartiles for the logging study.
In general, for conciseness, only significant effects are reported here; failure to report a gender, experience or interaction effect for any specified analysrs implies that it was not statistically significant.
Experience effects are reported in terms of an omnibus test over all values of the variable.
Results of pair-wise comparisons of means are available upon request.
Table 1 shows the distribution of survey respondentsby reported age and gender.
As expected, most members are college age, but the range is fairly wide.
Similar distributions are found for males and females.
Respondents were asked to estimate "about how many hours  have you been on LambdaMOO" in terms of five response categories: <=lO,lO-lOO,lOO-500,500-1000 and lOOO+ hours.
The distribution of experienceby gender for each of these categories is given in Table 2.
Modal experience level for both genders fell into the lo-100 hr.
PAPERS inexperienced players may reflect increased public awareness due to recent publicity on LambdaMOO.
Note that estimatednumber of hours in characterserved as the measureof experiencefor analysesof survey data.
While the analyses included all five levels of experience, for clarity of presentation in thii paper, data from onIy the extremes-"novices" and "experts" -are presentedin further tablesof resultsgiven below.
Males were more likely to have sought online guidance, from written material or an online person.
Femalesfocusedmore on personalguidance,online or "in real life".
A significant effect of experiencewas also found  = 29.89, p < .05; expertstendedto have relied on help from an online person followed by online written materials,while this order was reversedfor the less experienced.
Interview reports suggestthat this may in part reflect that the MUD was smaller andmore friendly towards  newcomersearlier on.
To get someidea of the kinds of related experienceor skills LambdaMOOersmay have, survey respondents were asked to "rate your experiencelevel for eachactiviw on a 7-pt scale .
Results are shown in Table 3.
Overall, the ratings tend to fall in the lower intermediaterange;ratmgsof programming experience are somewhat higher.
Males gave higher ratings than females in each case, but only video games showed a significant  experienceeffect = 2.81,pc.05.
Two further ratings of special interest include that of experience with "other MUDS" and with "other on-line communities ".
The overall ratings are in the low-to-moderate range, with those for other OLCs slightly higher than for MUDS.
Theseresults do not support the view that MUDclmg typically involves simultaneous activity in multiple MUDS .
Our interviewees reported some experimentation with other MUDS, but primary involvement in only one at a time.
LambdaMOO canbe fairly intimidating to the uninitiated, at leastat first.
One survey questionasked"which did you rely on most for guidance when first learning to use LambdaMOO?".
Five forced-choice responsealternatives were provided, as shown in Table 4.
The logging dataprovide direct measurements of time spent logged in to LambdaMOO.
Figure 1 showstime online in terms of the mean number of hrs/day spent on LambdaMOO by both user experience quartile and MP gender.
Overall, users spent a mean of 1.13 h&day  logged in.
Note that this is a very liberal estimateof MUD activity, since it does not take idle time into account.
Idle times can be extensive; MUDders commonly report "multitasking'`-MUDding while working or performing other tasks.
Yet even with this very liberal measure,less than 5% of users were online for over 20 hrs/wk, despite highly publicized suggestions that MUDding for "up to SOh&week may not be uncommon" .
Fig I: Mean H&Day Logged in to LambdaMOO  The picture that emergeshere is of a population of users who are mostly male, fairly young and with some experience pro,=ramming, playing vrdeo -games, etc.
In general,reported experiencewith other onlme communities is moderate,that with other MUDS is slightly lower.
Social interaction appearsto be the major activity, increasing with experience.
Many members may spend several hrs/wk logged on LambdaMOO-which is substantial but not especially surprising for this population.
There is little evidenceof widespreadaddiction.
To explore preferred mode of self-representation,we asked"if you had the choice, which of these alternatives would you chooseto use as your selfrepresentationin a system like LambdaMOO?"
Results are shown in Table 6.
Interestingly, text was most popular overall, followed by animated character,video came in a distant third.
Of course, text is the familiar mode for h$UDders; a great appreciation for the rich potential of written languagewas also apparentin the interviews.
Males and femalesshowed differing patternsof resultshere  = 8.12,~ < -05; femalespreferredtext most by far i;hile males chosetext and animation equally.
The gender differences in the pattern of responsesto these two questions are supported by interview reports; taken together, they suggestthat while women may be less likely to prefer image-based representationsoverall, if images are to be used, women may prefer more realistic self-representations.
Identity and Role-Play SherryTurkle claimed that "you are who you pretendto be" in the MUD, and that "there is no unitary voice...the self is...multiplied without limit."
We explored the issueof identity and role-play in various ways in this project.
In the survey, as shown in Table 7, slightly less than half the respondentsanswered "yes" to a question asking if "you have more than one character ".
In a follow-up question, only those who reported more than one character were asked to give "the total number of characters `l; the overall mean for this response was 5.
This number appearsto be misleadingly high, both from interview reports and from considering the distribution of the data.
A small proportion of usersgave extremely large numbersin response to this question,driving the meanup.
To someextent this might reflect honestanswers to the "letter" if not the "intent" of the question-one interviewee usedan algorithm to randomly vary the capitalizationof letter sequences in his main character's name,thus creating a large number of different  morphs.When extremevalues  were excluded from the analysis,the mean decreased to 2.
This was also the mode of the distribution.
A reliable increasewith experiencewas found =3.59,p<.OOl; the fact that morphs accumulateunless deliberately deletedmight have contributedto this effect.
Further evidenceon characteruse will be presented with the logging study results.
A final survey question on the topic of identity androleplaying was: "Do you ever feel that you arerole-playing your character?".
A 7-pt response scalewas again used.
Responses to this questionwere fairly low, with an overall mean of 2.7.
This fmding accordswell with interview reports in which most people saidthey generally "speak with their own voice" or "are themselves" on LambdaMOO;this will be discussedfurther below-.
Every person we interviewed reported having one primary character on LambdaMOO.
These tended be slightly distorted, perhaps idealized or fanciful versions of one's view of oneself ; most interviewees expressedconcern that the description of the primary charactershould match how they think of themselves.
One exception to this rule had a character humorously described as a vegetable but still reported "being himself" in LambdaMOO.
PAPERS man made a point of representinghimself "as himself' in character,with the one exception of changing his stated genderto female.He said this was initiahy done almost on a lark.
This was the only interviewee  who reporteda primary character of the opposite sex in the MUD .
He reported this to be a fascinating experiment but beganto experiencegreat difficulty as time went on, since he had becomeknown in LambdaMOO and built up friendships in hi "female" form and began to fear that these friends would feel betrayed if he ever revealed himself to be male.
Yet he also felt increasingly inauthentic in these intimate relationshipsby not doing so.
Almost all our interviewees claimed to not role-play their primary character,our most highly experiencedinterviewee said "I don't  know hardly anyone... who role-plays."
Secondary morphs appear to serve more as short-term, special-purpose tools or costumes than true alternative identities, often used for comedic effect For example, a commonly reported, if "rue!, "game" played among male newbies is for a more skrlled male user to assume a seductive female character and later make embarrassing revelations about hii unwitting victim.
Of course,roIe-play is a complex concept that occurs aiong a continuum; one older woman living in a remote area with little social contact reportedhaving a young, sexy secondarycharacter that sheoccasionallyused to "live a littIe"; but when asked if shethought of the characteras an "alter-ego", she replied "Well, it was supposedto be an attempt at humor...." Interestingly, she also reportedthat many MUDders refused to take her characterseriously since it was so stereotypical; shewasoften assumed to be male "in real life".
Many interviewees reported that over time, they felt a growing awareness of social pressuresto maintain the accountability affordedby a single primary identity.
As one person put it, "pseudonymity is not anonymity".
The sociologist Goftinan  argued that long-term social cohesion requires stability of self-presentatron.
In a "real" community, concern for one's reputation exerts strong control over the behavior of the individual.
Only in ephemeral, anonymous, low-risk situations are social constraints Ioosenedenough to experiment in role-playing with strangers.To the extent that LambdaMOO provides a "real", persistentsenseof community, the sociaI constraints described by Goflinan should hoId.
Interview reports suggestthat reputation is indeedthe currency of the W, in general, programming ski11and creativity are highly vahred, but observing "MUD manners" and showing a williigness to help others is also important Character appearance, behavior, homeand possessions are usedto get an impressionof what the player is "really like"; deception can be despised.
Moreover, a strong interest in getting to know other MUDders "in real lie" was expressed .
Thus, as in the caseof the male intervieweewho had posed as a female, over the long term, the price of real intimacy may be authenticity.
While the interaction behveenidentity and sociality cannot be discussedat length here, it should be noted that the issue has been surprisingly neglected by previous researchers.
Ironically, the "social laboratory for experimentation with the constructionsand reconstructionsof the self' that Sherry Turkle and others see in the MUD may be more characteristicof short-term sociality among strangers  than among those seeking to become community members-or evenjust to makereal friends in the virtual world.
Figure 2: Mean % of Users Changing Character Identify change The logging data provide information regarding frequency of identity change,and therefore somesenseof relative use of characters.
The time-stamped logs show that less than 25% of playersever morphed identity-changedcharacterover the entire 2-week observation period.
Of those who did, less than half ever changed gender.
These data are shown in Figure 2, by experience level and MP gender.A significant effect of experience was found.
Userswho did morph useda total of 3 characterson average,but the vast majority of their time wasspentin a single "main character".
The strong prevalence of the single primary character converges well with reports of social pressuresconstrainin-gidentity over the long term; further researchon the relatton betweenonline identity and sociality-especially over time-is clearly needed.
111, Sociality Sociality was cited as the primary reasonfor MUDding by all our interviewees.
LambdaMOO's peculiar ability to afford a wide range of creative yet constrained forms of social expression and interaction was also widely appreciated As describedabove, most survey respondents reported spending most of their time in social interaction; perhapsnot surprisingly, estimateswere higher overall for femalesandshoweda reliable increasewith experience.
Interview and logging data suggest that most `personal socializing in LambdaMOO is done in pairs or small groups, typically privately.
A trend for "females" to spend more time at home than `Lmales"=2.76,p=.og did not reach significance .
Note that since the home is a separateroom, conversations within it are private in that they cannot be simply "overheard" by others.
Moreover, security conditions at home are controlled by the homeowner.Most interviewees reportedusing a security systemof somesort to limit access to their homes;otherwise anyone else could, say,teleport in at any time.
Security was typically accomplished by simply specifying those who are-or are not--allowed entrance.
Interview reports also suggest a resolution to the apparent contradiction of findings which suggest that increased experience is associated both with more time spent socializing and with an increasedlikelihood to be observed be at home, often alone.
Highly experiencedinterviewees reportedcommonly communicating from home via "remote channeIs", paging and MOO-mail.
The affordances of staying home include the ability to monitor multiple remote conversationsat once-or focus on building a programwhile still remaining accessibleto friends who might check in.
We were told that this is faiily widespreadamongexpert users,and this is at least consistentwith the datawe have.
Thus about 77% of their time was spent in private rooms, the vast majority of which are homes .
Interviewees described public spaces primarily asplacesto meet people, especially initially; many said that most of their "in person" interactions take place with 1 or 2 others, typically in the privacy of someone's home.
However, most interviewees also said that they had felt more comfortablein public spacesin earlier times, whenthe community was much smaller and more closely-knit.
Overall, the pattern of fmdings strongly suggeststhat sociality is expressedby LambdaMOO memberslargelyalthough not solely-through personalinteractionsin private circumstances.
This tendency may be somewhatgreaterfor females, at least initially, and seems to increase with experience.
Our interviewees suggest that most public spacesin LambdaMOO may function more as a way to meet new people or as an occasional diversion than as somewhere to repair to regularly, especially for more Figure 4: Mean Number of Active Companions per User experienced members.
This pattern converges well with In LambdaMOO,location has strong implications regarding resuhs found in survey data on social patterns among who one might be with and the kmd of social interaction university students who do not report spendinga large one might be en,gaged in.
Sharedhome-ownership,though easyto do, was so "great good place"; the prevalence of small, private, extremely rare as to be negligible.
Overall, homeowners exclusive interactions is especially uncharacteristic.
But spentabout half  their active&me at home.
A highly some features of "great goodness" are found in it: reliable increase in time spent at home was found with conversationas a primary activity, high accessibilityevenat increasing experience = 40.32, p<.OOOl, and "off hours", and a capacity for providing both a playful significant effects of MP gender =3.18,p<.O5, mood and psychological support .
PAPERS peaked early on, when it was a quite small community in which it was possible to regularly repair with your friends to The Living Room or The Hot Tub and feel that on at least some level you knew and were known by many of the people there.
The issue of how "great goodness"might be supported on the large scale, perhaps through the creation of neighborhoodswith local hangouts of the thiid kind, is of primary significance for designersof shared virtual worlds .
But the data presented here indicate that we should be sure not to neglect the primary importance:private, personalspaces in online communities.
Spatiality Senseof PIace and Space Does LambdaMOO provide a stronger sense of "place" than other text-basedforms of communicationcan provide?
Interviewees uniformly agreed that it does, although speculationsas to why differed.
Some cited the ability to navigate and interact with objects, others the great visual detail given in descriptions.
Several survey questions explored the sense of place and space afforded by LambdaMOO.
Respondentswere asked to rate how often "you feel lie you are `in another place' when you are on LambdaMOO" on a 7-pt scale ; results are shown in Table 11.
Similar resultswere found for how often "yOu have a fairly detailed image of that place while you're `there'."
No gender differences were observed in these questions focusing on imagesand felt experienceof place .
The experience effects might reflect in part that more experiencedmembersmay have joined LambdaMOO when navigability was the rule.
A final questionaskedhow often "you ever find yourself `lost' in LambdaMOO".
Overall ratings are fairly low; no reliable gender effect was observedbut the decrease with experiencewas still found  = 23.85,p < -001.
Perhapsthose who navigated less had less opportunity to get lost.
Interviewees report navigating little after an initial exploratory stage,yet do still feel they haveretaineda good senseof the space.
Logged location datarecorded "who was where" during the observationperiod.
A related logging analysis assessed the relative extent of `travel" by members of LambdaMOO.
The averageuser was observedin 8.9 different rooms.
Since navigation involves passage through intermediaterooms, it is not surprising to find that males traveled more and that experience was associated with decreased travel.
Thesedata convergewell with many of the fmdings discussed above.
Additional survey questionsand the map-drawing task were usedto probe the nature of the "mental models" users have of the space.
The general pattern of findings suggeststhat at least at its core, the LambdaMOO environment--though purely textbased-does provides a senseof place and spacefor many members.
Patterns of individual differences in spatiality found "in real life" were replicated in this virtual space.
The issue of whether and how to promote spatiality in the design of online communitiesis a complex one, and closely relatesto the issuesdiscussed in connectionwith sociality.
But how strong can a spatial metaphorbe in a purely textbased realm?
Spatiality is a complex and controversial issue in LambdaMOO; to complicate matters, only the public core of LambdaHouse and its environs are now reliably navigable.
In recent years, many users have built homes which can only be reached by "teleporting", commandswhich automatically move charactersbetween locations.
Locations can be specified by a room name/numberor by a character to "join".
Emphasizingthe role of the MUD as a social space, interviewees report "joining" as a common mode of transport.
The effect of relaxing requirements for spatial navigation is a topic of great controversy among experiencedusers;many feel that navigation promotes"presence"and even community.
When survey respondents were asked "do you have a `mental map' of LambdaMOO?
Individual differencesin spatial cognition observedin the "real world" were replicated ; reliable effects of both gender  = 5.75@.05 and experience=9.79 ,pC.OOlwere found Another question asked "have you customizedyour navigation in LambdaMOO in any way?".
Shared online worlds are growing increasingly common, and the HCI community is facing many new challengesin understandimg, evaluating, and designingthesesystems.
The characterizationof LambdaMOO given here stemsfrom a deep,data-drivenapproachthat we believe is sorely needed in this field.
Many of our results directly addressspecific issuescited in calls for further researchto inform design  and because they provide empirical results, can be usedas a basisfor direct comparisons with alternative systems.
One of our major "lessonsfrom LambdaMOO" with direct implications for design is the strong focus on social interaction, which seemsto only increasewith experience, even to the point of supersedingany interest in navigating the space.As Whyte, an urban planner , pointed out for designing real spaces,"What attracts people most, in sum, is other people.
If I labor the point, it is becausemany spacesare designedas though the opposite were true and as though what people liked best are the places they stay away from."
Our findings suggest that design in virtual spaces should similarly focus on supporting social interaction in order to function effectively.
In some sense,this project serves as a "case study" of a researchpro,oramincorporating a synergy of qualitative and quantitative, subjective and objective methodologies in the attempt to understandwhat "life was like" for most people in a given online community at that time.
While causal conclusionsmust be madewith great care,robust patterns of convergent observationsderived from this approach can be accepted with some confidence.
The -general observation that major patterns of behavior in thrs text-based virtual world do not departradically from those in "real life', while perhaps not especially surprisiig, should nonetheless underscorefor researchersand destgnersaliie de value of putting one's hypothesesto empirical test The results also higldight the basic import of a themepointed out by Randy Farmerin 1992 .
Even in cyberspace, people are people.
Many thanks to E. Bewersdoff, H. Colston, P. Curtis, B. Fuson,J.Loftus, S. hktinwaring, M. Millis, and all MOOers.
Allen, C. Virtual Identities: The Social Construction of Cybered Selves.
Ph.D. Dissertation, Northwestern University, June 1996.
Ethical principles of psychologists and code of conduct.
Chemy, L. I%e MUD register: Conversational modesof action in a text-based virtual reality.
Curtis, P. MUDding: Social phenomenon in text-based virtual realities.
P. and Nichols, D. MUD.s Grow Up: Social Virtual Reality in fhe Real TorId Paperpresentedat the meeting of the Third International Conference on Cyberspace, Austin TX, 1993.
Dalaimo, D. M. l%e Simulation of Sejhood in Cyberspace.
Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Nevada,Las Vegas, 1995.
Donath, J. Inhabiting the virtual city: The design of social environmentsfor electronic communities.
Farmer, F. R, Social Dimensions of Habitat's Citizen+ 1992.http:lhvwwxommunities.comfcompanylp aperskitizemyhtml 9.
Gofiinan, E. The Presentationof Self in Everyday Life.
ChIC and Community on Campus.
Society for Computers in Psychology; Philadelphia, PA, 1997.
14.Turlde, S. Constructions and reconstructions of self in virtual real@ Playing in MUDS.
