Scatter/Gather is a cluster-based browsing technique for large text collections.
Users are presented with automatically computed summaries of the contents of clusters of similar documents and provided with a method for navigating through these summaries at different levels of granularity.
The aim of the technique is to communicate information about the topic structure of very large collections.
We tested the effectiveness of Scatter/Gather as a simple pure document retrieval tool, and studied its effects on the incidental learning of topic structure.
When compared to interactions involving simple keyword-based search, the results suggest that Scatter/Gather induces a more coherent conceptual image of a text collection, a richer vocabulary for constructing search queries, and communicates the distribution of relevant documents over clusters of documents in the collection.
The technique aims to place similar documents into the same cluster.
For each cluster, at each level of this hierarchy,the user is presented with summary information about the cluster that presumably communicates something about the kinds of documents it contains.
The user may then select  those clusters that seem interesting or relevant.
This subset of clusters can then be reclustered to reveal more fine-grained clusters of documents.
With each successive iteration of scattering and gathering clusters, the clusters become smaller and more detailed, eventually bottoming out at the level of individual docum~ts.
INTRODUCTION When faced with ill-defined problems requiring information access, we often want to explore the resources available to us before exploiting them.
This exploration may be partly aimed at refining our understanding of the potential space ot content that is available, and partly aimed at formulating a concrete course of action for getting specific documents.
Interfaces that support the browsing of a collection, as opposed to searching a collection, are aimed at satisfying this need to learn more about a collection before taking action.
Permission to make digital/hard copies of all or part of this material for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that the copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage, the copyright notice, the title of the publication and its date appear, and notice is given that copyright is by permission of the ACM, Inc. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires specific permission and/or fee.
In this paper we present experimental evidence to support the view that Scatter/Gather interaction induces the development of a better understanding of the contents of large text collections, refines users' formulations of search queries, and is a feasible information retrieval technique in its own right whea compared to standard search lechniques.
Precision is the proportion of relevant documents retrieved among a set of retrieved document& whereas recall is the proportion of relevant documents in the original collection that were retrieved.
Somereseatdcrs argue tim need to move away from slrict measures of overall precision and recall toward other measures of search ~cesa or to what is termed nser-centric evaluation .
However, most of the analyses that offer alternatives to precision and recall measures focus on how well the user's infon~fiou need is satisfied , rather than what is learned incidentally about the collection itself.
Pirolli and Card  suggest evaluating information access search strategies using a theoretical model based on optimal foraging theory from biology.
Figure 1, The Scatter/Gather interface presents a user with clusters of like documents.
Although there are some subtle issues involved in the assessment of precision and recall measures , even more difficulties arise when trying to assess whether a browsing system is communicating knowledge to a user about the structure of a document collection.
As will become clear, this was a major challenge to our research.
We have had to develop multiple methodologies and analyses in order to converge on an assessment of the mental models that people get from interacting with Scatter/Gather.
DOCUMENT CLUSTERING IN SCATTER/GATHER Clustering techniques have been used in the past as an enhancement to keyword-search retrieval algorithms .
The novelty of the Scatter/Gather approach is its use of clustering as the basis of an interactive method that supports the browsing of a summary of the structure and content of a text coUection-a summary intended to be like a table of contents.
This raises two essential requirements .
First, the clustering method has to be fast enough to support real user interaction.
Second, there must be a method of cluster summarization that enables a user to make sense of the text collection content and to navigate its structure.
Clustering depends on some measure of inter-document similarity.
A common approach , with a number of variants, is to represent documents as vectors of equal length, where each component of a vector is associated with one of the unique content words in the document collection.
In some schemes, the component may contain a value indicating the presence of a word in the document .
In other schemes, a vector component may indicate the frequency or some normalized frequency of a word in the document.
The similarity of two documents can then be computed by a cosine measure, which is the cosine of the angle between two vectors, which is sometimes also known as a normalized correlation.
Single-linkage hierarchical clustering is a commonly used method outside of information access.
For instance, we use it below in our data analysis.
It is, however, too slow for even moderately large document eoUecfions.
Beginning with individual documents, single-linkage hierarchical clustering iteratively agglomerates the most similar pair of clusters built so far into a new cluster.
The global consideration of all pairwise similarities at each stage of clustering leads to running times of f2 in the number, n, of documents.
Speedier algorithms  were developed for Scatter/Gather based on a nonagglomerative partitional clustering scheme.
The essence of this approach is to flatly partition a collection into k subsets, and recursively partition the subsets as needed to induce a hierarchical structure.
At each stage the procedure may be run further to iteratively improve the selection of seeds and improve the clustering.
The developed schemes have running times of O.
Linear O run-times are still too slow for very large collections.
Constant-time interaction costs for Scatter/Gather navigation through a cluster hierarchy are achieved by precomputing a cluster hierarchy to be used in Scatter/Gather interaction .
The off-line precomputation uses the llnear-dme algorithms and summarizes document clusters by meta-documents containing profiles of topical words and the most typical floes.
These topical words and typical dries are also used to present users a summary of the documents in a cluster.
Topical words are those that occur most frequently in a cluster, and typical ri0es are those with the highest similarity to a centroid of the cluster.
Together, the topical words and typical floes form a cluster digest.
The cluster digest scheme combined with the constant-time interaction cost satisfy the two requirements desired for a cluster-based browsing method.
A SCATTER/GATHER INTERFACE Figure 1 presents a typical view of the Scatter/Gather interface.
There arc ten clusters, with each cluster represented by a separate area in Figure 1.
For each cluster, the user is presented with the topical words that occur in the text contents of documents in a cluster, as well as the rioes of the three most typical documents.
The user may gather some subset of those clusters, by pointing and selecting buttons above each cluster, and then ask the system to scatter that subcollection into another 10 subclusters, by selecting a ScaRer/Gather button at the top of the display in Figure |.
METHOD Participants Sixteen adults participated in this study.
Three of the participants were Xerox PARC employees, one was a FARC employee family member, and the remaining 12 participants were graduate students from Stanford University.
PARC employees volunteered their time for the study; the remaining subjects were paid $10/hour for theirparticipation.
Materials end Procedure Participants were asked to read the instructions for tthc experiment and then use one of the interface,s to find ardclm relevant to given topics in a large and complex collection of text documents.
There were four phases to the experiment:  finding articles relevant to a topic using Scatter/Gather or Similarity Search,  writing search queries and drawing a diagram representingthe topicstructureof the collection.
Phases I and 3 were aimed at providing participants with exposure to one of the information access techniques, and Phases 2 and 4 were aimed at assessing the impact of that exposure on query formulation and the users' conception of the text collection.
Users could also select one or more clusters and then select the Show Tides button at the top of Figure 1owhich would then display all of the document floes in the selected clusters, in a separate Show Tide Window.
Tim user can scan the displayed list of tides, seeking those that appear relevant to the m ~ at hand.
Relevant documents can be selected by pointing, and then saved to file by cut and paste techniques.
OVERVIEW OF THE EXPERIMENT Although Scatter/Gather has not boca developed as a standalone information access technique ,we fellthat a stern trial of its efficacy would be to test it as a stand-alone search tool and determine how it fared in support of  finding relevant documents and  incidental learning about the text collection.
We compared Scatter/Gather to a wordbased search interface we called SimScarch.
This interface allowed users to enter an arbitrary collection of words based on a topic query and it retrieved a fixed small set of documents most similar to the query, as determined by a similarity in a vectax space model .
The experiment used the 2.2 gigabyte TIPSTER text collection created for the TREC conference .
Twelve topics were drawn from the first I00 topics used in the TREC conference.
These twelve were chosen based on a level of difficulty measured by the mean number"of relevant documents in the Tipster collection as identified by information reuieval experts associated with TREe .
The four topics with the fewest  relevant documents  were placed in the "hard" group, the four topics with the most relevant documents  were placed in the "easy" group, and the four topics about the median number of relevant documents were placed in the "medium" group .
Participants spent between two and five hours total study activities, with two phases a day over the course of two days.
Four blocks of toplcs were constructed for presentation over ~ four phases of tasks.
Each topioblock contained one easy topic, one medium topic, and one hard topic, in that order.
Participants were randomly assigned to one of three study conditions: Scatter/Gather Speeded , Scatter/Gather with Relevance Ratings , and SimSearch .
Phases I and 3 varied by condition, and Phases 2 and 4 were identical across conditions.
In the SGS condition, subjects were given one hour to f'md articles in each of Phases I and 3.
In the SS condition, subjects used SimSearch rather than Scatter/Gather to fred their relevant articles in phases one and three.
Note that SGR and SGS conditions were combined for some analyses into one group .
RESULTS Our first set of analyses will concentrate on comparisons of Scatter/Gather versus $imSearch, with respect to their effectiveness as information retrieval tools.
Subsequent analyses will focus on comparisons with respect to enhancement of users' understandings of the text collection.
For each type of data in Table 1,  we conducted an analysis of variance  for the two Groups  x Query Difficulty  x Phase  factorial design.
Interface Effects Examining Table I, it is apparent that participants who used the Scatter/Gather interface to answer queries took substantially longer than those using SimSearch, and the SG vs SS group difference in Table 1 was significant, F = 34.07, MSE = 297.79, p < .001.
The SGR participants took about twice as long as the SGS participants to answer queries.
This is attributable to the ancillary rating task performed by the SGR participants.
Still, SGS participants took about twice as long as SS participants, so that, even when instructed to use the Scatter/Gather interface as quickly as possible to answer queries, Scatter/Gather users were substantially outhustled by SimSearch users.
Query Effects Both the total number of documents saved and the number of relevant documents saved decreased significantly with increases in Query Difficulty:  Easy NO.
This main effect did not interact with the type of interface used, F = 1.56.
Perhaps participants monitored the rates at which they encountered relevant documents and this rate did not exhibit substantial depression before the 30 rain cutoff for Easy and Hard queries, but did so for the Medium queries.
That is, the rate of encounter with relevant documents should be highest for Easy queries, less for Medium, and less still for Hard queries, but the point at which there is a noticeable drop-off in this rate  may occur earliest for the Medium queries.
Clearly the users' judgments about when to give up is complex and requires further investigation.
Per-query averages for SimSearch  and Scatter/Gather  groups .
This is reflected in the differences in precision scores in Table 1.
The SG group showed substantially more variation in number of documents saved  than the S$ group .
Furthermore, 27% of SG queries , resulted in no documents saved, whereas all the SS participants saved at least one document on each query.
These results suggest that the chance of finding relevant documents is a bit more "hit and miss" for participants using a pure SG system.
Practice Effects Although there were trends indicating that participants increased the number of documents saved as they gained more experience  and increased the number of relevant documents saved with increased practice , neither increase was significant, nor did the trends show a significant interaction with the type of interface used.
Summary As a stand-alone information retrieval tool, Scatter/Gather is not as effective as a common word-based search technique.
As we noted, however, this is a stem test of the technique, since it has really been aimed at communicating the topic structure of a collection.
In the following sections we examine the incidental learning about topic structure that Scatter/Gather induced in the SO participants.
The linear relationships apparent in the log-log coordinates of Figure 2 suggest that the Scatter/Gath~ users perceive a distribution of relevant documents across clusters that has a power taw relation to the expected distn~utice of relevant documents.
Such relations are common in many domains where people must assess the strength of evidence to judge the probability of events .
Users apparently show the same biases in estimating how many relevant documents are in a collection as they do in estimations of events in other domains, such as sports or health ~ : s , It seems, then, that three conclusions can be drawn about how well Scatter/Gather communicates the location of relevant documents among the clusters presented to users:  even though the clustering algorithm obtains no information about users' queries, most of the documents relevant to a typical  query will tend to be grouped into few clusters,  users judge most of the relevant documents to be grouped into few clusters, and  the users' judgments appear to have a weU.defmed power-law relationship to the actual distribution of relevant documents.
We expect the Scatter/Gather browser to provide users who are working on a query with a sense of the distn'bution of relevant documents across clusters.
Ideally, one would like to match these ratings against the actual precisions to assess how well Scatter/Gather communicates the location of relevant documents, but it is currently infeasible to carry out this computation.
As an approximation, however, we were able to formulate the expected distribution of relevant documents across clusters and to compare this against the observed distribution of ratings.
The distribution of relevant documents across clusters was examined for each of 29 queries used in TREC.
Sets of the 200 most similar documents were retrieved using the SimSearch technique and then these retrieved sets were clustered using the Scatter/Gather clustering algorithm into five partitions.
The clustering, however, proceeded wihout any information about the nature of the query used to select the initial 200 documents.
Clusters larger than a criterion size were clustered again, and this process recursed.
For each query, the clusters were ranked i = 1, 2, .... 5 by the number of relevant documents u i assigned to cluster / from the U relevant documents contained in the original set that was clustered.
Among regressions of linear, exponential, and power functions, the best fit was obtained by an exponential distribution of relevant documents across clusters,
We might also expect that exploring a text collection with the Scatter/Gather interface improves the ability of users to formulate better key-word search queries.
We examined expectation through an analysis of the search queries formulated by participants in out study.
Both SG and SS subjects were given the task to generate search words for given query topics after having used their systems.Table 2 shows the mean number of keywords participants used in their keyword queries, and the mean number of new keywords in their query .
Ia Phase 2, SG subjects also generated sigriificantly mcae terms than SS subjects, t = 1.79, p < .05, although SS subjects marginally increased the number of terms they used from Phase 2 to Phase 4.
These results support the hypothesis that S ~ e r / O a t h e r users are learning about the effective topic language from which to generate their search queries.
In Phases 2 and 4 wc had asked all participants to draw tree diagrams representing the topic structure of the text collection.
Descriptive statistics for subjects' drawn diagrams are given in Table 3.
For all three groups, the number of nodes did not significantly differ from number of links.
Using Equation 1, we estimated the distribution of relevant documents  across the 10 topmost clusters and compared this against the mean precision estimates given by SGR participants, and these dam are presented in Figure 2.
This makes the assumption the rank ordering of people's ratings mirror the rank ordering of No.
The number of cluster windows was not correlated at all, however, with the depth of the diagrams or the number of nodes or links.
Regarding content, there seemed to be more diversity in topics listed in SGR diagrams, e.g., in addition to terms used in the given query topics.
The SS group listed items more related to their specific query topics, as well as mote general nodes like "news,* "AP," "WSJ," etc.
F'mally, the SG$ diagrams seem to have a few new topics not given in the queries , but not as many the SGR group.
Two jtidges rated the topics appearing in the diagrams on a three-point "specific-general" scale to determine the diversity of topics contained in the diagrams .
There was an 82% inter-rater agreement overall and 85% agreement on the most general topics .
Forty diagram topics  were rated as most general by both judges, and the groups were compared on the proportion of "general" topics their diagrams contained.
The SGS and SGR subjects did not differ significantly in the proportion of general topics they included in their diagrams .
There were no significant between- or within-group differences in the number of general topics for diagrams drawn in Phase 2 versus Phase 4.
The circles represent SG participants and the boxes represent SS participants.
In addition, a minimal spanning tree has been laid over the points in Figure 4 to highlight clusterings.
Overall, it appears that SO participants are more central and closer to one another in Figure 4 than SS participants.
As a measure of incoherence, we computed the root mean squared  distances among points in the Figure 4.
Scatter/Gather windows seen to the breadth of a subject's topic structure diagram.
A multi-dimensional scaling analysis was used to assess the similarity of participants' diagrams based on the number of shared topics.
Such an analysis attempts to arrange entities in a space such that the distances between the entities in that space correspond  to some measured differences  between all pairs of entities.
We wanted to look at the output of such an analysis to see which users  seemed to cluster together in terms of their conception of the topics contained in the text collection.
That is, multidimensional analysiswas used to lay out a kind of semantic space for users conceptions of topics in the collection.
The similarity matrix we used for this analysis indicated the proportion of shared topics between any two diagrams .
One SS participant did not use topics and was not included in the analysis.
On average, SOS and SGR participants' diagrams were more similar to each other than they were to SS participants' diagrams .
SS participants diagrams were no more similar to each other than they were to SO participants' diagrams .
The SGS diagrams were the most similar of the three groups, sharing an average of 14% of their topics.
Figure 4 shows a three.dimensional multi-
Figure 4, Multi-dimensional .scaling solution based on diagram content similarity for the Scatter/Gather  and SimSearch  participants.
Figure 5 shows a hierarchical clustering based on the similarity d~t~ for the diagrams from Phase 4.
This tree representation clearly shows the strong similarity grouping of the SGS and SGR diagrams.
Overall then, it appears that the Scatter/Gather interface is inducing a more coherent view of the text collection than SimSearch.
The results indicate that Scatter/Gather communicates several kinds of information about the topic structure of a large text collection.
It is, by itself, not a superior information retrieval tool when the goal is to locate specific documents.
Scatter/Gather may be useful in support of the kind of exploratory sensemaking activities that occur when users encounter large unknown text collections, and it should be coupled with other kinds of retrieval techniques, such as SimSearch, that can be enhanced by the knowledge that users gain through preliminary Scatter/Gather browsing.
We are currently in the process of testing such a multi-functional browsing/search engine.
In conducting this research, we also faced numerous methodological problems.
It is easy to collect measures based on counts of documents retrieved, but not so easy to assess the knowledge about a collection that is communicated by a browsing technique.
We developed several convergent assessment measures in this regard, though clearly a great deal of refinement remains to be done.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Jan Pedersen for discussions and advice throughout this study, and Stuart Card for similar interactions during the initial experimental design.
Bell, WJ., Searching behavior: The behavioral ecology of finding resources.
Constant interaction-time Scatter/Gather browsing of very large document collections, in SIGIR '93.
Scatter/gather: A cluster-based approach to browsing large document collections, in SIGIR '92.
Froehlich, TJ., Relevance reconsidered -- Towards an agenda for the 21st century.
Journal of the American Society for Information Science, 45 .
Harman, D., Evaluation issues in information retrieval.
Jorunal of the American Society for Information Science, 28 .
Harman, D. Overview of the first text retrieval conference, in 16th Annuam International ACM/SIGIR Conference.
Pirolli, P. and S. Card.
Information foraging in information access environments, in Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI-95.
Fox, Weighing risk and uncertainty.
Bliek, Measures of searcher performance: A psychometric evaluation.
