Prototyping and evaluation combine to explore ways that an effective, integrative organization of project-related information might emerge as a by-product of a person's efforts to plan a project.
The Personal Project Planner works as an extension to the file manager -- providing people with rich-text overlays to their information.
Document-like project plans provide a context in which to create or reference documents, email messages, web pages, etc.
The user can later locate an information item such as an email message with reference to the plan .
Results of an interim evaluation of the Planner are very promising and suggest special directions of focus for limited available prototyping resources.
This problem of information fragmentation is often made worse by the very tools designed to help.
New tools may introduce new forms of organization to be maintained in addition to, rather than instead of, existing organizations  Certainly, desktop search facilities can help but only to the extent that information -- in its content or its associated metadata -- already provides an implicit mapping to the tasks for which the information is needed.
Tagging of information items regardless of their form  according to tasks for which they will be needed is still poorly supported and will be an important step towards better support of PIM .
But people are constantly switching between tasks in typical day .
This "multi-tasking craziness"  makes it troublesome for people to tag manually.
Even sophisticated schemes of automated tagging  are limited by a basic tradeoff between error rate and coverage and may not be able to keep pace as new tasks emerge or old tasks are re-defined.
Is there a simple way to establish a mapping between tasks and information without making unrealistic demands - either on tools of automated tagging or on people to tag manually even as they rush to complete the many tasks of a typical day?
In an ideal situation of personal information management , people have the right information at the right time, in the right place, in the right form, to perform their current activity.
The reality is often far from this ideal.
The information needed to complete an activity may be scattered by location  and device .
Even on a single computer, information may be scattered across separate organizations of files, email, web references, notes, etc.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
This paper describes research on a prototype called the Personal Project Planner.
The Planner draws inspiration from an ideal that can be traced back to Vannevar Bush's notion of "associative indexing"  wherein items currently in view or accessed in sequence can be associated with one another so that their combined use later is made easier.
Stated another way, the ideal is that information is tagged, organized, and inter-connected as a by-product of its use.
In the Planner, the basis for an association of information is the project and the planning involved in its completion.
To live and be active is to have projects.
Some projects are professional or work-related; others are not .
External representations serve as powerful complements to a person's often fallible internal memories.
The Planner supports the creation of a rich-text project plan as an external representation that organizes not only component tasks , but also the information needed to complete these tasks.
Two principles are key to the Planner's design:
Planner features in support of these two principles are illustrated in a scenario where the Planner is used to plan a house re-model .
A user can begin top-down by building an outline where major headings like "kitchen" or "media room" represent high-level project components.
Or a user can start bottom-up by typing in notes and gathering bits and pieces of information from web pages, email messages and e-documents.
As a project plan develops, two features support its use to interconnect and hyperlink task-relevant information.
D&L works like a variation of drag & drop.
Select a line or two of text from a web page, email message or electronic document.
Drag to the project plan and drop on any line.
A link is automatically created back to the source.
1 Using ICC, documents can be created and email messages composed and sent from within a plan.
These items are created as they would be normally .
However, the Planner places a hyperlink to the document created or the email message sent at the insertion point in a project plan.
As an example of ICC, the user might see the heading for the task "Find out what the budget allows" and decide to send an email message  to the contractor .
A folder can be associated with "remind by" and "due by" dates that appear as appointments in the Microsoft Outlook calendar.
The appointment includes a link back to the folder for easy access to information required to complete a task.
The hyperlinks in a plan  point not only to documents  but also to email and web pages.
Headings representing tasks in a plan correspond to file folders, which serve to group together task-related information.
When the user creates or modifies a heading, a corresponding file folder is automatically created or modified.
Hyperlinks under a heading correspond to shortcuts in a corresponding folder.
2 The Planner, in its current version, takes the first critical few steps towards this goal.
The Planner is currently written as a stand-alone .Net 2.0 application which is accessed as a context menu option for any selected file folder.
The Planner works under Microsoft Windows and integrates with Microsoft Outlook, Word, and other Microsoft Office applications.
However, the Planner's approach, with its support for D&L and ICC extends to other software applications with interfaces through which to address project-related information items.
The Planner architecture supports its document-like views by distributing XML fragments, one per folder.
When invoked for a selected folder, the Planner "walks" a folder's subfolder hierarchy to assemble fragments into a coherent view that includes notes, links, and an ordering of subfolders.
Integration with the file system is currently "one-way".
For example, headings created in a project plan result in the creation of corresponding file folders.
But if the folder is later deleted through the file manager or if subfolders are added, the project plan is not automatically updated to reflect this change.
A later version of the Planner will include "compare versions" support for the detection and resolution of differences between a plan and the underlying state of files and folders it portrays.
Twenty-one participants  took part in the evaluation.
We deliberately sampled beyond a readily available population of students and faculty to include people with information intensive jobs and nonwork activities.
Fifteen participants had no affiliation with the university.
Participants represented a range of occupations: Seven managers, two homemakers, three teachers, three people in administrative positions, two graduate students, one physician, one engineer, one flight attendant and one consultant.
In general, findings from paired comparisons of participant ratings between features demonstrate that Folders as Tasks and Task Management were rated significantly lower than each of the other features 
In preparation for the evaluation, participants first watched a 5-minute video  that described the Planner and its features.
The evaluation itself took 40 minutes and included the following steps: 1.
The planner was installed on the participant's computer.
The participant selected a project they were currently working on or had recently completed.
Using the Planner, the participant created a rough outline for the project and then tried out each of six other Planner features described above.
In a similar spirit of integration is the support of an "Activity" in Microsoft Outlook  Folders-as-tasks and information integration can't really be "tried out" like the other features.
Instead, the participant was asked first to switch to the file manager to note that a folder was created for each heading created in the Plan.
The participant then noted that a plan could contain references to several forms of information .
How much time could I save ?
One click and I am right there, rather than opening 4 or 5 folders and repeat the same things.
The Planner will save me a lot of time.'
Sometimes it gets lost by the company so I need to re-find it.
I get so much email that it is hard to go back and forth to figure out when I sent it.
With the Planner, I could have all my email right there."
Integration with the filing system.
The Planner is an alternate way to work with files and folders.
Information management and task management are often two sides of the same coin - we manage information to insure its availability for tasks we need to complete.
In the Planner, folders, representing tasks, can be associated with "Remind by" and "Due by" dates that appear in the calendar.
The Personal Project Planner with its support for situating a person's interactions with information has done well overall in an interim evaluation and we're encouraged to pursue its development.
As guided by evaluation results, we will direct our limited prototyping resources first towards better, more complete support for the in-contextcreate and drag-and-link features.
Moving farther out in our prototyping, we hope to compare and contrast the outline view with other views into or overlays onto the information in a file system including "mind mapping"  and workflow views.
Bellotti, V. and Thornton, J., Managing Activities with TV-Acta: TaskVista and Activity-Centered Task Assistant.
Boardman, R., Spence, R. and Sasse, M.A., Too many hierarchies?
The mind map book: How to use radiant thinking to maximize your brain's untapped potential.
Catarci, T., Dix, A., Katifori, A., Lepouras, G. and Poggi, A., Task-Centered Information Management.
Czerwinski, M., Horvitz, E. and Wilhite, S., A diary study of task switching and interruptions.
Jones, W. Keeping Found Things Found: The Study and Practice of Personal Information Management.
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, San Francisco, CA, 2007.
Jones, W., Bruce, H., Foxley, A. and Munat, C., Planning personal projects and organizing personal information.
Kaptelinin, V., Integrating tools and tasks: UMEA: translating interaction histories into project contexts.
The cost structure of sensemaking CHI 1993: Proceedings of the ACM SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, ACM Press, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 1993, 269-276.
A hybrid learning system for recognizing user tasks from desktop activities and email messages Proceedings of the 11th international conference on Intelligent user interfaces, ACM Press, Sydney, Australia, 2006.
