Fitts' law  characterizes pointing speed-accuracy performance as throughput, whose invariance to target distances  and sizes  is known.
However, it is unknown whether throughput and Fitts' law models in general are invariant to task dimensionality , whether univariate  or bivariate  endpoint deviation is used, whether throughput is calculated using the mean-of-means approach or the slope-inverse approach, or whether Guiard's  Form x Scale experiment design is used instead of fully crossed AxW factors.
We empirically investigate the confluence of these issues, finding that Fitts' law is largely invariant across 1-D and 2-D, provided that univariate endpoint deviation  is used in both, but that for 2-D pointing data, bivariate endpoint deviation  results in better Fitts' law models.
Also, the mean-of-means throughput calculation exhibits lower variance across subjects and dimensionalities than the slope-inverse calculation.
In light of these and other findings, we offer recommendations for pointing evaluations, especially in 2-D. We also offer an evaluation tool called FittsStudy to facilitate comparisons.
Fitts' original task used vertical ribbons and focused on 1-D horizontal pointing, the ISO 9241-9 standard , in recognizing the relevance of pointing to 2-D interfaces, has also prescribed a ring-of-circles target arrangement.
In addition, researchers often create their own custom pointing evaluations involving 2-D targets , sometimes laid out in a random field .
Researchers have created many predictive movement time models for 2-D pointing --but despite this work, the literature is almost silent on the issue of throughput calculation in 2-D. For example, it is unknown whether or not applying 1-D throughput calculations to 2-D pointing data results in equivalent throughput outcomes.
It is also unknown whether univariate  or bivariate  endpoint deviation creates better models of 2-D pointing.
Even the calculation of throughput itself requires further investigation, as the mean-of-means approach  insists on averaging indexes of difficulty and movement times, while the slope-inverse approach  insists on using the reciprocal of Fitts' regression slope.1 How each calculation fares across dimensionalities and endpoint deviation schemes is unknown.
Additionally, the traditional AxW experiment design has recently been exposed by Guiard  as introducing possible factor confounds, but the effects of the foregoing issues as they relate to his Form x Scale design are unknown.
In short, there are many unanswered and interrelated questions regarding the use of Fitts' law in two-dimensional pointing studies.
This paper investigates the confluence of these issues at once.
Endpoint deviation is crucial to the application of Fitts' law.
Quantifying endpoint deviation is necessary for employing Crossman's correction  for normalizing subjects' personal speed-accuracy biases so that throughputs for a "fast but reckless" performer and a "slow and careful" performer are comparable.
The ISO 9241-9 standard  and most prior literature  define the endpoint deviation, or spread of hits, as a univariate quantity computed as the standard deviation of endpoints' xcoordinates in a horizontal pointing task .
But this definition is questionable in 2-D, as it ignores any deviation in the second dimension .
New pointing techniques regularly emerge, and often, these pointing techniques are evaluated using Fitts' law  to measure rapid aimed pointing performance independent of target distance  and size .
Fitts' law's measure, which combines speed and accuracy, is throughput, whose invariance to the specific values of A and W is well-known.
However, it is unknown whether throughput is also invariant to task dimensionality .
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
What, then, should serve as bases for addressing these issues?
In this paper, we consider invariance across dimensionalities, improved model fits, and theoretical soundness as possible answers.
This paper contributes a case for, and description of, bivariate endpoint deviation, which easily generalizes to N dimensions.
It also presents results from a study of 21 subjects performing the two ISO 9241-9 pointing tasks in 1D and 2-D layouts.
Throughputs are computed using both the mean-of-means approach  and the slope-inverse approach .
The effects of univariate and bivariate endpoint deviations on throughput are examined, as are the effects of Guiard's  Form x Scale experiment design as an alternative to the traditional AxW experiment design.
Our key findings include that Fitts' law is largely invariant across 1-D and 2-D, provided that univariate endpoint deviation  is used in both; but for 2-D pointing data, bivariate endpoint deviation  creates better Fitts' law models than SDx.
We also find that the mean-of-means throughput calculation exhibits lower variance across subjects and dimensionalities for the same pointing data than the slope-inverse calculation.
And Guiard's Form x Scale experiment design produces equivalent results with just one of three levels of A as the full AxW design, resulting in the possibility of major time savings when conducting experiments.
We offer a downloadable pointing evaluation tool called FittsStudy that provides extensive measures and a visualization tool for exploring submovement pointing profiles.
Two-dimensional Fitts' law studies have been conducted for some time .
Researchers have attempted to predict movement times  to 2-D targets for almost as long, relying on target dimensions  or probability distributions  to inform predictions.
Importantly, these efforts were focused on Fitts' law's ability to predict movement times, not its related but distinct measurement of throughput.
Therefore, these efforts did not deal with endpoint deviation, speed-accuracy bias correction, or throughput calculation, topics of central importance here.
Motor psychologists  have distinguished between two sources of error in rapid aimed movements: variable error  and constant error .
Simply put, VE reflects the spread of hits, or endpoint deviation.
By contrast, CE is the mean distance of endpoints from the target center.
Thus, VE is independent of target location while CE is not.
Crossman's correction  relies only on VE, not CE.
The ISO 9241-9 standard  and many published studies treat pointing in 2-D as having only univariate endpoint deviation .
Unfortunately, they do not explore or discuss this choice as we do here.
Murata  defined 2-D effective target width  directly using a bivariate joint probability distribution rather than calculating We using bivariate endpoint deviation , which is much simpler and which has not been examined until now.
Throughput has been fundamental to Fitts' law from the beginning.
Fitts himself  initially defined it using the mean-of-means approach.
Twelve years later, as Zhai points out , Fitts and Radford  seem to switch gears, referring to the "slope constant" when discussing performance.
MacKenzie  refers to both the meanof-means and slope-inverse approaches.
Twenty-five years after Card et al.
In general, Soukoreff and MacKenzie  have advocated for the mean-of-means approach, while Zhai  has advocated for the slope-inverse approach.
The present study brings additional empirical evidence to this debate, especially for 2-D pointing tasks, which have thus far been mostly ignored.
Although each throughput calculation results in a bits per second measure, the calculations consider different things.
A reasonable approach, then, is to report both throughputs rather than adhere to one or the other.
Only using one ID, MacKenzie and Isokoski  showed that throughput remains constant across cognitive sets , provided that Crossman's correction  is used.
Nonetheless, the correction remains standard for reducing bias and equitably comparing subjects .
Finally, Guiard  has recently argued that the classic crossing of factors AxW in Fitts' law experiments introduces possible confounds, and that experiments should use Form x Scale designs instead, which amount to crossing IDx.
Our experiment is among the first to provide results comparing both AxW and FxS designs.
Using IDe allows subjects making different speed-accuracy tradeoffs to be equitably compared.
The faster/slower a subject points, the lower/higher his movement time but the wider/narrower his spread of hits.
The constant term arises from the entropy of the standard normal distribution , but it is the calculation of endpoint deviation  that interests us.
As described elsewhere , SDx is the standard deviation of endpoint coordinates along the axis of motion--by convention, the "x" indicating horizontal pointing to vertical ribbons.
If we record each endpoint's x-coordinate such that negative values are undershoots and positive values are overshoots  , we would label endpoints as shown in Figure 1.
To date, despite years of Fitts' law research, the ramifications of the endpoint deviation calculation are unknown.
Intuitively, it seems that endpoint deviation should be accounted for in all relevant task dimensions; after all, pointing to a circular target in 2-D  clearly requires motor control in more than one dimension.
But how, then, shall we quantify endpoint deviation in 2-D ?
And will it produce comparable throughputs to those we observe in 1-D?
Consider Figure 3a, where using signed distances to a target's center is not feasible as it was in Figure 1.
How can endpoint deviation be generalized to cover Figure 3?
Clearly, unsigned distances from a target center do not suffice, lest the endpoint deviation of Figure 3b is considered equal to that of Figure 3a.
Our answer lies in regarding endpoint deviation not as signed or unsigned distances from a target center, but as deviations around a center of mass.
Mathematically, this notion is equally suited to 1, 2, 3, and N dimensions.
As before, in Figure 4a and 4b, distances to the target center are the same, but the spread of hits differs.
Now, the centroids  are also marked.
The above calculation relies on the mean x , which depends on having signed distances from a target center.
However, in 2-D  pointing tasks, signed distances to target centers are untenable unless we are to discard all deviation along axes perpendicular to the task axis, turning a multidimensional task into a unidimensional one.
Owing to Fitts' law's origins as a 1-D model of rapid aimed movement, it is reasonable to argue that even in 2-D pointing tasks, endpoint deviation should be regarded as univariate .
A simplified version of Eq.
4 appears in prior work by Douglas et al.
We emphasize that a spread of hits around a centroid is not the spread of distances from a centroid, which is a univariate deviation of 2-D distances, not a bivariate deviation of 2-D points.
This incorrect definition is given for comparison as SDwrong in Eq.
5b were used for Figure 2a or 2b, we would get a deviation of 0.58.
If it were used for Figures 4a and 4b, we would get 0.92 and 0.04, respectively.
These values represent the spread of distances from the centroid, not the spread of endpoints around the centroid.
4 is easily increased to 3-D or decreased to 1-D:
Thus, computing endpoint deviation as the spread of points around a center of mass unifies our calculation of deviation regardless of dimensionality.
Although empirical endpoint distributions show that deviation tends to be greater along the task axis than orthogonal to it , for our purposes in quantifying amount of deviation, we do not care where the deviation occurs, just that it occurs.
Endpoints 2 units up from a target center or 2 units right of a target center are each equally 2 units off the mark.
Importantly, all approach angles to circular  targets are equivalent, removing concern over target shape and approach angle in the ISO 9241-9 standard tasks .
Although the above formulation of endpoint deviation is consistent across dimensionalities, it remains to be seen how throughputs from 2-D tasks compare to those from 1-D tasks.
Also, it is unknown whether SDx or SDx,y results in better model fits for the same 2-D pointing data, how these issues interact with the two approaches to calculating throughput , or with Guiard's contention  that AxW factorial designs can be confounded.
These questions are addressed in our experiment, described next.
With the centroid approach, signed distances from target centers become unnecessary, and instead, 1-D coordinates can be used directly, like 2-D coordinates in Eq.
To illustrate the consistency of the centroid formulation for endpoint deviation across dimensions, consider two "equivalent" endpoint distributions in Figure 5.
All testing was conducted at a lab containing a 21" Samsung SyncMaster 214T flat panel monitor set to 1600x1200 resolution and a Logitech optical mouse.
The computer was a Xeon CPU running Windows 7 at 3 GHz with 2 GB RAM.
We created a full-screen application called FittsStudy in C to administer conditions, log data, parse files, visualize trials, and calculate results.
For the 1-D task, A was measured from one vertical ribbon's center to the other, and W was the width of a ribbon.
In each of the 18 AxW conditions per session, a subject performed 23 trials, where each trial was a single attempt to click a target.
In each condition, the first three trials were logged as practice and ignored, leaving 20 test trials per condition.
There was no delineation between the last practice trial and the first test trial.
Presentation order of the 18 AxW conditions was randomized first by A and then by W. Subjects were instructed to move as quickly as possible while maintaining an approximate 4% error rate .
Cumulative and condition-level error rates were displayed after each condition.
Each trial only contained one click; if a target was missed, it flashed red, audibly dinged, and the next target was immediately highlighted.
With each of 21 subjects completing 18 AxW conditions consisting of 20 test trials in 2 dimensionalities, 15,120 test trials were produced as part of this study.
Space precludes showing Fitts' law models for all 21 subjects, but average model fits  and parameters  for both the 1-D vertical ribbon task and the 2-D ring-of-circles task are shown in Table 1.
For the 2-D task, the exact same pointing data was analyzed using univariate  and bivariate  endpoint deviation.
The average fit of the models for the 1-D task was r=.948.3 The average fit for the 2-D task using univariate endpoint deviation  was r=.951.
For the same 2-D data, using bivariate endpoint deviation  resulted in r=.962.
Paired samples t-tests show that 2-D bivariate r values were significantly higher than both the 1-D and 2-D univariate r values , and that the univariate r values were not significantly different from each other.
The standard deviation of subjects' bivariate r values was lower than their univariate r values for the 2-D task  given the exact same pointing data.
For model parameters, it is generally desirable to have intercepts a that are nonnegative and as close to zero as possible .
Intercepts in both 2-D models were not significantly different from those in the 1-D model, but were marginally different from each other =2.04, p=.05.
The 1-D, 2-D univariate, and 2-D bivariate models produced 5, 4, and 3 negative intercepts, respectively.
Tests of slope parameters b showed that the 1-D and 2-D univariate slopes were not significantly different, but that both were different from the 2-D bivariate slopes .
All trials were mathematically rotated to horizontal  prior to analysis.
For the 1-D task, SDx was computed using Eq.
For the 2-D task, univariate SDx was computed using Eq.
7 and bivariate SDx,y was computed using Eq.
However, averages may be affected by the range of IDs used, and a and b are conflated such that averages may be the same whose slopes  differ due to the influence of intercepts .
However, this approach must report a separately, and has been shown to depend upon the range of IDs used .
The average throughput for the 2-D task with univariate endpoint deviation was TPavg=4.91 bps .
As is customary, trials flagged as spatial outliers were removed.
A spatial outlier was defined from prior work  as an error whose movement was less than half the nominal distance A, or whose endpoint landed more than twice the target width W from the target center.
Summary results over 21 subjects for Fitts' law regression coefficients , Pearson r model fits, and throughput calculations  for 1-D pointing to vertical ribbons and for 2-D pointing to circles in a ring .
The exact same data is used for each 2-D analysis.
The TPavg and TPinv columns show the absolute differences in throughputs from their respective 1-D throughputs.
Because Fitts' law intercepts can be negative, means and standard deviations for those columns are of |a|, i.e., intercepts' distance from zero.
The average absolute difference between subjects' 2-D univariate throughput and their 1-D throughput was TPavg=0.21 bps .
The average absolute difference between subjects' 2-D bivariate throughputs and their 1-D throughputs was TPavg=0.36 bps .
Thus, it seems that under the mean-of-means approach to calculating throughput, for 2-D task data, univariate endpoint deviation produces throughputs closer to those obtained in the classic 1-D task.
However, 2-D bivariate models fit the same data better than 2-D univariate models.
Using the slope-inverse approach, the average throughput for the 1-D task was TPinv=5.42 bps .
The average throughput for the 2-D task with univariate endpoint deviation was TPinv=5.28 bps .
These throughputs were not significantly different, indicating comparability across dimensionality as occurred for the mean-of-means approach.
The average absolute difference between subjects' 2-D univariate throughput and their 1-D throughput was TPinv=0.56 bps .
The average absolute difference between subjects' 2-D bivariate throughputs and their 1-D throughputs was TPinv=0.72 bps .
As with the mean-of-means approach, these differences were significantly greater than the 2-D univariate differences =2.18, p<.05.
Thus, the findings from the slope-inverse approach to calculating throughput agree with those from the mean-ofmeans approach, but with different magnitudes.
Thus far, we have compared univariate  and bivariate  endpoint deviation calculations for 2-D task data using  model fits and  similarity to 1-D throughputs.
While this was our main interest, we also reflect on the two throughput calculations, TPavg and TPinv.
First, we compare the throughputs TPavg and TPinv from Table 1.
Clearly, the slope-inverse calculation yields higher throughputs than the mean-of-means calculation.
Besides producing higher throughputs, TPinv also had higher variance among subjects than TPavg.
For the 2-D task using univariate endpoint deviation, standard deviations were 0.68 vs. 0.43; using bivariate endpoint deviation, standard deviations were 0.61 vs. 0.40.
Second, while we learned that 2-D univariate endpoint deviation produces more agreement with 1-D throughputs than 2-D bivariate endpoint deviation, we have not considered whether this result is stronger for TPavg or TPinv.
Thus, in both cases, TPavg agrees better between 1-D and 2-D throughputs than does TPinv.
Recently, Guiard  has argued that the typical procedure of separately manipulating A and W in Fitts' law experiments introduces potential confounds.
He contends that the universally agreed upon variable of interest in Fitts' law, and the sole determiner of movement time , is index of difficulty , which is expressed using the equivocal ratio A/W.
But typical experimental treatment of Fitts' law regards it as if it had three parameters--A, W, and ID--which introduces a confound when A or W has a disproportionate effect on MT.
A remedy, Guiard argues, is to instead manipulate Form , which is ID, and Scale , which is either A or W but not both.
Guiard's practical recommendation is to hold A constant and manipulate only W over the course of an experiment, thereby removing any potential confound.
In light of Guiard , it is conceivable that our throughput results could be affected by the traditional AxW design, and that an FxS design is worth exploring.
This leaves 1 A x 6 W for six  points per subject.
Our total test trials, excluding outliers, becomes 5039, about a third of our original amount.
We re-ran our regressions and throughput analyses, this time keeping only trials for which A=384 pixels.
Summary outcomes for our new analyses are shown in Table 2.
Thus, despite switching to the FxS design from the AxW design, the significance conclusions hold the same for TPavg.
Using the slope-inverse approach to throughput calculation, the FxS design produced similar TPinv values to those from the AxW design.
Within the FxS design, as in the AxW design, 2-D univariate throughputs were still not significantly different from 1-D throughputs, but this time the result was only marginal =-1.98, p=.06.
Until now, the findings from the FxS design mirror those from the AxW design for both TPavg and TPinv.
However, the story changes when we examine TPinv.
These differences grew significantly in the FxS design from the AxW design creating, on average, a discrepancy of over 1 bps per subject for both univariate =3.22, p<.01 and bivariate =3.47, p<.01 endpoint deviation.
Thus, TPinv was affected far more by the reduction of A to one level than was TPavg.
This is important in light of Zhai's  contention that TPavg is affected more than TPinv by the range of IDs used, and Soukoreff and MacKenzie's counter to the contrary .
Finally, as in the AxW design, 2-D bivariate throughputs were significantly further from 1-D throughputs than 2-D univariate throughputs =2.33, p<.05.
Thus, in switching to the FxS design from the AxW design, the significance conclusions are the same for TPinv but the discrepancy between 2-D and 1-D throughputs grew significantly to over 1 bps.
In the full AxW design, slope-inverse throughputs  were significantly higher than mean-of-means throughputs  for all three models .
In the 2-D univariate model, although average TPinv was greater than TPavg, the difference was only marginal =1.70, p=.10.
The marginal results are at least due in part to the greatly increased variance among subjects' TPinv values in the FxS design, which was much higher than for TPavg.
In the AxW design, 2-D TPavg agreed more with 1-D TPavg than did 2-D TPinv with 1-D TPinv for both the univariate and bivariate models.
Although the average Pearson r model fits improved slightly in the FxS design over the AxW design, none of these improvements were statistically significant.
As for the AxW design, the two univariate fits were not significantly different, and the 2-D bivariate fits were significantly higher than the 2-D univariate fits =2.47, p<.05.
Unlike in the AxW design, the 2-D bivariate fits were no longer better than the 1-D fits.
As before, the standard deviation of model fits among subjects was low, with the 2-D bivariate model being lower than the 2-D univariate model .
Although the average absolute intercept |a| increased in the FxS design from the AxW design for each of the three models, these increases were not statistically significant.
The standard deviation among subjects of |a| increased as well, and there were more negative intercepts than previously.
The 2-D univariate and bivariate intercepts were not significantly different from each other or from the 1-D intercepts.
Slope parameters b did not change significantly in the FxS design from the AxW design for each of the three models.
As in the AxW design, in the FxS design the 1-D and 2-D univariate slopes were not significantly different from each other, but both were significantly different from the 2-D bivariate slopes .
Within the FxS design, as in the full AxW design, 2-D univariate throughputs were not significantly different from 1-D throughputs.
The resiliency of Fitts' law to changes in experimental settings is often touted as part of the law's strength.
Here we have seen that in light of Guiard's  concern over confounding the effects on MT of A, W, and ID, switching to a FxS design by holding A constant at 384 pixels and varying only W has largely produced the same significance conclusions with a third of the experimental effort.
To facilitate our discussion, we first restate our key findings, each of which had statistically significant support.
Findings A-F are from the full AxW design, while finding G specifically addresses Guiard's FxS design .
A. Fitts' law intercepts transcend dimensionality but slopes change with endpoint deviation.
Model intercepts a did not change significantly from 1-D to 2-D tasks, while slopes b changed significantly from univariate to bivariate endpoint deviation calculations.
B. Bivariate models fit 2-D pointing data best.
On the exact same 2-D pointing data, bivariate endpoint deviation gave better model fits, as judged by Pearson r coefficients, than univariate endpoint deviation.4 C. 2-D univariate throughputs are closest to 1-D univariate throughputs.
Using univariate endpoint deviation for 2-D pointing data gave throughputs closer to 1-D throughputs than using bivariate endpoint deviation under both the mean-of-means throughput calculation and the slope-inverse calculation.
D. Bivariate models produce lower throughputs.
Using bivariate endpoint deviation produces lower throughputs than using univariate endpoint deviation for the same 2-D pointing data under both throughput calculation schemes.
This should be no surprise, as in bivariate models, deviation is being accumulated that is ignored in univariate models.
Using bivariate endpoint deviation increases We, decreasing IDe for the same MT and thus lowering throughput.
E. Slope-inverse throughputs are highest and exhibit most variance.
In the AxW design, slope-inverse throughputs were higher than mean-of-means throughputs in both dimensionalities and under both endpoint deviation schemes.
They also exhibited greater variance among subjects.
F. Mean-of-means throughputs agree most across dimensionalities.
Mean-of-means throughputs calculated from 2-D pointing data are closer to 1-D throughputs calculated the same way than are slopeinverse throughputs.
This finding holds for both univariate and bivariate 2-D endpoint deviations.
G. Guiard's  Form x Scale design largely upholds the above findings.
Finding E was upheld only for the 1-D case, although for the 2-D cases, the results were both marginal .
Additionally, the FxS design showed that the slope-inverse approach was more sensitive to the reduced ID range than the mean-of-means approach: 2-D throughputs became significantly further from 1-D throughputs, and variance among subjects increased considerably.
At this point, we are ready to ask:  how resilient is Fitts' law to changes in dimensionality?, and  should univariate or bivariate endpoint deviation be used in 2-D studies?
We take each of these questions in turn.
Is Fitts' law invariant to dimensionality?
On this, our findings suggest "yes" if univariate endpoint deviation is used, and "no" if bivariate endpoint deviation is used.
Put another way, as long as a 2-D task is treated with 1-D calculations, the results will be comparable to 1-D tasks.
Evidence lies in the stability across dimensionalities of model intercepts and slopes  and throughputs .
However, if bivariate calculations are used, then slopes , model fits, and throughputs all change significantly across dimensionalities .
However, these results do not necessarily mean that univariate deviation is most appropriate for 2-D pointing data; other considerations besides agreement with 1-D pointing studies must be weighed carefully.
Which throughput calculation seems most stable across dimensionalities?
TPavg produced throughputs with greater agreement across 1-D and 2-D than did TPinv .
Above, we saw that univariate endpoint deviation calculations for 2-D pointing data cause model parameters and throughputs to better agree with 1-D pointing results.
In effect, by using univariate endpoint deviation, we are treating a 2-D task as if it were a 1-D task.
But does this mean univariate endpoint deviation should be used, even in 2-D pointing studies?
Agreement across dimensionalities may be an important consideration.
At the same time, there are both empirical and theoretical arguments that commend a bivariate approach.
Empirically, bivariate endpoint deviation produces better model fits for 2-D pointing data than univariate deviation , and as noted in footnote 4, this cannot be attributed to an increase in model parameters.
Better model fits using the same data and number of parameters are no small concern, for we usually want to prize models with the best possible explanatory power.
Theoretically, there is satisfaction knowing that bivariate models do not simply ignore variation in a physically relevant dimension.
The FittsStudy tool offers  zoomable path visualizations and path analysis measures ,  graphical submovement profiles including velocity , acceleration, and jerk over time, and  Fitts' law models  and pointing error models  using both endpoint deviation schemes and throughput calculation approaches .
In light of our findings, we recommend the following: 1.
Consider using an FxS design by choosing one level of A and varying only W. Doing so will save considerable effort and reduce the chances of factor confounds.
Alternatively, use a full AxW design but, afterwards, isolate a middle A value while retaining all W values and reanalyze the data as if it came from an FxS design.
If the conclusions change, report them and investigate a disproportionate effect of A or W on MT.
For 2-D pointing studies, use bivariate endpoint deviation , but examine results from univariate endpoint deviation  and report them if they significantly differ.
If a goal is to compare results between a 1-D task and a 2-D task, compute 2-D throughputs using the mean-ofmeans approach  based on univariate endpoint deviation .
Doing so will cause throughputs across dimensionalities to agree best.
Comparisons should generally not be drawn across throughput calculation approaches, i.e., comparing throughputs from the mean-of-means approach  to those from the slope-inverse approach .
Given the prevalence of 2-D pointing in user interfaces, we encourage the use of the ISO 9241-9 ring-of-circles task in lieu of the vertical ribbon task.
Future work in FittsStudy includes offering not just the vertical ribbon and ring-of-circles tasks, but also random target fields , and crossing and steering tasks .
This work has made progress in clarifying the effects of task dimensionality, endpoint deviation, throughput calculation, and experiment design on Fitts' law models and measures.
However, it has relied on the two suggested ISO 9241-9 task arrangements , both of which use regularlyshaped targets.
How endpoint deviation should be calculated for irregularly-shaped targets is a topic for future work, and will almost certainly involve probabilistic accounts of endpoint distributions .
Another item for future work is examining whether the findings comparing outcomes in 1-D and 2-D transfer to 3-D pointing environments.
Yet another project could investigate whether different device types other than the mouse change the pattern of results seen here.
To facilitate adoption of the foregoing recommendations, we built a downloadable software tool called FittsStudy .
FittsStudy logs all pointing trials in a session in XML, from which it builds spreadsheets for statistical analysis.
The strength of our quantitative methods depends on deep understandings of our measures.
In this paper, we have addressed Fitts' throughput and its relationship to task dimensionality, endpoint deviation, throughput calculation, and experiment design.
Our findings indicate that Fitts' law is largely invariant to dimensionality , but that this depends on using univariate endpoint deviation , even in 2-D, which ignores deviation in the orthogonal task dimension.
Bivariate endpoint deviation , on the other hand, better models 2-D pointing data.
We also offer support for using Guiard's  FxS experiment design to save effort and avoid possible confounds.
We built FittsStudy to facilitate exploration of these issues and ease the burden of these details on researchers and evaluators.
