This is the author's version of a work that was submitted/accepted for publication in the following source: Cottman-Fields, Mark, Brereton, Margot, & Roe, Paul  Virtual birding : extending an environmental pastime into the virtual world for citizen science.
In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, Association for Computing Machinery, Paris, France, pp.
This paper investigates engaging experienced birders, as volunteer citizen scientists, to analyze large recorded audio datasets gathered through environmental acoustic monitoring.
Although audio data is straightforward to gather, automated analysis remains a challenging task; the existing expertise, local knowledge and motivation of the birder community can complement computational approaches and provide distinct benefits.
We explored both the culture and practice of birders, and paradigms for interacting with recorded audio data.
A variety of candidate design elements were tested with birders.
This study contributes an understanding of how virtual interactions and practices can be developed to complement existing practices of experienced birders in the physical world.
In so doing this study contributes a new approach to engagement in e-science.
Whereas most citizen science projects task lay participants with discrete real world or artificial activities, sometimes using extrinsic motivators, this approach builds on existing intrinsically satisfying practices.
A citizen science approach for analyzing environmental acoustic data, and particularly bird vocalizations, is appealing , given the popularity of birding.
There are approximately 20 million people in the U.S.  and over 20 thousand in Australia  who regard themselves as regular birders.
Our target participants are birders - highly dedicated individuals with extensive experience and expertise resulting from an inherent motivation and interest in birding.
There is a high degree of regional variation in bird vocalizations and birding relies heavily on local knowledge.
The investigations and checklist presented in this paper were conducted using recordings from the South East of Queensland, Australia.
Research that embraces and motivates community participation can create significant and scientifically useful contributions .
Clearly communicating the purpose of the project, how to participate, the benefits of participation and the expected outcomes is important.
In this research, we wanted to explore satisfying interaction designs for birders to annotate bird vocalizations in audio datasets.
An online tool can enable access to a wealth of birding information that may be problematic to access and comprehend or unavailable during a physical bird walk.
A prominent benefit of virtual birding is that the recorded audio and associated contextual information that is available can be stored and replayed.
This allows for verification of observations on a scale that is not possible for physical observations.
Virtual birding has potential for providing immediate access to sounds from hard-to-reach locations and the ability to inspect bird vocalizations in depth.
Collaboration and discussion with birders with differing expertise can be enabled in the online world.
Understanding the distribution and abundance of biodiversity in the environment is important.
Biodiversity monitoring must be scalable, objective and verifiable.
Traditional in-the-field monitoring methods are expensive to perform and do not scale well.
Automated terrestrial sensors that record sound have been shown to be a viable alternative that can be scaled to cover larger areas over longer periods .
The challenge becomes analysis of overwhelming amounts of recorded audio data.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
There are a number of successful citizen science projects that inform our work.
In the Foldit game, players are tasked with `folding' proteins to find the configuration that meets a number of criteria.
Participants may be interested in the scientific basis of the project or by the novel game play .
Galaxy Zoo was built to classify a vast number of images of galaxies by engaging people to spot patterns .
The concepts involved - presenting a small task for human computation that automated processes struggle to complete - can be applied to the analysis of acoustic data.
TagATune  is a system for describing music and sound effects.
Unlike images, audio requires time to listen and comprehend .
Some useful frameworks have emerged to classify citizen science approaches, identifying dimensions such as motivation for participation, functionality and usability features of citizen science sites.
Ensuring there is a spectrum of time and effort commitment available, properly distributing tasks, providing effective interfaces to the tasks, combining contributions and resolving conflicts are important considerations for this investigation.
Prestopnik  found that satisfiers may be more important than motivators i.e.
Rotman  examined what motivated participants to contribute to e-science projects, finding that volunteers participate out of interest, a commitment to conservation or related educational efforts.
For birders, the motivation to continue is often an innate desire to continue experiences that are enjoyed, as well as socialize with colleagues , which was indeed observed.
Birders may want to make a difference in the community through their interest in birds.
Birders' motivations may change over time.
Initial participation may be due to the desire for a particular type of leisure activity, to strengthen personal relationships or for personal achievement.
Continued participation in physical birding may increase the appreciation or interest in birding .
While the frameworks outlined above provide useful suggestions, orientations and checkpoints for design, understanding what to design requires delving in to the domain.
As noted by Gaver , "designing and deploying speculative systems makes it clear that theory seldom drives design or guides evaluation".
The research group has formed relationships with a range of conservation and ecological organizations over the last five years.
This has lead to acoustic sensing projects, which have grown in number and application.
For this project, the combined existing knowledge of birder practices and specific observations have been distilled.
Our analysis is based upon open ended interviews with eight birders, participation in many bird walks, and small-scale tests of candidate design elements.
Domain specific expertise is the basis of identification and verification, and levels of skill vary widely even among birders with similar levels of experience.
Identifications are made using diagnostic indicators - the color, shape and vocalizations of a bird, its location in undergrowth or at the top of a tree and movement patterns - with the approach varying from person to person.
According to Sauer , sound accounts for more than 50% of identifications.
Donnelly  discusses trust as an important factor in birding, as each person is dependant not only their own knowledge and skills, but also on other people's knowledge and skills.
This was reflected in our investigations, as there is often incomplete information and uncertainty regarding the observation of a bird call or behavior.
The social assumptions and interactions between birders can take the place of objective measurements.
Due to this, a participant's status, previous sightings and involvement in the community are factors in determining the level of trust.
A bird walk is an immersion into the sights, sounds, smells, surrounds and weather of an area, usually undertaken over an hour or more, often with a substantial amount of preparation.
Knowledge and experience of flora and fauna form the basis of seeking and identification strategies for particular species.
Bird walks may be undertaken in groups, or more commonly individually.
Birders are social and conversational: participants share knowledge, debate bird identifications and talk about previous and future birding activities.
This interaction forms a central part of the pastime for many participants.
The essential components for a bird walk are transport, binoculars and an enthusiastic individual or group of people, including those with visual or auditory impairments.
However, some time and money is required, and there is limited opportunity to identify birds, usually with no second chance.
Six birders participated in an experimental trial of the website, and completed a survey.
The experiment involved listening to five minutes of recorded audio, divided into 20 second segments.
The participants were asked to identify bird vocalizations and check off the name on the checklist.
Each bird only needed to be found once for the five minutes.
There was no reference library available, as the existing annotations were compared to the participant's results.
The participants indicated that they were willing to spend "several hours a week" up to "as long as it takes" to identify bird calls in recorded audio.
The type of vegetation and approximate geographic location were of more interest to the birders than the exact time of day for accurately identifying birds.
Samples of known calls and the ability to discuss with other participants were popular requests.
There were eleven different birds annotated for the reference library: the participants found between four to ten of these, but also found an additional four to ten birds that were not in the initial annotations.
The identified birds matched with those expected in the area.
Birders were pleased to have access to personal progress in the form of lists of birds seen and sought.
They reported that this helped them focus on the birds they expected but had not yet found, possibly leading to the identification of additional birds.
The participants always played the audio segments multiple times.
They took 30 minutes to two hours to annotate the five minute recording.
The spectrogram visualization of audio was also very popular,
Physical Travel to a particular place at a particular time Watch & photo birds.
Keep a life list of birds seen and/or heard.
Bird watch in a group.
Discuss birds that have been seen and/or heard.
Consult a bird field guide Keep a list of birds seen so far on a particular trip.
Record the time and place a bird was seen.
Plan a trip to listen to the dawn chorus, and particular bird calls.
Ask another birder to describe the bird they saw, in order to confirm.
Virtual Organize and present recordings spatially and temporally.
Easy access to a list of birds heard, annotated and verified.
Receive information about activities of other bird listeners.
Discuss birds that have been heard in an online format.
Access audio samples of bird calls A list of birds found within a virtual bird walk and overall.
Indicate the time and call of a bird that was heard via an annotation.
Can listen to dawn chorus and other times of day from many different locations at any time.
Discuss annotations and segments of audio a friend or group has already analyzed.
These portfolios in the form of lists and diaries serve to remind them of enjoyable experiences and achievements.
Birders may be willing to modify how they record information, if the benefit provided is judged to outweigh the change in procedure .
It would be interesting to explore birders' opinions on the differences between lists of birds encountered virtually in audio datasets and those encountered in the physical world.
Our development of tools to analyze bird calls has led to candidate design elements, which can be considered as technology probes .
These are used to explore how birders might continue activities online, exploring and discussing both recorded environmental audio as well as physical bird encounters.
The candidate design elements include a forum and website.
We have a forum used for a few months with more than 150 posts, attached to an existing website that was built for the purpose of seeding a library of sample reference bird call annotations.
The forum was initially for general announcements, but grew to be used extensively by the birders.
Their posts mainly involved talking about birds they had found and annotated and asking for others to check annotations they were unsure about.
Birders also learnt from each other, by giving examples of birds they knew.
The forum functioned as a means for the birders to suggest modifications to the methodology, such as annotating calls with not just the species but also the type of call.
Some of the discussion was about the personal experience of the birders, particularly to justify their annotations.
There are advantages and disadvantages in translating birding from the physical domain to a virtual space.
Virtual birding does not seek to replace traditional birding - it offers opportunities to extend and augment the pastime, summarized in Table 1.
While the aural atmosphere in the virtual environment is very similar, some of the natural visual, spatial, bodily and interactional context that would be present for physical birding is lost.
Some diagnostic clues available in a physical environment are missing; however photographs can confer an idea of the vegetation and landscape features.
The birder cannot move closer or change the angle of viewing.
Instead, there is a permanent record of the bird vocalizations, and opportunities for indepth verification of identifications.
The time taken to annotate audio is potentially much longer than its duration, making this a very important consideration in an online tool.
This paper explored the potential for a virtual citizen science project created for local amateur birders with domain-specific expertise.
There are some positive signs that extending birding into a virtual space may be a viable approach to the analysis and verification of recorded environmental audio.
This extension of birding provides a number of benefits: expanded birding opportunities; little need for interventions in established practices due to intrinsic motivations; and large degrees of re-use of existing knowledge and experience.
The annotation activities of the project are aided by the quality control that occurs naturally between birders.
Although there is a constrained pool of viable birders, the significant benefits to participants offer feasible motivators to participate.
The study indicates the significant potential for e-science to benefit from engaging populations of non-scientific experts and hobbyists by designing extensions to their existing practices that draw upon their expertise and intrinsic motivations.
This research was supported by the Australian Research Council under the Discovery grant DP110105127 Cooperation and Reciprocity at the Local Scale Enabled by Social and Mobile Technologies 2011.
This research was conducted with the support of the QUT Institute for Future Environments and QUT Samford Ecological Research Facility.
We would like to thank the birders that gave their time and discussed their experiences for this paper.
