Strong ties in a network are beneficial for support during times of crises and for obtaining timely informational support .
While a company's organizational chart can provide information about professional closeness and the formal structure of the enterprise, it cannot fully reflect the complexities of the social networks inside the workplace .
For example, the company directory does not show who an employee trusts, cares about, and chooses to spend time with outside the workplace.
Relationships that transcend current projects and team structures can be the strongest and most meaningful, yet they are not represented within official company databases.
This is where analysis of social software usage may help.
Recent work by Gilbert and Karahalios presented a model for predicting relationship strength based on behavior on Facebook, today's most popular and ubiquitous social network site .
Their findings indicate that different behaviors on Facebook reveal the strength of relationships between friends.
However, we know that people socialize differently in the workplace than in their personal life because of the professional context.
It may be that interactions on a company's internal tool are not indicative of relationship closeness because these tools are used for different purposes than external social network sites, which are used primarily for keeping in touch with friends .
In this work we present an analysis of the behavior of employees on a company-internal social network site to determine if relationship closeness can be predicted from employees' SNS interactions.
We compare users' perceptions of their relationships with coworkers to their interactions with these coworkers on a company's internal SNS.
Given the nature of workplace relationships, that span professional and personal dimensions, these two facets of workplace relationships are the focus of our analysis.
We find that certain SNS behaviors signal professional closeness and others signal personal closeness and a core concept relating to these findings is "relationship multiplexity."
In this work we analyze the behavior on a company-internal social network site to determine which interaction patterns signal closeness between colleagues.
Regression analysis suggests that employee behavior on social network sites  reveals information about both professional and personal closeness.
This analysis contributes to our understanding of how SNS behavior reflects relationship multiplexity: the multiple facets of our relationships with SNS connections.
Online social network sites  have become established mechanisms for maintaining connections to both strong and weak relationship ties .
Behind the firewall, companies, including Best Buy, Deloitte, Microsoft, and IBM, are starting to host their own internal social network sites for the purpose of enabling communication and collaboration across organizational boundaries .
Organizations hosting internal social network sites can benefit from knowing more about the relationships between employees: this knowledge can inform strategic team formation, human resource decisions, and resource allocation .
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
A multiplex relationship within the workplace is one where coworkers share more than one dimension of interests .
And when two persons have a multiplex relationship, each dimension impacts the other.
For example, a conflict between two persons in the workplace can cause problems for their friendship, or vice versa.
To this extent relationships cannot be simply categorized as purely professional or personal.
To maintain multiplex relationships with coworkers, employees alter their behavior for different communication contexts and media.
For example, within a meeting, people speak and behave rationally as a course of doing business, but after the meeting over lunch may share more personal perspectives and emotional responses to the events of the workplace.
This balancing of behavioral norms and appropriateness can be understood through Goffman's distinction between `front stage' and `back stage' performances .
Within the workplace, people are continually balancing, and sometimes struggling with, their self-presentation, as they juggle the social norms of different workplace contexts.
A social network site inside the enterprise is a unique platform that allows us to study this tension.
People have a professional identity in the workplace, but a social network site is for socializing: which side of a coworker relationship is reflected in the behavior on the site?
This tension of multiple presentations of self online has been discussed elsewhere , but here we attempt to determine how relationship facets are reflected through explicit behavior on an SNS in the workplace setting.
The concept of multiplexity has been examined previously in terms of social networks and technology, but the focus has been on "media multiplexity:" the concept of using different media for maintaining types of relationships.
For example, individuals may favor using the phone for communicating with friends and email for communicating with coworkers.
The research in this area has found that, in general, the more frequent the communication with the connection, the greater the number of communication tools used to communicate , provided certain conditions are met, such as uniform availability of tools .
To understand the issue of relationship multiplexity and SNS use in the workplace, we are focusing our analysis on two dimensions of relationships between colleagues: professional vs. personal closeness.
As a conceptual framework, Table 1 illustrates how professional and personal closeness vary along the spectrum of strong and weak ties.
Strong professional ties work closely together and frequently exchange information relating to work tasks and critical job-related information.
Strong personal ties also communicate regularly, but may not work together, and the primary basis of their communication is for emotional, or non-task oriented, support.
Strong tie Professional Closeness Work in the same group or on same project; Exchange frequent information about work tasks.
Long relationship history, communicate regularly; Exchange news of major and minor life events.
Weak tie Communities of practice, professional organizations; Exchange work tips.
Lost touch colleagues, people you work near, but not with; Exchange casual banter.
Based on this framework, this paper answers two research questions.
The first is: How does behavior on a company-internal social network site reflect the relationships between a company's employees?
By answering this initial question, this work contributes to the broader research on measuring the strength of ties in social media by adding a new context, the workplace, to the existing findings on external sites.
Based on the issues of relationship multiplexity in the workplace, our second question is: What are the strongest behavioral predictors of professional versus personal closeness in the workplace?
By answering this question, we will be providing a mechanism for detecting these two facets of workplace relationships.
And in understanding how professional and personal closeness predicts weak and strong ties, we expect to determine the important behavioral factors that describe the four combinations in Table 1.
The following section discusses enterprise social network sites and related work in this area of understanding how employees use these sites.
A growing number of companies are launching internal deployments of social network sites to encourage employees to share both professional and personal information with each other on the corporate intranet .
These sites are frequently built with commercial tools and customized for the company, and they often share a core set of features that can also be found on external SNSs: * Employees can create online profiles that can be customized with a wide range of content, typically including about-you's .
Users can articulate their relationships with other coworkers by connecting to them on the site.
The primary activity on the internal SNS is content sharing, which can include status message updates, photo sharing , lists sharing , and blogs .
Many of the sites support commenting so that conversations between employees can occur across the site, and serve as a mechanism for informal communication between employees.
Why do IBM employees use Beehive?
In terms of content, users share a wide range of information on the site, from describing hobbies and personal life events to discussing project ideas and brainstorming around corporate-driven topics.
The personal and professional content co-exist and is encouraged to, by the design of the site .
Previous research on the site's active users found that they were using the site for "social browsing" : discovering and connecting with colleagues that they did not know well at all .
This indicates, along with the previous work describing the mixture of professional and personal content, that Beehive is used for communicating with weak ties of both a professional and personal nature.
Employees additionally report being motivated to use the site to promote their careers and the projects within the company, both professional pursuits.
This site is an environment in which employees interact and communicate with each other in different ways, and all of this communication likely signals the type and strength of their relationships.
Yet other sites, such as Facebook and LinkedIn, likely have similar data about coworker connectedness.
For example, Skeels and Grudin studied the use of Facebook and LinkedIn at Microsoft and identified three primary uses: reconnecting with distant colleagues and friends, maintaining and sharing CV information, and building social capital .
Furthermore, SNSs are not the only social software which reflects relationship strength about coworkers.
To support social network analysis, as well as to develop applications for enterprise tasks such as expert finding, social network information has been extracted from enterprise applications such as email , and document repositories such as patenting and co-authorship databases , and combinations of multiple internal enterprise sources .
In these example works, relationship strength is calculated by the number of ties or connections between individuals and via other indications of communication, yet this research has not included verifying which behaviors are indicative of relationship strength.
Additionally, an SNS behind the firewall typically directly connects each profile to information in the company's employee directory and users typically log in to the SNS with their corporate identification.
Different facets of relationships cannot be selectively expressed on different tools in the enterprise because the tools are linked to one another and this tension between professional identity and non-professional identity is brought together.
This lack of anonymity, or rather this persistent identity throughout the corporate intranet, is one the reasons why we hypothesize that the communication on a corporate SNS particularly reflects the multiple aspects of relationships with colleagues, not simply the personal side which is reflected on an external site such as Facebook.
On an SNS, where the social norm is to share on a more personal level, multiple tensions can arise in terms of what information to share with whom .
This paper focuses on the SNS Beehive that was deployed at IBM in 2007.
Since launching, 60,000 employees joined the site  and between 6000 and 13,000 employees are currently visiting the site each month.
Over 400,000 network connections have been made between employees and 150,000 comments have been left on thousands of profiles, photos and lists.
Beehive has many features common on Internet SNSs such as articulated social networks, profile pages, photo sharing, status updates, and commenting on profiles and content.
Because of this, behavior on Beehive can be generalized to behavior on any SNS.
As mentioned in the previous section, company intranet authentication credentials are used for logging into the site, so browsing and connecting is never anonymous.
Another key difference between Beehive and Internet SNSs is users can view each other's content without being connected: any user can see any other user's profile and all of their publicly shared photos and lists without being a "connection" of the user.
Users can also leave comments on any of the profiles and content on the site.
A specific, unique feature of Beehive, which will turn out later to be of significance, is content recommendations.
A user can recommend a photo, for example, to another user as something they might find interesting.
And unlike common Internet SNSs, there is no private messaging on Beehive.
These differences limit the generalizability of an analysis of behavior on the site.
To determine if coworker relationship strength is revealed through interaction on an internal SNS, we asked the company's SNS users to subjectively rate the closeness of their relationships with people they had interacted with on the site over the previous year.
Then we analyzed different aspects of their online interaction, along with company directory information, by using a regression model to determine if these factors could accurately predict the subjective judgments of relationship closeness.
The questions in the subjective rating task asked about professional and personal closeness, enabling our analysis to separate out these two different concepts.
For the task, subjects were asked to map up to 50 of their colleagues that they had interacted with on Beehive.
These `friends' that the subject rated were either employees the subject had listed as connections on their profile page, or employees whom they had commented on at least 3 times or had viewed at least 10 times during the last year.
To address the issue that subjects may not remember viewing 10 pages of a particular employee's content, subjects were allowed to mark any of these people as "strangers" and this would remove them from the mapping task.
The mapping task asked three questions regarding general closeness, professional closeness and personal closeness: Q1: "How strong is your relationship with each of these people?"
Q2: "How closely are you currently working with each of these people?"
Q3: "How likely are you to talk about your non-work life with each of these people?"
To answer each question on a range of "not at all" to "very," subjects dragged their friends from a list onto a circular canvas, where the closer the friend's picture was placed to the subject's picture in the center, the closer the subject indicated the relationship was.
Figure 1 shows a screenshot of the tool.
The pixel distance from the center of the user to each friend then was used as a continuous measurement of closeness.
We asked users to map their friends in one single step for each question to avoid possible task fatigue .
By using a circular target, all friends could be mapped without occluding each other and could be rated in relation to one another, a method also used by .
The angular position was not used for this analysis, but because users may have interpreted the angular position as meaningful, this is a potential weakness of our data collection method.
The first question, addressing general closeness, correlated strongly with both the professional question and the personal question , while the responses to the professional and personal closeness questions had a lower correlation to each other .
Higher absolute value of the r-value indicates stronger correlation and the p-value indicates the significance of the existence of such correlation.
The means, standard deviations and distributions for the three questions are shown in Table 2.
This close correlation of the general question with the other two is a good indication that this question is in fact general, while the other two questions address more specific aspects of the relationship.
The subjects' responses to the prior three questions were treated as the dependent variables in the analysis.
After collecting and cleaning the data 1 , 93 subjects' ratings produced 4009 subject-friend pairs available for analysis.
Using pixel distance, relationship strength was transformed to a scale between 0  to 1 .
Any friends placed outside the circle were rounded to a radius of 1.
The friends marked as strangers prior to the mapping tasks were coded as 1.1.
Description of Coding Same floor , same building , same work campus , same state , same country , or different countries  Whether subject and friend report to the same manager  Subject is a manager or not  Friend is a manager or not  Whether subject and friend are in the same company division or not  Whether subject and friend have direct management relationship  Whether subject and friend are in the same management chain but not a direct reporting relationship 
Cronbach's alpha is a measure of how well individual variables vary, indicating the reliability of the single factor representing the multiple individual variables.
As potential predictors of relationship closeness, we gathered data from Beehive's server logs on user viewing and contributing behavior over the 12 months prior to the rating task.
These logs provided activity information for both the subject and the subject's friends, as well as the interaction between them and the subject's and the friend's interactions with their mutual connections.
We also collected data from the company's employee directory to gather basic organizational information such as office location and the hierarchical distance between each subjectfriend pair.
53 variables from Beehive were collected.
Because many of these variables were highly correlated with each other , a Principle Component Analysis  was performed to produce a smaller set of uncorrelated variables  as shown in Table 3.
The PCA process also transformed these variables from action counts, following power-law distributions, into standard normal distributions.
The 18 factors used going forward fall into four categories: the subject's behavior on the SNS, the friend's behavior, the interactions between the subject and the friend, and the interaction the subject and the friend had with any mutual connections on the site.
The company's employee directory provided additional information about the relationship between the subject and the friend: the hierarchical relationship, as well as relative physical location.
Table 4 lists these individual variables with explanations of how these variables were coded, either as nominal or ordinal variables.
The 25 factors listed in Tables 1 and 2  were entered into the regression model in a stepwise method.
This method found 10 significant factors contributed to general closeness, 11 contributed to the professional closeness, and 14 contributed to the personal closeness.
For the purpose of comparison among these three questions, a superset consisting of these 17 factors were put into a regression for each of the three dependent variables and these results are presented here.
Table 5 presents the overall results.
The model predicts relationship closeness across all three questions with approximately 20-24% predictive power The model performs slightly better when predicting general closeness and professional closeness strength.
The Maximum Absolute Error , expressing prediction accuracy, indicates closeness can be predicted with 71-73% accuracy.
Because our research questions are focused on whether or not behavior on an SNS reflects relationship strength, it makes sense that both the subjects and the subjects' friends should be active on the SNS for this detection to occur.
By narrowing down the sample from 4009 subject-friend pairs to the 1614 pairs where the friends met our threshold for active on the site3, we significantly improved the model's predictive power.
By just considering the active subject-friend pairs, the predictive power of the model increases to 28-34% and prediction accuracy improves 78-82%.
Again, the model is strongest at predicting the general closeness and the professional closeness.
In the analysis going forward, we focus on this active-pair subset.
After consideration of different models, in particular considering potential interaction terms between our factors, we settled on a linear regression model with only main effects because of its relative ease in interpretation .
The model, with the four categories of SNS behavior factors, plus the company directory information, is represented as:
The negative correlation between a friend's general activity level and closeness on the SNS was unanticipated, but on reflection we believe it indicates that when a friend is very active on the site, communicating with many people, direct communication with the subject then becomes less of an indicator of closeness and more of an indicator of how the friend communicates with everyone on the site.
From the company directory factors, all three types of relationship closeness were stronger when physical distance was closer  and when the subject and friend were in the same company division.
Table 6 presents each of these significant factors with their standardized beta weights.
The darker a table cell's shading, the more significant the factor is in the prediction model.
With these findings, we have answered our first research question and determined which SNS behaviors are most predictive of relationship closeness in the workplace.
To answer our second research question about detecting the differences between professional and personal closeness, we focus in on differences between the beta weights for professional and personal closeness .
The results indicate that a subject viewing a friend's profile and friends and subjects commenting on each other's profiles are predictors of personal closeness, but not professional closeness.
This suggests that personal friends check out and have profile-based conversations with those they feel personally close with, but not with those they have a professionally-focused relationship.
A second finding in terms of SNS behavior is regarding a subject's general activity level on the site.
The switched signs on the beta weights indicate that the more active a subject is on the site, then the more personally close they feel with colleagues, yet the less professionally close they feel with them.
This likely reflects earlier findings on Beehive that users typically connect on a personal level with colleagues on the site .
A direct management relationship between the subject and the friend is an important predictor of professional closeness, but not of personal closeness.
Furthermore, a comparison of the beta weights for whether or not the employees are in the same division show that being in the same division is a much stronger predictor of professional closeness than personal closeness.
These findings are not surprising in the sense that professional relationships are based on corporate hierarchy, not on personal affinity.
Yet this result further confirms that professional and personal closeness are different concepts within the workplace, and these different factors can separate out the distinction between these relations.
In terms of the explanation power of the different categories of factors in the regression model, subject-friend interaction on the SNS is the dominant predicting term, followed by information from the company directory.
Figure 2 shows the relative beta weights of each regression term, comparing the weights for professional vs. personal closeness.
Some of these predictors are less obvious, such as content recommendations between pairs.
Yet when recommending site content to a colleague, you likely have some knowledge of that person's interests, either personally or professionally.
This specialized knowledge about the colleague likely reflects a closer relationship with them.
Another unexpected predictor is that a friend's level of connecting on the SNS has a negative impact on the closeness between the subject and the friend.
This may be explained because of a dilution of communication meaningfulness.
Your friend may be an SNS enthusiast, who posts comments on everyone's profiles every day and connects to many more people than average on the site.
When this person communicates with you on the site, because of their high activity level overall, the communication may not indicate closeness as much as it reflects the friend's general approach to using the SNS for connecting.
Some of our main predictors are consistent with Gilbert's previous work: they also found length and recency of friend communication to be top predictors of tie strength .
Both our results and theirs found that higher interaction with mutual friends was predictive of strong ties.
Additionally, Facebook wall exchanges, the equivalent of our mutual profile commenting, was predictive of strong ties, as it predicted personal closeness in our model.
Focusing on our second research question relating to relationship multiplexity and the differences between professional and personal closeness, our regression model was able to make distinctions between these two types of relationship closeness.
This graph shows that, while the subject-friend interaction on the SNS reveals almost 50% of the information of the subject's personal closeness to a friend, this interaction predicts less than 40% of the professional closeness.
Interaction with mutual connections indicates twice as much about personal closeness  as professional closeness .
In terms of the company directory factors, the directory contributes 29.7% of the predictive power for professional relationships, and 22.7% to predicting personal relationships.
This supports the earlier discussion that hierarchical structure more heavily influences professional relationships than personal relationships.
Regarding our first research question, our results suggest that we can predict relationship strength within the workplace by studying interactions on an SNS.
The strongest predictors of all types of relationship closeness are the distance between offices, whether two people are in the same division or not, whether there is an explicit friendship link established on the SNS, the subject's overall connecting behavior on the site, the friend's general activity, the length and recency of a friend's visits to the subject's profile, content recommendations between the pair and the amount of interaction with mutual connections.
Some of these predictors are pretty straightforward and expected, such as office location: people can be acquaintances from online socializing, but in order to be close friends or colleagues, physical proximity is still important.
This explanation also applies to the finding that being in the same division is predictive of a close relationship.
For example, a direct management connection is a strong predictor of professional closeness, but not predictive of a personal relationship.
This likely reflects the fact that employee-manager relationships are established through upper management decisions, not personal affinity between individuals.
In some ways, earlier analysis of Beehive discovered this through interviews when users claimed they did not use the SNS for keeping up with their "close colleagues" because they already had tools and mechanisms in place for doing this .
It may be that people use the SNS to keep track of those they care about on a personal level, but only intermittently visit the pages and content of those they are currently working with because they do not feel the need to keep up with their SNS activities.
Table 7 summarizes the factors that uniquely predict professional versus personal closeness, across the spectrum of tie strength.
While in the past work was done through paper documents and personal sharing was done around the lunch table or the water cooler, both work and socializing are now done within the digital domain of the corporate intranet.
The findings presented in this work provide new understanding of how employees communicate with their coworkers, by presenting a model for predicting professional and personal relationship closeness based on SNS behavior.
These findings have implications for organizations, research on SNS behavior, and our understanding of relationship multiplexity.
First, organizations are interested in knowing the true social network structure of their organization because this information helps in management reorganization, project funding allocation, and other management-level decisions.
By extracting the predictive factors from an SNS, organizations can detect relationships not reflected in the organizational chart.
Such knowledge may help develop strategies for team formation.
A complication with this issue though is that friends do not always make the best project teammates, because they tend to avoid conflict and excuse lower effort .
For individual employees, social network information can assist employees in finding jobs  and in spreading information between organizational divisions .
Despite the limitation of studying one SNS located within one company, the majority of the variables in the analysis are counts of actions common on SNSs: connecting, commenting, and viewing each other's content.
Our results align with Gilbert's  and add to a continuing understanding of how behavior on an SNS can reflect relationship strength through factors such as profile commenting and mutual connections.
Our work also has implications for understanding online behavior as one facet of our lives.
Relationship multiplexity is a natural part of relationships and balancing different, sometimes conflicting, personae becomes more difficult as online profiles are merging between different sites and with offline experiences.
With knowledge of models that detect different relationship facets, designers of communication tools can incorporate natural segmentation of different communication styles and propose automatic filtering of certain communication for different audiences.
Or alternatively, designers can leave the control up to the users and instead highlight when users are expressing multiplexity in their relationships.
A greater sensitivity to relationship facets will improve the design of future networked applications.
Beehive does not have private messaging and our analysis did not include any private communication between coworkers.
In the workplace people frequently communicate through emails, instant messages, phone calls, and face-to-face meetings, in addition to intranet tools such as the corporate SNS.
Because of this media competition, an analysis of just one resource, such as Beehive, underestimates the intensity of interaction between two persons.
Combining information from multiple resources would improve a prediction model of workplace social network interaction.
In our model the workplace hierarchy and location heavily influenced the predictive power, which makes these findings more difficult to directly compare to findings with Facebook  or a non-corporate SNS, where there is no explicit management hierarchy and private communication does take place.
In terms of data collection, we chose to use a circular target for data collection for methodological and practical reasons, yet there are downsides to this method.
For example, the participants could have found it difficult to determine relationship closeness while they dragged-and-dropped an individual image, requiring tedious readjustment.
Information regarding angular layout, which may be part of a participant's intentional communication , is lost in our current analysis.
In our every day life, we interact with our colleagues, friends and family in different ways, depending on the nature of our relationship.
And a relationship can be comprised of multiple facets, such as a family member who is also part of a circle of friends or a friend who is also a classmate.
The workplace is one setting where these multiple facets are particularly present and complex because people both maintain professionalism and establish close friendships.
This makes the workplace a particularly relevant setting for studying "relationship multiplexity."
