Cellphones have the potential to improve education for the millions of underprivileged users in the developing world.
However, mobile learning in developing countries remains under-studied.
In this paper, we argue that cellphones are a perfect vehicle for making educational opportunities accessible to rural children in places and times that are more convenient than formal schooling.
We carried out participant observations to identify the opportunities in their everyday lives for mobile learning.
We next conducted a 26-week study to investigate the extent to which rural children will voluntarily make use of cellphones to access educational content.
Our results show a reasonable level of academic learning and motivation.
We also report on the social context around these results.
Our goal is to examine the feasibility of mobile learning in out-of-school settings in rural, underdeveloped areas, and to help more researchers learn how to undertake similarly difficult studies around mobile computing in the developing world.
It is a low-power device that can be used in places without reliable electricity.
Even though it is largely purchased for voice communications - which semi-literate users rely on for their social and economic needs - it is also able to run educational software that support visuals and voiceovers.
Most of all, the cellphone is the fastest growing technology platform in the developing world.
There are 2.2 billion mobile phones in developing regions like Africa and India, as compared to only 11 million desktops .
While cellphones can be deployed in schools in developing countries, the greatest opportunity is to facilitate informal learning in out-of-school environments so as to complement formal schooling.
In underdeveloped regions, particularly rural areas, many schools are not only poorly equipped or lack highly-trained teachers.
Worse, school attrition can be prevalent in underdeveloped regions.
For instance, in rural India, about 43% of school-age children cannot attend school regularly because they have to work for the family in agricultural fields or households .
Mobile learning thus empowers poor children to balance their educational and income earning goals, by enabling them to learn anytime, anywhere, in places and times more convenient than school.
According to the World Bank, "there are still precious few widespread examples of the use of  phones for education purposes inside or outside of classrooms in developing countries that have been well documented, and fewer still that have been evaluated with any sort of rigor" .
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
This paper's contribution is to report on how rural children use cellphones in their everyday lives when they were given access to cellphones throughout 26 weeks.
The cellphones were pre-loaded with our applications that target English as a Second Language  - an important "gateway" to economic advancement in India - but our findings should generalize to other subject matter.
To our knowledge, this is the first study on how rural children in the developing world used cellphones in their everyday lives, when researchers were not present to artificially influence participants to use the phones for learning.
As the first such study, it is inevitably exploratory.
We wanted to understand the opportunities for children to engage in mobile learning in everyday rural settings.
More importantly, what are the social contexts that exist in these settings?
What are the challenges to mobile learning in such naturalistic settings?
Klopfer  adds that mobile learning games are not only engaging, but can also account for the user's context and environment to improve on the learning process.
Mobile learning has been applied to the domains of nursing education , online communities  and distance education .
However, all of the above studies are based in developed world settings.
A major contribution of this paper is instead to explore the scope of mobile learning in poorer developing regions of the world.
The first week focused on getting a glimpse of the participants' everyday lives.
We carried out participant observations, after which we analyzed our field data to construct accounts for "a day in the life of a child."
We then offer plausible scenarios for everyday, cellphoneenabled learning that emerged from these accounts.
In all, we identified 9 distinct scenarios.
In the second week, we examined the feasibility of these scenarios by having participants use our mobile learning applications during various times in the day.
Instead of imposing predefined tasks, we encouraged the children to come up with their own ways of using the applications.
Our observations and interviews gave us preliminary insights to these scenarios.
A researcher who is a native of India led this 2-week field study.
Her grandparents taught her the social norms around village life when she grew up in a village.
Her education on rural culture continued over a seven-year stint as a social worker in villages throughout North and South India.
She speaks 5 official languages in India, including Hindi, which was the participants' native language.
She was introduced to the villagers by a respected community leader who had excellent ties with the community and was supportive of our study.
His support helped us to establish our credibility among the villagers.
To mitigate this barrier, she cultivated ties with the lower castes by not spending her time exclusively at the community leader's home.
To gain further acceptance, she wore the traditional garb that the participating families wore, spoke their dialect, and accepted the refreshments they offered.
Phase 2: Deployment in Naturalistic Setting  with 18 children from 15 households to understand their mobile learning behaviors in everyday rural settings.
This phase built on the initial lessons that we learned about various rural scenarios for everyday, mobile learning from phase 1.
We are not the first researchers who have evaluated mobile learning in the developing world.
It has been examined in the context of specific developing regions like Africa , China  and India .
Moreover, Brown  draws a comparison between the existing e-learning techniques and opportunities for mobile learning; whereas Wang et al.
With the exception of studies by Scanlon et al.
This paper hence extends the body of knowledge about mobile learning to unsupervised settings in the developing world.
The entire study was conducted in two phases:  summer 2008, and  spring and summer 2009.
The time spent in the field totaled 28 weeks.
The field research took place in two neighboring villages in a mango-growing district in the northern state of Uttar Pradesh in India.
By rural standards, one village was relatively prosperous while the other was typical.
We chose to work with both communities because we have had a successful history of running mobile learning trials with them, one of which was a pilot deployment that took place as an after-school program three times per week over an entire semester .
In those studies, researchers were present throughout all sessions.
This study was a significant departure in that we wanted to understand rural children's mobile learning behaviors in non-school, everyday settings.
It is infeasible for researchers to be present in these settings - some of which are private social spaces - over months.
Worse, the presence of researchers could artificially affect participant behavior.
We believe that we have had enough successes with both rural communities to collect meaningful data without needing our researchers to supervise their use of cellphones.
It was unfeasible to re-enroll all participants from phase 1 into phase 2 since the latter, being significantly longer-term than the former, implied that their parents needed to take responsibility for the phones we loaned, In the beginning of phase 2, we interviewed participants on their demographics such as their ages and grades they were enrolled in.
We loaned each participant a Motorola Razr V3m cellphone that was preloaded with our mobile learning applications.
Participants were asked to keep the cellphones for the entire duration of phase 2 and could put the phones to any uses so long as they had parental permission.
This flexibility was important in allowing us to examine, under naturalistic conditions, the degree to which participants will engage in mobile learning voluntarily.
In the first 10 weeks, we visited the villages twice per week to train the participants to play the applications and show them how to troubleshoot technical problems.
We also used these occasions to hold short, semi-structured interviews with participants on their use of the cellphones.
We ceased these visits after the 10th week, when it seemed participants could use the cellphones on their own, so as to transition the study from a controlled setting to an unsupervised setting.
In order to collect more data about participant use of the mobile applications, we designed these applications to log user actions.
We had also designed these applications such that they took the form of game-like activities, to motivate participants to play them in the absence of teachers.
Due to the challenges that we will describe later, however, we were only able to retrieve the logs from 13 of the 18 cellphones at the end of phase 2.
In the last two weeks of phase 2, we conducted exit interviews in order to obtain qualitative data that helped us contextualize our logs.
We observed that our participants' everyday lives revolved around four functional contexts beside school: agricultural work, household chores, home and play.
In particular, key differences in these everyday contexts seemed to be highly delineated along two major social factors, i.e.
Owing to agricultural work, we observed qualitative differences in the activities of the boys between school and non-school days during different times of the day.
But there were no significant differences between school and nonschool days for the girls since their lives revolved around domestic work.
Given the non-homogeneity among participants in our field data, we shall attempt to simplify this complexity for the reader by emphasizing the similarities across participants along the major dimensions of gender, caste and time of day .
Specifically, we constructed accounts of a school and non-school day in the lives of the following four hypothetical characters.
Two siblings come from an uppercaste home: Amit  and Gauri Trivedi .
The second pair of siblings Hari  and Resham Gautam  belong to a lower-caste household.
These archetypes have been constructed so as to deliberately represent the entire spectrum across age, caste and gender to the maximum extent possible.
This phase took place over 2 weeks.
The first week was spent understanding the daily lives of the participants and identifying scenarios for mobile learning in unsupervised settings.
The second week examined the feasibility of these scenarios by asking our participants to use mobile learning applications under conditions that reflect these scenarios.
Participants for this phase were recruited through snowball sampling, i.e.
In total, they comprised 45 children from 20 households, broken down as: 6 upper-caste girls, 3 upper-caste boys, 23 lower-caste girls and 13 lower-caste boys.
This breakdown mirrored the local demographics.
These children were between 7 and 18 years old .
The participants were from 3 different schools in the community - 2 private and 1 public.
These schools mostly varied in their affordability, i.e.
Attending school for the poorer children also implied less time to earn a living from working in the fields.
More importantly, English teachers in all schools were unable to converse with us in English, thus supporting the need to supplement English classes in school for participants.
Among the 20 households from the above community who participated in the study, we learned that all of them owned a cellphone each, with at least two households owning more than one cellphone each.
The phone was usually used by the eldest male in the family.
In poorer households, children were allowed to receive calls, but not play cellphone games due to the fear that they may drop the phones.
In wealthier homes, children were allowed to play games on the phones, and one boy possessed a phone of his own.
Both Gauri and Resham wake up earlier than their brothers because the girls are responsible for all the household chores in the morning like cooking and house cleaning.
In contrast, the boys wake up and go straight to school if it is a school day.
If it is not a school day, both Amit and Hari head to the fields.
The children are busy in classes for the entire duration while they are in school, except for a 15- or 20-minute break in the middle of their school day.
On non-school days, the girls Resham and Gauri stay at home to help with household chores, and possibly also any agricultural work.
For Resham and Gauri, work is not a continuous activity - instead it occurs sporadically and they often have "idle time" between "bursts" of activity.
Hari works as a hired laborer who plucks mangoes or tends to fields belonging to Amit's family, while Amit's supervises child laborers including Hari.
An upper-caste boy plays an e-learning game on a cellphone, sheltered from the sun by a tent in the fields .
In fact, upper-caste boys spend so much time in the fields that the inside of the tent's roof became a convenient location for stashing things that they use while in the fields .
Upon return from school, Reshma and Gauri help with household chores e.g.
Later, when the adults take an afternoon siesta, Gauri plays indoors or in the backyard with her neighbor's daughters.
She stays indoors because it is socially unacceptable for girls in general and upper-caste girls in particular to roam about in the streets.
In contrast to Gauri, lower-caste girls such as Reshma are expected to go out to the fields to graze their goats during the afternoons.
On the other hand, boys such as Amit and Hari are allowed to go outside to play outdoors with other boys in the village.
In the afternoon on a non-school day, while Reshma and Gauri follow the above routine, Hari helps to transport the mangoes which he plucked in the morning to Amit's home.
Amit takes the mangoes to the market to sell.
From "a day in the life accounts" such as the ones above, we analyzed them to identify opportunities for mobile learning.
A child uses a mobile learning game when walking to school or work.
Since the child has to concentrate on walking on the road, audio-based learning applications that do not distract the child from paying attention to where he or she is heading are more viable.
A girl plays an e-learning game on a cellphone when she has downtime between housework.
We found that there is intermittent downtime between chores, such as cleaning the home, cooking, washing dishes, gathering firewood and getting fodder for cattle.
C. An upper-caste child  plays a cellphonebased e-learning game when in the fields.
We do not expect boys from the lower castes to use their cellphones in the fields, since they would have to be at work as hired laborers.
In contrast, upper-caste boys have time to play e-learning games in the fields, since they are present only to supervise their hired laborers.
D. A girl is sharing a cellphone with other girls and is playing an e-learning game with them, just as the adults are taking their afternoon rest at home.
E. A lower-caste child  plays an e-learning game on a cellphone while grazing the goats outdoors.
This scenario only applies to lower-caste households, who are the only people to keep goats.
In such families, it is the girls who take the goats out to graze.
F. A boy is sharing a cellphone with other boys and is playing an educational game together with them, in the afternoon.
Since boys are permitted to go outdoors more freely than the girls, boys have access to a greater social circle of playmates.
In any case, children never player with other children from different castes.
G. A boy plays an e-learning game on a cellphone during his free time in the evening before dinner.
On the other hand, after girls have completed their homework in the evening before dinner-time, they would be occupied in the kitchen helping their mothers prepare dinner.
On a school day, in the evening, both Resham and Gauri help to prepare dinner at home.
They are interrupted every few minutes by a family member who asks them to do some housework chores.
Both the girls do their homework in the free time between chores.
On the other hand, Amit and Hari either do their homework or watch TV until dinnertime at night.
On a non-school day, Amit keeps watch in the fields with his upper-caste friends.
While keeping watch, they would also listen to the radio or play board games like snake and ladder.
On the other hand, Hari stays at home to finish his homework or goes to his neighbor's house to watch TV.
In contrast Reshma and Gauri have housework to do all day.
On a school day, Hari and Amit watch TV at a neighbor's or his home respectively before having dinner.
After dinner, they stay up for an hour before going to bed.
Resham and Gauri wash the dishes after their families had dinner.
Like the boys, Resham and Gauri also find an hour of free time before they go to bed.
During non-school days, Amit keeps watch in the fields at night.
Accompanied by other upper-caste boys in the fields, Amit sleeps in tents that are erected in the fields .
On the other hand, Hari stays at a neighbor's home to watch TV.
H. Siblings play an e-learning game together as a group, on a cellphone that they are sharing, in their free time between dinner and bedtime.
In both upper- and lowercaste families, boys have more time than girls to play.
But after the girls have completed the housework, they have time to play with their brothers, albeit usually as passive observers.
I. Upper-caste boys share a cellphone in order to play an e-learning game, while they keep watch in the mango groves either in the day or the night.
We needed to investigate the extent to which the above scenarios were culturally appropriate within the rural Indian context.
As such, in the second week of phase 1, we asked participants to use a suite of e-learning software prototypes over various times of day.
Initial results showed that with the exception of scenario A, the other scenarios seem to be feasible.
Here's why: An upper-caste boy said he would not take the cellphone to school lest it was stolen.
Similarly, 2 girls from lower-caste households told us that their parents prohibited them from taking their cellphones out of their homes for fear of theft.
Hence, although we had imagined children learning via cellphones when walking to school or work in scenario A, this scenario did not appear feasible when school was the destination.
On the other hand, we saw 2 upper-caste boys carrying their cellphones with them when they were in their fields.
Likewise, participants took our phones to their neighbors' and their own homes to show the mobile learning games to their friends.
Despite an initial reluctance from parents in the two village communities to enroll their children in the study due to the need to be accountable for the phones, we faced a deluge of interest from more parents after a few parents agreed to have their children participate in the study.
In total, parents expressed interest to have 25 children participate.
We had to turn 7 children away because they did not exhibit, on a screening test, the level of prerequisite English knowledge that would enable them to cope with the curriculum in our mobile learning games.
The 18 children came from 15 households and were broken down as follow: 2 upper-caste girls, 6 upper-caste boys, 7 lower-caste girls and 3 lowercaste boys.
There was no attrition throughout the study.
14 out of 18 participants came from families who owned at least one cellphone.
In general, cellphones were primarily used by the eldest male member in the family.
7 children belonged to families who owned phones with color screens, as opposed to monochrome displays.
At least 5 of the above families had cellphones that were programmable i.e.
Most cellphones owned by participating families had commercial games such as Snake pre-installed.
From our demographics interviews, we learned that participants previously played these games on their fathers' or elder brothers' cellphones.
The boy is attempting to take the cellphone away from his sisters .
Since girls in India are conditioned to accede to the male members in their families, they handed the cellphone to him.
They were not only denied their chance to play the educational game on the cellphone, but also had to "wait on" their brother by holding the phone for him .
In phase 1, we observed that the children's mobile learning behaviors varied with their caste, gender and the time of the day during which the participants tried out the mobile learning games .
However, this phase left us with some open questions that needed to be answered in order to understand the efficacy of mobile learning in the absence of supervision from facilitators or instructors: * What are some patterns of cellphone usage that are observed over a non-trivial length of time in the absence of supervision from researchers?
Participants were loaned cellphones with preloaded games.
Due to the non-existence of mobile learning games that target rural children, we designed and implemented a set of games for phase 2.
The game designs are based on traditional village games which have been found to be intuitive, engaging and motivating for rural children .
In total, we had four different game designs that targeted different ESL competencies spanning across both oral and written modalities.
The games that targeted vocabulary covered a total of 180 word families.
Although the study took place in a rural setting, there were electrical outlets in all but 2 of the participants' homes to recharge their phone batteries.
The real challenge was that the power supply was irregular or unstable.
For example, electricity could be randomly available on the grid for 2 hours in the afternoon and for another 2 hours at night.
One of the participating families owned a power generator at home that was used to charge its phones.
This family was among the wealthiest in the community.
Their children would therefore recharge our cellphones at their parents' workplaces.
Lastly, at least 4 households in the study had power outlets at home that supplied electricity with highly fluctuating voltages.
This fluctuation damaged our battery chargers and required us to replace the chargers twice to these 4 families in the first 10 weeks of phase 2.
It turned out that these 4 families were among the poorest in the community and could not afford their own cellphones.
They were hence unaware that their electrical outlets could not support cellphone chargers until enrolling in our study.
Worse, we observed that the power situation was exacerbated since participants enjoyed watching and/or listening to music clips on the phones .
These multimedia applications consumed more power than regular cellphone applications and drained their batteries more quickly.
Participants also exchanged wallpapers and ringtones with one another on our cellphones.
Lastly, at least 4 participants paid about 10 rupees  per month for prepaid calling cards, which they used to make voice calls to other participants.
Despite the above electricity challenges, participants were still able in most cases to keep their cellphones sufficiently charged to access our e-learning games, as our logs showed.
On average, participants accessed the games for a total of 46 hours  throughout the entire study, i.e.
2 hour 23 minutes in each week.
Figure 4 shows the breakdown by each participant.
These participants are marked by asterisks in Figure 4.
We saw several social rituals around electricity.
Participants who lacked an electricity outlet or generator at home relied on their neighbors who did to recharge our cellphones.
The latter households were generally more than willing to allow neighbors to recharge our cellphones using their generators, but the former seemed hesitant to take advantage of the latter's generosity on every occasion, potentially due to the implied obligations.
In addition, we observed that participants would not leave their cellphones plugged into the wall outlets while away from home because it was considered unsafe to leave equipment lying around without their constant vigilance.
In our exit interviews, participants reported that on average, they spent 75% of their time with our mobile application in their homes , as compared to 15% at a neighbor's or relative's home , and the remaining 15% outdoors in the fields .
Participants engaged in mobile learning more often in their own homes than elsewhere for two reasons:  concern about the cellphone's security, and  the summer heat, such that the home was cooler than outdoors.
We learned that both users had learned to perform these tasks from watching us fixed similar problems in the field for the participants.
Both of them seemed to have spent a significant amount of time familiarizing themselves with the mobile learning applications on our phones - they in fact corresponded to participants 17 and 18 in Figure 4 who had used these applications for the longest duration.
On average, power users spent 7 hours and 38 minutes  per week with the mobile learning games.
In comparison, non-power users spent 35 minutes  per week on the games.
The type of mentorship varied by the age, relationship and gender of the other participant.
If the other participant was a boy, girls mentored by giving a direction to the gameplay without actually sharing the cellphone.
On the other hand, if the other participant was a girl, both participants would share the cellphone.
In the latter case, if the girls were friends, either of them could assume the mentors role; whereas in the case of siblings, the elder girl would assume the mentor's role.
The girls hid our cellphones near those places where they worked, e.g., hanging a cellphone from the roof's beam  or hiding it in cupboards in the kitchen .
Doing so allowed them to finish a household chore and resume gameplay while making it more difficult for their brothers to take the phones while the girls were not using them.
Specifically, in the case of the 4 girls, the cellphones had been monopolized by their brothers who were non-participants in our study .
The girls were afraid that their brothers would take the cellphones when their use of the phones was interrupted by housework assignments.
Hence, the girls tried to hide the phones from their brothers in convenient locations such as the kitchen cupboards while they were occupied with housework .
In the case of the boy, we learned that his cellphone was monopolized by his elder brother.
We corroborated the above reports against the voice, photo and video recordings that were made on those cellphones, as well as how the title menus had been personalized, all of which suggested that the phones were monopolized by a different boy for most of the time.
The existing relationships among participations prior to the study, and new relationships that were formed through the gaming activities.
Boys and girls among the participants are organized spatially in this diagram based on their village  and caste .
The number next to each child stands for his or her participant ID .
An asterisk is placed next to those participants to indicate that the regular user for their cellphones was likely to be a brother who was monopolizing the phones.
Apart from the above roles that children exhibited in interacting with other children, we learned that participants drew closer to one another in the process of interacting with one another to discuss topics about the cellphones or games.
The boys who were already friends with one another prior to the study played the educational games in one another's company and helped their weaker peers to learn the targeted syllabus.
Even when there was a significant disparity in the friends' ability to play the games, they would nevertheless stick together such that the better gamer helped the weaker ones.
The above patterns were also observed among girls in the study.
Introducing the e-learning games did not only strengthen existing social relationships, but also facilitated new ties to be formed.
In other words, more children from different castes, genders and villages who were not previously acquainted bonded through the process of helping one another play the e-learning games.
By the end of the study, 10 new pair-wise relationships between friends had developed.
Most significantly, 8 and 3 of these 10 new ties took place across caste and village divisions respectively .
We illustrate these social changes in Figure 6, which depict the participants according to their castes  and villages .
Most importantly, the social relations that were developed in the context of this gaming community were observed to transfer to the participants' everyday lives, in which they continued to interact more deeply with one another in realworld, non-gaming settings.
For example, from our interviews, we learned that the boys who had bonded through the games supported each other when one of them received a scolding at school.
Similarly, we observed that boys would wait after school to accompany the girls  home if they had long distances to walk.
We analyzed the log entries from our mobile applications to assess the extent of learning that occurred.
Figure 7 shows the average number of new words that participants covered in each week with our e-learning games, whereas Figure 8 shows the cumulative number of words covered per week by the average participant.
From Figure 7, it appeared that the usage patterns were fluctuating until week 9 due to novelty effects and/or our physical presence in the community.
As such, for our analysis, we only considered the logs for week 10 and onwards when the study entered "steady state".
Furthermore, due to the challenges such as cellphone malfunctioning and battery "swelling" which we describe later, Figure 7 and Figure 8 represents data from 13 participants whose logs we were able to retrieve.
Figure 7 shows that on average, each child covered 3 new vocabulary words per week  in the mobile learning games.
Between weeks 10 and 25, each participant covered an average of 46 new words .
Moreover, no new words appeared to have been covered in week 18, i.e.
A plausible explanation is the occurrence of village elections in weeks 18 and 19, during which the majority of villagers participated in pre-election rallies, thereby affecting their levels of cellphone use.
On average, the amount of time that a participant spent on the mobile learning games in one continuous session was 62 minutes , and each participant engaged in 2 sessions  per week.
Here's why: first, only the girls reported in the exit interviews that they had shared the cellphones with someone else.
This playmate was always a non-participant.
More importantly, since our e-learning games targeted a curriculum that was attainable only for participants, participants would have to mentor their friends to complete the words.
It was not practical to seek out parents to interview them on their thoughts about the educational benefits of the mobile learning games.
From past experience, we expected them to be predisposed to telling us out of courtesy that the games were indeed educational.
However, even though we did not conduct such interviews, 9 adults approached us voluntarily when they saw us and shared their positive perceptions.
More important, whereas their children used to spend their free time loitering in the rural vicinity, parents observed that their children had been spending more time with the cellphones - presumably for learning English - after the study began.
In fact, mothers believed that child participants were benefiting from the mobile applications to the extent that we should also design similar applications for rural adult education: First woman: Can we also not learn from this cellphone?
Do you have a program to teach women from rural village also?
Researcher: Our current study is designed for children only.... Do you think cellphones will help you learn something?
We keep sitting idle at home all day.
I think we can learn something if you give us the cellphones.
We found out that several women in the community had to discontinue their schooling when they had to marry at an early age.
Mobile learning could therefore empower them to engage in lifelong learning.
The key is what constitutes "good learning conditions."
In our study, the typical participant achieved this level of learning progress with 2 hours and 23 minutes of mobile learning per week.
Furthermore, it does not appear that poor learner motivation was the factor here: only 11% of all mobile learning sessions ended as a result of the participant providing an incorrect response.
It seemed that in most of the cases, participants ceased their sessions for reasons other than frustration with their performance.
From phase 1, we had learned that variables such as caste, gender and time of the day were likely to influence mobile learning behaviors significantly.
We therefore wanted to perform a finer-grain analysis of our log data to understand how mobile learning behaviors varied with these variables.
But there was inadequate data to perform this statistical analysis.
This was not only due to the fact that 5 phones had malfunctioned to the extent that we could not turn them on at the end of the study to retrieve the logs on them.
Instead, the real problem was that the batteries in 6 cellphones had "swelled" after week 10 to the extent that these cellphones could be turned on after their batteries were replaced .
Consequently, participants were only able to use the phones up to a certain point in phase 2.
The likeliest explanation for the swelling was that the phone batteries had been exposed to extreme heat.
We believe that the cause was due to the phones being left in the kitchen when participants tried to hide them from their brothers.
This explanation is supported by the fact that these 6 cellphones had all been assigned to girls, including the 4 girls who self-reported that their brothers had been monopolizing their cellphones.
There seemed to be a combination of social and technical barriers, such that mobile learning in rural, underdeveloped areas could become more prevalent should these obstacles be overcome.
The attitudes of rural parents towards their children's education, especially their bias that educational opportunities should be made more accessible to their sons instead of their daughters, appeared to be at work here.
For instance, brothers could not have monopolized the phones that we loaned to their sisters if parents had not given tacit consent to this behavior.
It is not clear if and how we could design technology so as to mitigate such effects.
We not only plan to investigate designs in which the cellphones and mobile learning applications were designed to appeal only to girls and not boys.
We also plan to explore game designs that encourage those group sharing behaviors exhibited in some of the scenarios from phase 1, such that girls could play an explicit mentoring role and learn something in the process, even if the actual cellphone user might be a boy.
We have found that gender attitudes remain a significant challenge, and this topic will be a major emphasis in future research.
In comparison, the electricity barrier appears to be more amenable.
Multimedia mobile applications for cellphones in developing regions could be designed so as to perform less energy-intensive computations that drain their batteries less quickly.
Most importantly, our findings regarding power users suggest that more reliable electricity is associated with greater phone use, which could potentially translate into higher learning gains from mobile learning.
In addition, better quality batteries that are more resistant to "swelling" under extreme heat conditions are also more likely to yield more robust devices that promote a greater extent of mobile learning.
Most of all, we learned that our mobile learning games have created a shared context that encouraged the formation of new social ties across caste and village boundaries, which were less likely to have developed otherwise.
Our findings have also pointed to a new opportunity for mobile learning that has not yet been pursued in our research community, namely, mobile learning to promote lifelong learning for mothers.
Even though the above findings are mixed, we remain cautiously optimistic about the future of mobile learning in the developing world.
At the rate that an average participant covered 46 new words over a span of 16 weeks, it seemed reasonable to expect each participant to have covered over 150 words in a calendar year.
This paper presents an important step towards this goal.
We have identified opportunities for mobile learning in the everyday lives of rural Indian children.
Based on these insights, we have investigated the extent to which rural children voluntarily engaged in mobile learning when they are unsupervised, and have carried out this study on a sufficient duration that novelty effects were likely to have worn off.
Our results not only show that some degree of academic learning occurred, but that the extent of such learning could potentially be increased if barriers owing to limited electricity and gender attitudes could be overcome.
More broadly, the cellphone is viewed as the "personal computer" of the developing world given its increasing pervasiveness there.
Our experiences and the challenges we have encountered will be beneficial to our colleagues who seek to conduct more rigorous, longer-term evaluations of cellphone applications under naturalistic conditions in these highly difficult environments.
Ford, M., Leinonen, T. MobilED - Mobile tools and services platform for formal and informal learning.
Gregson, J., Jordaan, D., Exploring the challenges and opportunities of m-learning within an international distance education programme.
Athabasca, AB: Athabasca University Press.
Jarkievich, P., Frankhammar, M., and Fernaeus, Y.
In the hands of children: Exploring the use of mobile phone functionality in casual play settings.
Improving literacy in rural India: Cellphone games in an afterschool program.
Designing Digital Games for Rural Children: A Study of Traditional Village Games in India.
Using mobile learning to enhance the quality of nursing practice education.
Klopfer, E. Augmented Learning: Research and Design of Mobile Educational Games.
Koole, M. A Model for Framing Mobile Learning.
Athabasca, AB: Athabasca University Press.
Telecommunications and development: The cellular mobile 'revolution' in India and China, Journal of Creative Communications, vol.
Rekkedal, T., Dye, A. mobile distance learning with PDA's: Development and testing of pedagogical and system solutions supporting mobile distance learners.
The International Review of Research in Open and Distance Learning, 2007.
Mobile technologies: prospects for their use in learning in informal science settings.
In Journal of Interactive Media in Education 2005/25.
Sharples, M., Corlett, D., and Westmancott, O.
The design and implementation of a mobile learning resource.
In Personal and Ubiquitous Computing2002.
Current state of mobile learning.
Wang, M., Shen, R., Tong, R., Yang, F., and Han, P. Mobile learning with cellphones and PocketPCs.
Surveying the use of mobile phones in education worldwide.
This research was funded by the MacArthur Foundation via the HASTAC Digital Media and Learning award 2008 as well as U.S. National Science Foundation .
We thank Suraksha  for collaborating with us on this study.
Anshul Chaurasia, Ashwin Jain, Pallav Vyas, Denny George and Shirley Jain helped develop the mobile learning games that were piloted in this study.
Akhil Mathur, Satyajit Swain, Aman Anand and Kartikey Singh helped in either one of the phases of the deployment.
We thank the Associate Chairs and anonymous reviewers for their invaluable feedback.
Interweaving mobile games with everyday life.
H. T., The role of m-learning in the future of elearning in Africa, 2003, ICDE World Conference.
Cameron, L. Teaching languages to young learners.
Clough, G., Jones, A., McAndrew P., Scanlon, E. Informal learning evidence in online communities of mobile device enthusiasts.
In Mobile Learning: Transforming the Delivery of Education and Training.
Athabasca, AB: Athabasca University Press.
