In the age of space flights and high performance aircrafts, an emerging HCI challenge is to create innovative interactive systems extending current design requirements from Earth ubiquitous 1Gz environment to altered Gz environments.
Designing for extreme environments would enable users to execute perceptual motor tasks efficiently, without unnecessarily increasing cognitive load and the probability of critical errors.
However, meeting such a challenge would require answering first the following question: How does context influence perceptual motor performance in human-computer interaction?
Because extreme environments' stressors impact both human physiology and human psychology, the significance of understanding their synergistic effects on performance is compelling.
Indeed, such an understanding would allow us to predict far more accurately than is currently possible the manner in which extreme environments' stressors affect perceptual motor performance outcomes.
We argue that optimal user interface design for extreme environments such as altered Gz extreme environments can only be derived from such an understanding.
Failure to address extreme environments constraints at the human-computer interaction level may lead to the commission of critical and potentially fatal errors.
This experimental study addresses gaps in our current theoretical understanding of the impact of Gz accelerations and field dependency independency on task performance in human-computer interaction.
It investigates the effects of Gz accelerations and field dependency independency on human performance in the completion of perceptual motor tasks on a personal digital assistant .
We report the results of an experimental study, conducted in an aerobatic aircraft under multiple Gz conditions, showing that cognitive style significantly impacts latency and accuracy in target acquisition for perceptual motor tasks in altered Gz environments and propose design guidelines as countermeasures.
Based on the results, we argue that developing design requirements taking into account cognitive differences in extreme environments will allow users to execute perceptual motor tasks efficiently without unnecessarily increasing cognitive load and the probability of critical errors.
When designing safety-critical systems, addressing contextual issues pertinent to where, how and why systems are used is of paramount importance.
Extreme physical environments, where users typically operate under conditions of risk and stress, have a low tolerance for user error.
Previous work on human performance relevant to the quantified prediction of human performance in extreme environments for cognitive and perceptual motor tasks exhibits a dichotomy at the theoretic level and application level.
At the theoretic level, the emphasis in experimental psychology has been on human information processing models on the one hand , and individual differences in the manner in which information is acquired and processed in the early stages of information processing on the other hand .
A very brief review of theoretic models and application domains relevant to this study is presented followed by a short summary of the impact of altered Gz environments on human performance.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Several theoretic models of information processing are well suited to explaining and predicting human performance in terms of response to visual stimuli in low-level perceptual motor tasks.
The Keystroke-Level Model  derived from Card, Moran and Newell's Model Human Processor  has been applied to a wide range of HCI tasks, and remains a simple but accurate means of generating quantitative estimates of human performance in terms of task execution time.
Whenever a user must select among alternatives in a situation in which there are two or more possible stimuli, Hicks-Hyman's law provides a specific solution to model the decision outcome as a function of n possible alternatives and in terms of reaction time in target selection .
This model also enables quantified predictions of human performance as it predicts that reaction time increases as the logarithm of the number of alternatives.
Fitts' law, in its original form and in its various incarnations, has proved imminently useful in predicting speed-accuracy trade offs at the user interface level.
However, although Fitts' law did provide a reliable mechanism to predict pointing time, it did not provide a direct answer to the problem of predicting error rate.
Subsequent work derived from Fitts' law does provide such a mechanism  and can be used in conjunction with Fitts' law to predict both speed and error rate in target acquisition.
Most importantly for the purpose of this study, Fitts' law, and Hicks-Hyman's law are both well suited not only to the evaluation of a wide range of pointing and selection tasks executed with the archetypal mice and trackballs pointing devices, but also to the evaluation of pointing and selection tasks executed with current tablet-stylus devices and the increasingly prevalent touchscreen devices.
Just as importantly, both laws are particularly relevant in quantifying human performance in target acquisition involving both rapid, aimed movements at lower levels of information processing such as low level perceptual motor tasks on a PDA.
Field independent individuals are characterized by an overt reliance on internal frames of references, while field dependent individuals are characterized by an overt reliance on external frames of reference.
Operationally, field dependency independency measures the degree to which an individual has difficulty discriminating between part or parts of a field, independently of a distracting or confusing contextual field.
Theoretical indices of field dependency independency include tests of perception of the upright as instantiated in the Rod and Frame Test , and tests of disambiguation as instantiated in the Embedded Figures Test  and the Group Embedded Figures Test .
Although both tests target the same construct, they measure two different aspects of field dependency independency.
The EFT and the GEFT reflect individual differences in cognitive and restructuring abilities arising from overt reliance either on undifferentiated structure or on differentiated structure in visual information processing.
The RFT reflects individual differences in perception of the upright arising from overt reliance either on external visual cues or internal vestibular and somatosensory cues in information processing, in situations when vestibular cues may either conflict or conform with visual cues.
These three tests have been widely used as reliable tools in numerous studies and are considered valid indicators of the ability of an individual to perceptually ignore conflicting cues in distracting, misleading, or conflicting contexts .
Finally, Witkin  and his colleagues did not define field dependency independency as a binary construct but rather as a "continuum of individual differences"  in perceptual performance, ranging from extreme field independence to extreme field dependence.
The conceptualization of field dependency independency as a perceptual style has been consistently recognized as a significant contribution to the field of experimental psychology, its influence has been pervasive in several research areas, and it has unified findings reported in many academic disciplines .
Jean Piaget, the noted developmental psychologist, deemed the construct of field dependency independency to be a critical factor in the development of visuoperceptual analysis .
As a theory of individual differences in cognition, and of individual differences in information processing modalities in particular, field dependency independency theory  is highly relevant to the optimization of human performance in the execution of cognitive and perceptual motor tasks.
Field dependency independency is typically discussed as a cognitive or perceptual style, that is as a heuristic that all individuals use to process information in their environment , and to selectively encode this information.
Furthermore, such heuristics are prevalent at numerous levels of information processing, from perceptual scanning speed in color recognition tasks to accuracy in pattern matching such as in letter selection tasks , and complex problem solving tasks .
Developed by Herman A. Witkin following a series of experiments on visual perception, the concept of field dependency independency evolved over time from "perception of the upright" to "perceptual analytical ability".
In other words, the construct evolved from a narrow perceptual skill to a full fledged perceptual style in its own right .
As a cognitive construct, field dependence independence refers to a person's ability to separate a stimulus from its embedding context, and defines the extent to which an individual's perception of a focal stimulus is affected by distracting or con-
The design of displays for safety-critical systems  and mission-critical systems  has largely been implemented under the desktop level paradigm.
However, very little work has been done to extend design guidelines evolved from our cumulative design experience within these two domains to mobile platforms to be used for similar purposes.
Furthermore, notwithstanding the well established potential and the increased use of mobile platforms such as PDA as integrated components of full fledged applications in a variety of extreme environments ranging from altered Gz environments, under sea habitats and space , even less has been done to extend aforementioned design guidelines to mobile platforms for users active in such environments.
As far as safety-critical systems are concerned, prior research has focused on implementing vital sign monitoring applications on a PDA in the context of high-altitude  and altered Gz extreme environments .
As far as missioncritical systems are concerned, prior work investigated the area of RFID identification in space .
We argue that considering both the strenuous demands extreme environments place on human physiology and their severe impact on cognitive functions, due consideration to these issues is long over due if the necessity of optimizing human performance while minimizing cognitive load and the probability of critical error is ever to be enforced at the user interface level.
Extreme environments can be defined as severe ecological systems well outside the range of normal human survival parameters, where optimal human performance predicated on a high level of physiological adaptation, technological innovation, and training is a sine qua non requisite for survival.
Extreme environments act as physiological stressors inducing dysfunctional physiological activity.
In particular, extreme environment stressors such as high acceleration loads impact both human physiology and cognition, sequentially affecting human receptors and proprioreceptors, information processing, and motor control.
A significant degradation of human performance ensues, particularly conspicuous in delays and errors in task execution .
Nonetheless, for the user of a mission-critical or safety-critical system in altered Gz environments, maintaining optimal performance at all times remains a critical requirement.
This combination of factors obviously places severe constraints on the use and design of mobile devices for users operating in such environments.
Traditionally, the G notation is used when referring to rapid transitions between positive and negative G force's values of the acceleration vector.
In particular, the notation Gz refers to the positive or negative values of the acceleration vector along the vertical axis of the acceleration vector, i.e., accelerations parallel to the spine of the human body.
Human physiological responses to Gz acceleration forces are well documented in the medical literature .
The literature discusses a constellation of physiological responses to the impact of Gz acceleration forces whose symptomatology can be summarized as follows:  an inability of the normal cardiovascular system mechanisms to provide adequate circulation to the brain and the eyes, resulting in compounded symptomatology and physiological changes; and  an increased normal weight hydrostatic pressure and physiological ventilation-perfusion gradients in the lungs, resulting in increased pulmonary arterio-venous shunting and subsequent impairment of circulatory oxygenation.
Associated symptomatology includes, but is not limited to, arterial blood pressure fluctuations, decreased cardiac output, cardiac arrhythmias, visual disorders, reduction of peripheral vision , total loss of vision , followed by loss of consciousness .
Individuals exposed to rapid Gz accelerations experience sudden G-LOC without warning,
Typically, G-LOC lasts for 3 to 10 seconds.
After regaining consciousness, individuals typically remain disoriented for another 4 to 11 seconds .
Although generally perceived as a less dramatic response than G-LOC, smaller gravity fluctuations create in individuals an altered state of awareness and a number of associated cognitive impairments referred to as Almost Loss of Consciousness .
The effects of A-LOC on cognitive functions were described as a "disconnection between cognition and the ability to act on it".
Finally, and contrary to widely shared assumptions among aircraft pilots, research shows that exposure to G forces through professional training neither eliminates or diminishes physiological responses to altered G environments , and the use of anti-G suits only slightly delays the onset of "G-LOC" .
Different lines of research investigating the particular influence of these factors on human performance have so far reached a consensus with regard to the dynamic interdependence between extreme environments' stressors, cognition and performance.
In particular, distinct lines of empirical research have conclusively shown that  physiological effects of Gz accelerations adversely impact performance ;  performance in Gz environments correlates negatively with stress ;  performance correlates negatively with field dependency as a perceptual style on a wide range of sensory-motor tasks ;  field-dependency correlates positively with stress ; and  field-dependency-independency is an important determinant in human-computer interaction .
However, a careful review of the relevant literature suggests significant gaps in our understanding of this dynamic interdependence between extreme environments' stressors, individual cognitive differences, and performance.
For instance, little is known regarding interaction effects between extreme environments' physical stressors and human cognitive abilities .
Even less is known regarding interaction effects between field dependency independency as a perceptual style and Gz accelerations as an extreme environment physical stressor .
Acknowledging these gaps in our understanding of this dynamic interdependence of variables and integrating lines of empirical research in cognitive psychology and human physiology, the experimental study reported here investigates how performance varies between field dependent and field independent groups under conditions of alternating Gz accelerations.
The primary purpose of this research is to understand the nature and extent of the combined effects of field dependence-independence and Gz accelerations on human perceptual motor performance.
The experimental design is a 5x2 mixed factorial design with repeated independent measures consisting of 5 levels of the within-subjects factor  and 2 levels of the betweensubjects factor .
The independent variables are  altered Gz environment and  field dependency independency.
The altered Gz environment is operationalized as Gz acceleration loads corresponding to the 5 levels of the Gz acceleration vector coefficient used in this study.
Field dependency independency is operationalized as a dichotomous variable through a block sampling strategy assigning extreme field independent and extreme field dependent participants to the two levels of the independent variable.
Everything else being equal, any differences found in the measurements of the dependent variables between the two levels of the field dependency independency factor and across the five levels of the Gz acceleration factor can only be attributed to either interaction effects of perceptual style and Gz accelerations, main effect of perceptual style, and/or main effect of Gz acceleration.
The dependent variables consist of three individual measures of human performance evaluated in terms of efficiency, effectiveness, and user interaction satisfaction.
Efficiency is operationalized as latency in task execution.
Effectiveness is operationalized as accuracy in task execution.
User interaction satisfaction is operationalized as a self-reported score on the Questionnaire for User Interaction Satisfaction .
A total of 18 participants participated in the study, with 9 field independent and 9 field dependent participants assigned to the two levels of the field dependent independent factor.
A total of 90 non-solicited participants were included into the sampling frame after indicating their intention to volunteer for the experimental study and after taking a standard test for field dependency independency, the Group Embedded Figure Test .
This test, whose scale ranges from zero to eighteen, has been widely used as a reliable instrument in numerous studies and is considered a valid indicator of the ability of an individual to perceptually ignore conflicting cues in distracting, misleading or conflicting contexts.
A typical sampling strategy is to use a theoretical index of field dependency independency such as the GEFT to rank participants on the field independency dependency continuum and to use the median score to divide them into two groups.
Participants whose score falls on or below the median are assigned to the field dependent group, while participants whose score falls above the median are assigned to the field independent group.
However, in order to create two groups of extreme field dependent and extreme field independent participants, this study enforced block sampling as an alternate strategy.
Accordingly, a sample of 18 participants was drawn out of the original pool of 90 participants included in the sampling frame.
The field dependent experimental group consisted of 9 participants who scored between 0 and 9 of the GEFT, and the field independent experimental group consisted of 9 participants who scored between 17 and 18.
The experiment was conducted in a CAP10B aerobatic aircraft, with participants interacting with a Dell AximTM X51v PDA secured to their left or right thigh to a NavPadTM support system.
The CAP10B comes with side-by-side seating, dual control configuration and is stressed to +6Gz and -4.5Gz.
The Dell Axim X51v PDA runs Windows Mobile 5 on a 3.7" LCD with a 640x480 resolution VGA display.
The in-flight support system for the PDA is a hard plastic mount designed to support a PDA on the left or right thigh of the participant.
The mount is then secured to the participant thigh with a Velcro strap.
The NavPad is designed to hold the PDA at a 30 degree angle, presenting to the participant a clear view of the screen at all times.
The experimental set up including the the PDA and the NavPad mount secured to a participant's thigh is presented in Figure 1.
The selection of a PDA as the mobile computing platform for the experimental study was dictated by theoretically driven requirements - touchscreen interface, screen size and resolution, related studies  - as well as more pragmatic concerns - availability, architecture, programmability, safety concerns, ergonomic issues for participants, and restricted accommodation capabilities of the aerobatic aircraft.
Immediately thereafter, one of four different randomly selected letter grid layout screens is presented to the participant.
Each configuration on the screen displays either 4, 9, 16, or 25 non-repeated letters arranged in a grid layout pattern defining each of the four letter selection tasks' configurations.
Immediately after selection, or after a three or four seconds time-out, the screen displays the next task to the participant.
The second task times out at three seconds for all but the 5x5 task configuration.
Due to floor effect observed in pilot studies in the 5x5 letter selection task configuration, the time out for this particular task configuration was increased to four seconds.
Figure 3 shows an example of a randomly generated letter selection task sequence with its random combinations of letter and letter grid layout.
Each button selection task configuration on the screen displays either 4, 9, 16, or 25 buttons arranged in a grid layout pattern.
Figure 2 shows an example of a randomly generated red button task sequence.
Participants are instructed to select the red button as quickly and as accurately as possible.
Immediately after selection, or after a three second time-out, the screen displays the next task to the participant.
Each event of the button selection task times out after being displayed for three seconds.
The third task, implemented around the rod and frame illusion , is designed to evaluate and compare participants' performance in spatial orientation against a baseline previously established on the ground.
The orientation of a vertical rod when viewed in the context of a tilted frame is typically misperceived as the result of the tilt of the frame.
Since the rod and frame illusion is leveraged as a test of field dependency-independency in the rod and frame test   this task also compares participants' performance against a baseline previously established on the ground through the administration of the RFT.
One of the two randomly selected rod and frame events is first displayed by itself in the center of the screen for a duration of two seconds.
Immediately thereafter, a second screen is presented to the participant asking "Was the rod tilted".
The participant has two seconds to answer the question by selecting either one of two buttons labeled "Yes" or "No".
Figure 4 shows each of the two possible field dependent independent task configurations and the associated question screen.
Based on available empirical evidence and a careful review of the literature on individual differences and Gz acceleration physiology, the following three hypotheses were advanced: H1 There will be a statistically significant interaction effect in performance between the Gz accelerations factor and the field dependency field-independency factor on the button selection and letter selection tasks.
H2 Performance will be significantly lower at altered Gz acceleration levels than at the +1Gz acceleration level on the button selection and letter selection tasks.
H3 Performance will be significantly lower for field dependent participants than field independent participants on the button selection and letter selection tasks.
As explained in the Design section, all three tasks were presented to all participants at each of the five levels of the Gz factor.
Each and every specific task's configuration as well as its order of presentation was randomly generated before being hard coded into five different task sequences.
At any particular Gz level, the tasks were presented to the participants within the same unique tasks' configurations sequence assigned to this particular Gz level.
It follows that  at a specific level of the Gz factor all participants to the experiment were presented with exactly the same unique task sequence featuring the same tasks configurations presented in the same order, and  each of the five Gz level specific task sequences displayed in a different order nine tasks configurations unique to this particular sequence.
At each level of the Gz factor the entire task sequence timed out at 29 seconds.
To control for nausea at all Gz levels, participants were to report on the PDA at the end of each task sequence their subjective wellness state before being allowed to continue the experiment.
The PDA "start up" and "wellness" screens are shown in Figure 5.
No participant to the experiment ever became nauseated or reported feeling bad.
For each task event, both latency and accuracy in task execution were recorded.
All experimental data was logged in to a CSV file.
The data output file opened at the beginning of each task, was written to as the time of task completion, and was closed immediately afterward, so all data was recorded even in the case of abnormal termination of the program.
To ensure both familiarity with the software and the tasks, all participants were instructed on how to run the application and were trained on a demo task sequence before the flight.
All participants were asked to execute the tasks as accurately and as quickly as possible before running the application on the ground and as a last reminder just before take-off.
Participants to the experiment were seated in the co-pilot seat of a CAP10B aerobatic aircraft with the PDA strapped to their left thigh if they were left handed, or right thigh if they were right handed.
This is a standard interactive mode for reading and writing notes for pilots and co-pilot of an aircraft.
At each Gz level, after setting the aircraft into the appropriate Gz flight pattern, the pilot confirmed to the participant the Gz level value and instructed the participant to begin the tasks sequence with the simple instruction: "Start!".
After selecting the appropriate Gz level button on the PDA start-up screen, the participant executed the entire tasks' sequence for this Gz level.
Immediately after completing the task sequence for a particular Gz level, the participant allowed the pilot to unload the Gz and resume +1Gz normal flying conditions with the simple call: "All done!".
The pilot then returned for one minutes to a normal +1Gz flight pattern to allow the participant's physiology to return to normal before exposure to the next Gz level.
A mixed factorial repeated measures multivariate analysis of variance of latency in task execution showed no statistically significant interaction effects between the field dependency independency factor and the altered Gz acceleration factor for latency  = 0.461, ns.
Thus, the first hypothesis H1 was not supported.
However, hypothesis H2 and H3 were supported.
As predicted, performance on both the button selection and letter selection tasks worsened under altered Gz acceleration conditions compared to the +1Gz condition.
Figure 6 presents average time, in milliseconds, on the combined button selection and letter selection tasks across the five levels of the altered Gz acceleration factor.
The error bars display 95% CI of the means.
As predicted, field dependent participants took more time than field independent participants on both the button selection and the letter selection tasks.
Figure 7 presents presents average time, in milliseconds, taken by the field independent group versus the field dependent groups.
No significant differences were observed on accuracy for the Gz accelerations within-subjects factor.
Accuracy was higher for field dependent participants on the button selection task whereas field independent participants scored higher on accuracy on the letter selection task.
Participants self-reported high scores on wellness across the five levels of the altered Gz accelerations factor with no significant differences observed between the field dependent and field independent experimental groups or across the levels of the Gz accelerations factor.
Therefore, both motion sickness and nausea can be ruled out as potential confounding factors in the experimental study.
The QUIS questionnaire  was administered to collect the participants' subjective satisfaction scores.
The QUIS 7.0 instrument also measured participants' subjective satisfaction with the instructions and the tutorial, aside from various system measures.
No significant differences were observed on any of the sections of the QUIS instrument.
Each of these factors influences human performance but there is no empirical evidence to indicate that they significantly impact each other.
The results illustrate how environment independent and individual homogeneity design assumptions can contribute to significant degradation in performance in situated human computer interaction.
They suggest the need to develop and test innovative user-interface design requirements for mobile devices aimed at mitigating the effects of altered Gz and individual differences on human performance.
They also demonstrate the need to develop adaptive displays addressing both the constraints altered Gz environment place on users, and the differences in information processing among users.
A two pronged approach to the problem might indeed be more productive of a solution than either approach in isolation.
The experimental results support the hypothesis that performance for field dependent participants is significantly lower than for field independent participants on the button selection and letter selection tasks.
As such, it is clear that in altered Gz environments individuals' mode of information processing has a significant impact on perceptual motor performance when interacting with the touchscreen interface of a mobile device.
This study's findings corroborate the impact of Gz acceleration on task performance documented in prior research.
For example, an experimental study investigating the effects of Gz acceleration on cognitive performance showed performance degradation across individuals on a compensatory tracking task, a system monitoring task, and a strategic resource management task .
The results of our study suggests that field dependent individuals would benefit from mobile displays that provide support for disambiguation of objects and artifacts in a perceptual field.
The experimental results also support the hypothesis that performance on the button selection and letter selection tasks is significantly lower in altered Gz environments than on Earth's ubiquitous +1Gz environment.
This finding corroborates prior general findings on the impact of altered Gz environments on human performance and firmly establishes their relevance at the human computer interaction level.
The study's findings corroborate the impact of perceptual style on task performance documented in prior research.
For example, an experimental study investigating the relationship between perceptual style and tracking ability showed that among U.S. army pilots, field dependent individuals had significantly more difficulty than filed independent individuals in tracking an object similar in color to its background .
The results of our study suggest that users of mobile devices in Gz environments would benefit from displays featuring an interface adaptive to altered Gz environments.
The experimental results failed to support hypothesized interaction effects between altered Gz environments and field dependency-independency.
This suggests that the impact of altered Gz environments on hu-
Historically, HCI has witnessed an evolution with regard to context of use.
While HCI was originally concerned with the desktop and desktop applications, the scope of its application has considerably widened with the emergence of ubiquitous computing.
As a result, its domain of inquiry has become increasingly more diversified.
We already know that mobile devices break many assumptions inherent to HCI and desktop computing .
However, we know very little as to how performance in HCI covaries with the constraints imposed by the environment.
As such, the HCI community might consider a proactive research agenda with regard to mobile computing in extreme environments.
Indeed, the evidence is that mobile devices have a promising future in extreme environments as their increasingly ubiquitous presence in such environments suggests.
For instance, professional users increasingly require mobile computational devices when working in extreme environments as diverse as deep-sea diving , high altitude  or space .
The same could be argued with regard to the increasing propensity of recreational users to use mobile devices as consumer products  in extreme recreational environments activities as diverse as sky-diving, high performance flying, scubadiving or high altitude climbing -- to name a few.
Furthermore, one of the primary goals of usability is safety , and as this paper pointed out extreme environments are always characterized by conditions of risk and stress.
As such, for users of mobile devices immersed in such environments, safety-critical issues become of paramount importance, lifecritical in fact.
Finally, if any claims to ecological validity can legitimately be made, HCI needs to research these issues in their extreme environment context of use.
The facts are that  mobile technology is increasingly ubiquitous in extreme environments;  mobile devices are a logical platform for users to choose in such environments; and  this steady trend among users creates a host of HCI concerns that beg to be addressed.
For the aforementioned reasons, the authors feel that there are urgent, tangible, and promising research opportunities for HCI researchers to contribute their expertise to, in an effort to address what we see as a new challenge emerging on the HCI horizon.
The long term purpose of this line of research is to enable users of mission-critical and safety-critical systems in altered Gz environments to execute low level interaction tasks quickly and efficiently, without unnecessarily increasing cognitive load and the probability of critical errors.
A particularly promising application domain specifically requiring individuals to be mobile while using small, lightweight computing devices, lies within space's zero Gz environment.
As a case in point, to allow space crews to perform missioncritical tasks, both the ESA and NASA are increasingly relying on mobile computing platforms, and particularly on PDA.
They are also relying increasingly on these mobile platforms to perform safety-critical tasks such as monitoring crew members' vital signs.
To extend this research to zero Gz environments, the authors have initiated preliminary negotiations with NASA to establish modalities of use of NASA Ames' C9-B parabolic aircraft which would simulate a near zero Gz environment for future experiments.
Perceptual style and tracking performance.
NIRS monitoring of pilots subjected to +Gz acceleration and G-induced loss of consciousness .
Field independence-dependence and susceptibility to distraction.
Differences between field independent and field dependent persons on the stroop color-word test.
The role of individual differences in choice of strategy and performance in a computer-based task.
Powers, T. Brown, C. Hartmann, and D. Gaines.
2E-3 Asset tracking on the international space station using global SAW tag RFID technology.
The psychology of human-computer interaction.
Development of an instrument measuring user satisfaction of the human-computer interface.
M. Di Rienzo, G. Parati, F. Rizzo, P. Meriggi, G. Merati, A. Faini, and P. Castiglioni.
Heart rate monitoring and control in altered gravity conditions.
In Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society  2007.
The information capacity of the human motor system in controlling the amplitude of movement.
K. Fong and S. Fan.
An overview of the physiological effects of sustained high +Gz forces on human being.
D. Gaffi e, A. Guillaume, and P. Quandieu.
Modeling and numerical simulation of the cerebral blood flow under acceleration.
S. Galvagno, T. Massa, and S. Price.
Acceleration risk in student fighter pilots: preliminary analysis of a management program.
This experimental study analyzed the main effects and interaction effects of altered Gz accelerations and individual differences in perceptual style on performance.
The study showed that both Gz accelerations and perceptual style significantly impact human performance.
The findings could help predict in an accurate manner how altered Gz environments and individual differences in information processing impact human performance.
The findings could also provide guidelines for the design of interactive mobile computing platforms used in altered Gz environments.
Additional experimental evidence would help in the development of a theory of human-computer interface design in extreme environments.
The authors would like to acknowledge Kim Binsted, Daniel Suthers, Scott Robertson, and Curtis Ikehara for insightful advice and encouragement in investigating HCI in extreme environments; Pat Gilbert for re-writing the experimental study software; Jeff Bagust for providing the CRAF software.
The second author was supported by NSF awards # 0093505 to Daniel Suthers and # 0535036 to Scott Robertson.
High-G stress and orientational stress: physiologic effects of aerial maneuvering.
On the rate of gain of information.
E. Hill and K. Eigenbaum.
Altering field dependence through stress.
Stimulus information as a determinant of reaction time.
Cognitive styles in the context of modern psychology: Toward an integrated framework of cognitive style.
A conceptual investigation of Witkin's notion of perceptual style.
S. Leverett and R. Burton.
Physiological effect of high, sustained +Gz forces on man.
Software safety: Why, what, and how.
Relationship between perceptual style and reactivity to motion.
Monograph 19, Naval Aerospace Medical Research Lab, Pensacola,FL., June 21 1972.
L. Luo and B. John.
Predicting task execution time on handheld devices using the keystroke-level model, 2005.
Lifeguard: A personal physiological monitor for extreme environments.
In 26th Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, 2004.
Cumulative effects of +Gz on cognitive performance.
A multiparameter wearable physiologic monitoring system for space and terrestrial applications.
J. Onopa, M. Le Pape, G. Thonier, S. Saiki, K. Montgomery, and L. Burgess.
J. Piaget and B. Inhelder.
The child's conception of space.
Interaction Design: Beyond Human-Computer Interaction.
C. A. Rickards and D. G. Newman.
G-induced visual and cognitive disturbances in a survey of 65 operational fighter pilots.
Exploiting context in HCI design for mobile systems.
In Workshop on Human Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices, 1998.
Advanced patient monitoring displays: Tools for continuous informing.
V. Sarris, E. Heineken, and H. Peters.
Effects of stress on field dependence.
The effects of positive acceleration on cognitive performance: Big G - little know.
B. Shender, E. Forster, L. Hrebien, H. Ryoo, and J. Cammarota.
Acceleration-induced near-loss of consciousness: The "A-LOC" syndrome.
Engineering psychology and human performance.
Attention and aviation display layout: Research and modeling.
Technical Report Contract NASA NAG 2-1535, NASA Ames Research Center, 2005.
The perception of the upright.
H. A. Witkin and D. R. Goodenough.
Cognitive Styles, Essence and Origins: Field Dependence and Field Independence.
International Universities Press, New York, 1981.
J. Wobbrock, E. Cutrell, S. Harada, and S. MacKenzie.
An error model for pointing based on Fitts' law, 2008.
