Researchers in HCI and behavioral science are increasingly exploring the use of technology to support behavior change in domains such as health and sustainability.
This work, however, remain largely siloed within the two communities.
We begin to address this silo problem by attempting to build a bridge between the two disciplines at the level of behavioral theory.
Specifically, we define core theoretical terms to create shared understanding about what theory is, discuss ways in which behavioral theory can be used to inform research on behavior change technologies, identify shortcomings in current behavioral theories, and outline ways in which HCI researchers can not only interpret and utilize behavioral science theories but also contribute to improving them.
H5.2 User Interfaces: User Design; Theory & Methods HCI researchers are increasingly designing technologies to promote behavior change.
A review of the last 10 years of CHI proceedings in the ACM Digital Library found 136 papers that mentioned "behavior change" with 76% of these from the last four years .
Although this work has focused on diverse behaviors from diet  and exercise  to sustainable water usage , a common strategy underlies much of this work: to inform design, HCI researchers draw on theories from behavioral sciences.
For example, He and Greenberg  used the transtheoretical model of behavior change as an organizing framework for persuasive eco-feedback design.
As HCI research on behavior change technologies matures,
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Moreover, as these two research communities continue to explore intersecting topics, are there ways in which HCI research may contribute back to behavioral theory?
In this paper, we aim to provide HCI researchers with guidance on interpreting, using, and developing behavioral theories.
We first provide an overview of different forms of behavioral theory across levels of generality--from metamodels to empirical findings.
We then use these distinctions to discuss the current uses of behavioral theory in HCI and to highlight areas that, as yet, have received little attention.
We then enumerate a series of shortcomings of behavioral theories as articulated within behavioral science itself, which are likely to be non-obvious to those outside this discipline.
Finally, we conclude by suggesting ways HCI researchers can contribute to the development and refinement of behavioral theories.
Our paper has implications for the growing body of research in the design and evaluation of behavior change technologies and for HCI researchers interested in utilizing behavioral theory.
It is a set of concepts, definitions, and propositions that explain or predict these events or situations by illustrating the relationships between variables."
When we refer to behavioral theory, this is the definition we are using.
In addition, we also borrow from other terms from behavioral science including: constructs, which are the fundamental components or "building blocks" of a behavioral theory, ; and variables, which are the operational definitions of the constructs, particularly as they are defined in context .
We will use the term design guidelines to refer to the principles formulated by HCI researchers to make behavioral theory and empirical findings actionable for designing behavior change technologies .
Although the term persuasive technology  is common within HCI, it has become somewhat controversial and can bring up negative associations .
For this reason, we do not use the term in this paper .
Instead, we refer to the broad array of systems and artifacts developed to foster and assist behavior change and sustainment as behavior change technologies.
This term more adequately reflects the diversity of behavioral theories and goals beyond persuasion that can be encoded in technical artifacts.
Finally, based on our own areas of expertise, we primarily focus on behavioral theories from psychology that have been commonly applied in the health domain.
Behavioral theories vary widely in which behaviors they describe and how these behaviors are described.
Some theories focus on one behavior , others describe the specific process , and still others describe dynamics between behaviors and other constructs .
As a consequence, behavioral theories can be categorized in a variety of ways.
One common distinction, for instance, is between behavioral theories that describe determinants of behavior  versus the process of change .
At the highest level of generality are meta-models, which are organizational structures of multiple levels of influence on individual behavior.
For example, an increasingly popular meta-model in health-related behavioral science is the social ecological model , which identifies broad "levels" of inter-related associations and factors of influence on a behavior of interest, from micro-level factors such as genetics and biology to meso-level factors such as interpersonal relationships and, finally, to macro-level factors such as urban design, public policy, and culture.
Like Erickson's model , meta-models are valuable for identifying the "lens" a researcher is using and other "lenses" not currently emphasized by the researcher or community at large.
In this way, a meta-model can help identify new levels of inquiry.
For example, the majority of behavior change-oriented research in HCI has thus far focused on the individual level  or the interpersonal level , with less emphasis placed on understanding the context with which these individual or interpersonal-level interventions are created and tested .
Examining prior work through the perspective of a metamodel can uncover previously under-explored research.
For example, King et al.
This led to new research and partnerships, such as increased interaction between behavioral scientists and urban planners .
By virtue of their generality, however, metamodels are typically short on specifics about determinants of behavior that could be used to directly inform the design of technical systems.
In addition, too often meta-models have too many levels of influence to adequately evaluate.
As such, the use of meta-models in design requires a great deal of conceptual and formative work to translate into pragmatic design guidelines and system features.
Conceptual frameworks describe relationships among the fundamental building blocks of a behavioral theory, constructs, and provide a more specific account of how constructs are inter-related.
Conceptual frameworks encompass several commonly used theories including the transtheoretical model , self-efficacy theory , theory of planned behavior , health belief model , and self-determination theory .
From an HCI perspective, conceptual frameworks provide more specific guidance to the design and implementation of behavior change technologies .
For example, goal-setting theory  describes the effect of different types of goals on performance, enabling HCI researchers to implement effective goals in their interventions .
However, because of their emphasis on only one or two levels of analysis, conceptual frameworks have the potential to disregard key factors that may be influencing a behavior.
For example, recent physical activity promotion research found that "walkability" of a person's neighborhood influenced physical activity intervention effectiveness, such that the interventions tested were only effective for those who lived in walkable neighborhoods .
Although conceptual frameworks were used to design the interventions , the key finding emerged from situating these models within the broader context of a meta-model.
Constructs are the basic determinants or mechanisms that a theory postulates to influence behavior.
For instance, social cognitive theory defines the notion of self-efficacy--a person's assessment of his/her ability to perform certain behaviors in a particular context .
The theory identifies this construct, along with other constructs such as outcome expectancies, as a key determinant of behavior.
In lieu of utilizing all of the constructs defined within a conceptual framework, a common practice in the development of behavior change interventions is to selectively use constructs from one or more theories.
For example, many researchers both from behavioral science and HCI who utilize the transtheoretical model incorporate only the stages of change construct, leaving out other constructs such as the twelve processes of change or decisional balance .
Although common, this practice makes it difficult to evaluate the utility of the entire conceptual framework as the entire framework was not tested.
This can lead to methodological flaws in interpreting the validity of behavioral theories.
We return to this point in the Shortcomings of Behavioral Theory sections.
By virtue of their focus on a much smaller level of analysis, constructs translate more easily into features of a behavior change technology.
To continue with the self-efficacy example, a behavior change technology that supports selfefficacy might be effective for individuals who already have high outcome expectancies but might not work well for individuals with low outcome expectancies.
Insofar as the other construct was not assessed or integrated in the system, it would be difficult to understand why the system may work for some individuals but not others.
Finally, in some cases, previously developed theories are insufficient to guide HCI research.
In such cases, additional empirical work--often in the form of ethnographic and other qualitative approaches--can generate knowledge necessary to establish a starting point for design.
Such empirical work can yield concrete and contextually-specific findings, which can be applied to ground specific designs and to create design guidelines.
For instance, in their work with stroke patients, Balaam et al.
Based on this finding, Balaam et al.
The level of specificity of empirical findings comes at the cost of generalizability, however.
Empirical findings, by virtue of being observed in a given context, must be abstracted in some way to create generalized knowledge.
Although it is tempting to directly generalize specific findings from empirical work, such generalizations should be tempered by factors such as the target participant group, study length and size, and other relevant contexts.
That said, empirical findings are an invaluable starting point for the creation of new constructs and theories, as well as for informing the design of new technologies.
In our review of HCI literature on behavior change technologies, we have identified three broad uses of behavioral theory.
HCI researchers use theory:  to inform the design of technical systems,  to guide evaluation strategies, and  to define target users.
Here, we discuss how theory has been used for these purposes thus far and how theory can support HCI research going forward.
HCI researchers often draw on theory to make design decisions about a technical system.
Theory can be used both to make decisions about which functionality to support and how to implement such functionality.
For example, Consolvo et al.
Goffman's theory of presentation of self in everyday life .
Theory also informed how this functionality was implemented.
For instance, UbiFit required users to specify the number of strength training, cardiovascular, and walking sessions they would do each week.
This design decision was informed by goal-setting theory, which postulates that performance is highest when goals are specific and created by the user .
Similarly, Mamykina and colleagues  drew upon the construct of breakdown from the theory of sensemaking  to design MAHI, an application for patients with diabetes that supports reflection and problem-solving.
The theory of sensemaking postulates that individuals constantly engage in drafting and redrafting of a story to understand their experiences.
In sensemaking, breakdown refers to the times when everyday routines are interrupted by an unexpected or undesirable event that forces the individual to make sense of what happened and to create a new story that explains the experience.
To help users reflect on breakdowns, MAHI enables:  flexible journaling through photos and audio recording on a mobile phone;  collecting information about context for measuring glucose via experience sampling; and  discussing captured data with a diabetes educator.
By providing patients with the flexibility to capture, document, and discuss breakdowns when they occur, MAHI supports the reflection that sensemaking theory argues is essential to effective problem-solving.
A second way of informing design is the development of design guidelines.
For example, drawing on behavioral theory and their own empirical work, Consolvo et al.
Such technologies, Consolvo et al.
Behavioral theory can be a rich source of ideas for behavior change technologies.
However, the translation of behavioral theory into effective behavior change technologies is by no means a trivial process.
This gap between theory and a concrete design has to be bridged for every new technology.
The design guidelines such as those described above can help, but researchers need to be mindful about their epistemic status.
While we believe strongly in the value of empirical data for generating design guidelines, given the relatively limited amount of empirical data behind many proposed design guidelines , we suggest that the guidelines are more akin to "design hypotheses," which require additional testing.
Behind each guideline is a set of assumptions about how a technology that embodies the guideline should affect users' behavior.
Testing these assumptions explicitly in user studies, along with exploring the design space for guidelines, can enable HCI researchers to build generalizable knowledge about ways in which behavioral theories can be translated into better designs.
In addition, new strategies for balancing abstraction with contextual relevance are needed.
HCI researchers who translate theory into systems should pay close attention to issues such as the specific behavior in question , user characteristics , and the sociocultural context .
By investigating how technologies with similar theoretical grounding fare in different cultural contexts, the field can begin to develop both more nuanced design guidelines and to inform the development of better behavioral theories.
In addition to informing design, behavioral theories are also relevant to guiding evaluations of behavior change technologies.
Although examples of this are less prevalent in HCI literature, behavioral theory has been used both to inform study design and to help interpret findings from technology evaluations.
In a recent paper, Lee et al.
This construct, however, did not only influence the design of the system but also the design of the evaluation.
Specifically, the control condition was a webpage with all food options available on one screen whereas the intervention condition showed only two food options at a time and required participants to click to another page to explore other snack options.
This study design was informed by the behavioral theory because the control condition  was a direct complement of the webpage that embodied the default option construct .
This is an exciting use of theory to guide technology evaluation through a theoreticallyinformed delineation of the control condition.
For example, in their evaluations of MAHI and UbiFit, Mamykina et al.
Theory can also help with the interpretation of study results.
For example, to understand whether their game OrderUP!
For instance, Grimes et al.
Both of these effects are examples of consciousness-raising.
By using theory in this way, Grimes et al.
While not without potential methodological shortcomings, which we delineate in the next section, this is an innovative strategy for using theory in tandem with qualitative data to explore theoretical fidelity  within user testing.
Although the stated aim of most behavior change technology research is to design technology that effectively changes behavior, this is rarely robustly demonstrated in HCI research .
Indeed, very few HCI researchers have the resources to conduct large-scale randomized trials of their prototypes.
And though randomized controlled trials  remain the gold standard of efficacy research in behavioral science, there are a number of emerging theory-driven study designs and analytic strategies that we believe are highly relevant to the HCI community.
These include:  mediational/path and moderation analyses,  alternative experimental designs, and  evaluations of qualitative data.
Mediation describes how an intervention works whereas moderation describes for whom or under what circumstances an intervention is most efficient .
From a behavioral theory perspective, mediating variables are the constructs that drive behavioral change , while moderating variables identify who responds best to different interventions  and under what conditions outcomes are optimized .
Understanding key mediator variables within a behavioral theory can allow HCI researchers to both support these constructs in their designs and to assess them in their evaluations instead of solely relying on more distal outcomes such as behaviors.
Similarly, moderation analyses can be very valuable for defining for whom a system will work.
For example, Hekler et al.
They found that individuals who were high in amotivation  required a human advisor to become more physically active whereas those who were low in amotivation  fared better with the IVR system.
Such analyses can provide another way to gain knowledge about how technical interventions work for different groups of users.
There is a small but growing revolution in behavioral science related to the use of alternative experimental designs beyond the RCT to develop and test behavior-focused interventions.
Some of these designs, such as single case experimental designs  and factorial designs , might prove to be useful in HCI research as well.
Their emergence is at least partly due to the recent ease with which:  behaviors and important variables can be frequently assessed , a requirement which is key for "in the wild" N-of-1 style experimental designs ; and  a much wider range of small variations of experimental conditions can be easily created, which was previously a stumbling block for factorial study designs .
A full description of these methods is beyond the scope of this paper, but many were and still are used in labbased psychological research .
Until now, however, such designs were not used in "free-living" situations due to resource constraints that have now largely been abated by new technologies.
Using theory to help evaluate qualitative data.
As we mentioned, Grimes et al.
Such theoretically-guided analyses of qualitative data are a promising form of evaluation for HCI research on behavior change technologies, and they fit well within the tradition of theory-driven qualitative methods such as ethnomethodology, conversation analysis, and other methodologies from anthropology and sociology.
Specifically, the Grimes et al.
To do this, researchers would formulate a priori expectations of likely responses in user feedback that would indicate that the technology was having or not having a theoretically postulated effect.
For example, a statement like "Using the application made me feel more confident about being active" could be an indicator that the system influenced self-efficacy.
Having a coding manual with such statements  would enable researchers to use qualitative data to rigorously assess if a behavior change technology is influencing the proposed constructs .
To decrease the risk of the confirmation bias , it would be important for such coding manuals to be established a priori, before user interviews begin.
It is a well-known psychological fact that humans tend to perceive and interpret their observations to "confirm" their preconceived notions and theories .
As with other cognitive biases, confirmation bias operates unconsciously, without our being aware of its influence.
This is a central reason why the lists of statements that would indicate that users' experiences with a technology are in line with or refute theoretical expectations should be established in advance.
We discuss this idea further in the HCI Contributions to Behavioral Theory section.
Put together, these three theoretically-informed evaluation strategies--moderation and mediation analyses, alternative experimental designs beyond the RCT, and using qualitative data to assess theoretically-expected outcomes from user testing--can offer HCI researchers powerful new ways to assess technologies that they are developing.
One corollary of this point is that researchers should be specific about the characteristics of users who are testing the behavior change technologies.
If study participants do not match the target user group sufficiently closely, it becomes very difficult to make sense of study results, increasing the likelihood of type III error .
Put differently, does the system not work or did it not work for these particular participants?
Theory can also help HCI researchers to better understand who the most appropriate target users are for a given technology.
This is evidenced by King et al.
Using theory to define target users could lead to the design of tailored--and potentially more effective--interventions.
Related to this point, theory could be used post hoc to understand different patterns of use and outcomes among study participants.
Similar to how Grimes et al.
These factors could then be more rigorously assessed in follow-up studies, leading to a richer understanding of the individual, social, and cultural variables that influence the effectiveness of behavior change technologies.
By extension, findings from such studies would also help delineate for which users a system is and, perhaps more importantly, is not appropriate.
Although we have argued that theory can be helpful to HCI researchers working on behavior change technologies, its use is not without pitfalls.
We have alluded to several common pitfalls already, including:  ignoring the broader context in which a technology will be used ;  picking only some constructs from a theory and thus losing the potency of the full conceptual framework for designing a system;  treating design guidelines generated from one empirical study as "requirements" when they should be thought of as design hypotheses;  using selective constructs from a theory but making claims that are related to the full theory ;  increasing the likelihood of confirmation bias in studies;  falling prey to Type III error due to poor specification of the target audience .
We want to emphasize that many of these pitfalls are shared by behavioral science as well.
We explicitly enumerate them to help HCI researchers avoid them in their work.
Theories like the transtheoretical model suggest that different user groups will have diverse needs and interventions that effectively support one group might be ineffective for another.
Individuals at different stages of change may require different types of support, even if the goal is to encourage the exact same behaviors .
In HCI research on behavior change technologies, this insight is most strongly reflected in the use of theory to screen participants for evaluation studies.
Among others, Consolvo et al.
Finally, some HCI researchers may think of behavioral theories as if they were in some way "truth" or "fact" with regard to understanding behavior and behavior change.
While tempting, this view would be inappropriate.
In the following section, we provide a brief summary of the shortcomings of current behavioral theories, both to inform HCI researchers of their limitations and to highlight that these shortcomings present opportunities for HCI researchers to contribute to the process of refinement and development of behavioral theories.
Despite their prominence in HCI research, behavioral theories have many shortcomings which may not be wellknown in the HCI community.
These shortcomings include:  most behavioral theories explain only a small portion of variance in the outcomes they are trying to account for;  many behavioral theories, in their current form, are not falsifiable; and  there is a fragmentation and an overabundance of different theories.
We expand on each point in turn and summarize strategies behavioral scientists are using to combat each shortcoming.
While other shortcomings and debates certainly exist , we see the three we mention above as most relevant to HCI.
Most behavioral theories traditionally explain, at best, only 20-30% of the total variance in a given health behavior, particularly when the behavior is tested in an intervention .
In other words, approximately 75% of the variance is not accounted for by behavioral theory and thus can be attributed to unmeasured and unknown factors.
There are highly efficacious exceptions ; however, the vast majority of behavioral theories explain only a small portion of variance, resulting in interventions that leave much to be desired.
For example, Prochaska, the originator of the transtheoretical model recently noted: "We are convinced that the glass ceiling that has kept efficacy at about 25 per cent for smoking cessation is due first and foremost to inadequate knowledge about the principles of change.
Implicitly, all initiatives within behavioral science are targeting this core problem.
Behavioral scientists are continually refining their interventions, improving measurement of constructs, and striving to increase the efficacy of their interventions.
For example, behavioral scientists are increasingly utilizing the social ecological model to better understand and represent multiple determinants of behavior, with the goal of explaining more variance .
Behavioral scientists are also increasingly relying upon alternative experimental designs  to improve evaluation.
However, as evidenced here, there is still much to be done.
As discussed in the common pitfalls section, there are important methodological shortcomings related to the evaluation of behavioral theories.
A central reason, as pointed out by Ogden , is that many current behavioral theories do not generate or are not challenged by falsifiable hypotheses and therefore cannot be tested.
For example, the theory of planned behavior  identifies subjective norms, perceived behavioral control, attitudes, and behavioral intentions as key predictors of behaviors, but in the evaluations of this conceptual framework reviewed by Ogden, a majority of studies did not find that all of these constructs predicted behavior .
However, rather than reject the theory, most papers reviewed by Ogden stated that the theory was good because some aspects of the theory were deemed relevant and important, thereby rendering it impossible to falsify the conceptual framework as a whole.
Behavioral theories can also lack falsification if the constructs and relationships are not well specified.
For example, Adams et al  postulated that the construct of the decisional balance  from the transtheoretical model was not fully specified.
Adams et al argued that the possibility of weighing the pros and cons of competing behaviors  was not articulated in the transtheoretical model but is central within other conceptual frameworks such as applied behavioral analysis.
In their study, they explored if this poor specification made a difference in predictive models and found that the balance between the pros of the two competing behaviors  was a stronger mediator of the behavior than the pros and cons to just the health behavior .
This type of work highlights an important area whereby constructs are critically evaluated to generate falsifiable predictions that can be tested.
As these examples illustrate, behavioral scientists are increasingly calling for concrete predictions that are falsifiable and for tests that support, reject, or alter full conceptual frameworks, or alternatively, for tests that focus on constructs or interactions of constructs only .
In addition, there is a growing interest in comparative studies , which could directly compare predictions of different theories within the same context .
Poor evaluation and lack of falsification of theories has led to a plethora of different conceptual frameworks, competing research findings/conclusions, and redundant underlying constructs that are labeled differently depending on the theoretical camp of origination .
While the originating theories do define these constructs slightly differently, many behavioral scientists see the constructs as practically the same .
Despite this, the terms remain and are a source of confusion to non-behavioral scientists and behavioral scientists alike.
To resolve this issue, behavioral scientists have attempted to synthesize theories into broader frameworks and, more recently, to create a theory agnostic taxonomy of behavior change techniques.
Indeed, the original intent of the transtheoretical model was to, "reduce 300 theories of psychotherapy and behavior change down to the most common and robust processes of change" .
More recently, researchers in Europe have started to develop a taxonomy of behavior change techniques .
This work is currently progressing using consensus methodology, but there are already early versions of the taxonomy in the literature .
Although HCI researchers have traditionally not engaged in the development of behavioral theory, we see HCI as being in a unique position to help mitigate the shortcomings in behavioral theory we discuss above.
Here we outline three ways in which HCI could help improve behavioral theory:  improving measurement and, by extension, fostering better theories of behavior,  enhancing early-stage theory fidelity, and  using big data and A/B testing.
Many behavioral theories are based on studies that rely on self-report measures and assess key variables infrequently .
The small variance explained by such theories as well as the lack of rigorous testing is at least in part due to the poor fidelity of data on which the theories are based.
HCI researchers can significantly contribute to solving both of these problems by improving measurement of theoretical constructs and behaviors.
HCI researchers have ample experience with developing tools that take advantage of ubiquitous sensing, machine learning, and mobile computation to collect data on human behavior .
For example, mobile phones equipped with activity and location sensing  allow for data collection on user behavior not just with regards to application usage on the device but interactions and movements in the physical world as well .
HCI researchers can work with behavioral scientists to develop tools and techniques for precise and frequent measurement of key theoretical constructs and behaviors postulated by current and future behavior theories.
Such tools could collect data both automatically  as well as through lightweight self-report at inferred moments of interest .
And, crucially, because many new data collection methods require little-to-no user attention, the data collection tools developed by HCI researchers would enable longer and larger user studies, improving not only the quality of the data but its quantity as well.
Better and more frequent assessments, in turn, would enable behavioral theories to be more rigorously tested--and then refined--than behavioral scientists have been able to do in the past .
In addition, tools built by HCI researchers could enable the development of a different kind of theory: personalized, dynamic models of factors that influence behavior of a particular person.
By collecting fine-grain data about behavior, context, physiological measures, and cognitive constructs, systems built by HCI researchers could use machine learning techniques to model how various elements in the user's life  affect the behavior the user is trying to change .
In addition, as the system is used over time, the model could be continuously tuned and improved.
Such individualized models of behavior could be used to create highly effective behavior change interventions which take into account the precise factors that shape the behavior of a particular person.
In addition, the models could be aggregated across individuals to create more general theories of behavior which are likely to be more precise than current theories.
Behavioral scientists have historically put great effort into reducing the likelihood of type I error  and type II error .
Type III error  is becoming an increasing concern.
Type III error can lead to erroneous conclusions with regard to the accuracy of a theory.
To minimize this, some behavioral scientists are starting to explore theoretical fidelity-- whether a theoretically-guided intervention actually functions according to the theory .
Mediation analyses and treatment fidelity methods  are the standard "checks" behavioral scientists use to determine theoretical fidelity.
Current behavioral science methods for theoretical fidelity, however, are largely lacking for initial system development.
As discussed in the Uses of Behavioral Theory section, HCI researchers could establish a priori expectations of words or phrases from user testing research to establish early-stage theoretical fidelity tests.
To the best of our knowledge, this strategy has not been employed previously but may offer exciting new opportunities for early-stage theoretical fidelity testing.
The opportunities for testing, refining, and creating new theories about behavior are astounding when big data, improved measurement, and A/B experimental testing are combined.
Big data and A/B testing allow for research that goes beyond testing individual constructs or conceptual frameworks but full meta-models.
Before big data, tests of meta-models were almost impossible; this, however, is rapidly changing with big data and improved multilevel measures and A/B testing is a particularly promising approach to testing meta-models.
Using A/B tests, it becomes possible to explore the causal impact of constructs after controlling for other components identified in the meta-model.
The closest example to this type of study that we are aware of is a recent study in which an A/B test of 61-million users of Facebook was conducted to test the effect of social influence on voting patterns .
This type of research, which HCI researchers are uniquely poised to conduct, could radically transform our ability to test and further develop behavioral theories.
Our goal in this paper was to provide HCI researchers and designers with guidance for interpreting, using, and contributing to behavioral theories.
We explicitly sought to highlight the important place for a cross-pollination of ideas and methods between disciplines.
That said, this paper only scratches the surface.
Each of these points requires more careful thought and work from both fields.
As such, our final goal is a call for behavioral scientists and HCI researchers to work more closely together both on the design of behavior change technologies and the development of better theories.
This paper itself represents the collective effort of two behavioral scientists , and two HCI researchers .
We believe that such collaborations and open exchanges of ideas across disciplines are fundamental to the development of better theories, better systems, better behavioral outcomes, and, ultimately, to positive societal impact.
