Students monitor and control the local state of the simulation through distributed media positioned around the room, gathering and aggregating evidence to solve problems or answer questions related to those phenomena.
Embedded phenomena are persistent, running continuously over weeks and months, creating information channels that are temporally and physically interleaved with, but asynchronous with respect to, the regular flow of instruction.
In this paper, we describe the motivations for the framework, describe classroom experiences with three embedded phenomena in the domains of seismology, insect ecology, and astronomy, and situate embedded phenomena within the context of human-computer interaction research in co-located group interfaces and learning technologies.
The goals of this paper are to further develop the motivation for the embedded phenomena paradigm, to describe our experiences with three examples of embedded phenomena introduced in classrooms over the past year, and to situate the framework within the context of contemporary research in humancomputer interaction and learning technology research.
The design space of the embedded phenomenon framework is characterized by four common attributes.
Embedded phenomena are grounded in the principles of situated, experiential learning ; the learner activity at the core of embedded phenomena is scientific inquiry.
In designing activities, we ask students to do the  things that practicing scientists do when conducting investigations: make observations, take measurements, record and aggregate data, look for patterns, articulate and test theories, and report and reflect on their findings.
In this way, the embedded phenomena approach does not differ from traditional experience-based learning methods, with or without technology, that have always been used by teachers as an important element of science education.
It is important to point out that, in and of itself, our framework does not prescribe an instructional design per se, nor does it provide any direct scaffolding to support learning.
Where learning technologies were once circumscribed by the form factor of the desktop computer, emerging ubiquitous technologies are giving rise to a cornucopia of new designs that expand the space of activity structures available to students and teachers .
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
The contribution introduced by the embedded phenomena framework lies in the way that phenomena are made accessible and responsive to the needs of learners  through the novel uses of classroom time and space.
A central component of our framework is the conceit that the phenomenon under investigation is unfolding within the confines of the classroom itself.
This is not an obvious choice, nor necessarily the correct one.
When studying seismology, for example, many learning researchers would argue that authenticity demands that the discourse be situated in a scientifically accurate geographic framing; we should be talking about earthquakes around the Ring of Fire, for example.
We conjecture, however, that by situating the phenomena "in here" rather than "out there" we might increase learners' emotional interest in the phenomena, and leverage incidental associations between the simulated and real worlds 
Moreover, we hope that by situating the imaginary phenomena within the classroom space students can build on their accumulated knowledge of the physical, social, and cultural features of the environment as they undertake a new type of activity.
While we have observed such effects, the larger question of the differential effects of these two approaches remains an area for further research.
Another feature of our approach is the decision to maximize the nominal spatial extent of imagined phenomena by scaling them  to fill the physical space of the room.
From a perceptual perspective, we hope to increase the salience of the phenomena for learners .
On a more practical level, we also believe that this strategy can reduce congestion in the classroom by allowing students to use the entire floor space as they conduct their investigations.
Our strongest motivation, however, draws from a desire to physically immerse learners within the experience ; in our framework, not only are the phenomena embedded in the space, indeed the learners themselves are embedded within the phenomena.
In embedded phenomena, access to the representation of the state of phenomena is physically distributed throughout the space of the classroom.
We believed that this offers four important benefits.
First, it creates multiple natural contexts for students to engage in discourse with peers and teachers  concerning the phenomenon.
Second, it reinforces the important science concept that understanding the state of a phenomenon might not be possible from a single observation, but may require multiple probes from different vantage points that require aggregation and coordination to come to full understanding.
Time, more than space or funding, is the most precious commodity in schools.
Schools are constantly struggling with ways to make more effective use of time, both to provide opportunities for teachers to collaborate with their peers to improve instruction and to afford students opportunities to meaningfully engage both required and supplemental curriculum content.
The embedded phenomenon framework engages the issue of time along two important dimensions: duration and persistence.
In the examples that we describe later in this paper, embedded phenomena were employed in units that lasted in each case for several weeks.
The long time course of these deployments offers three important benefits.
First, it opens the door to the study of phenomena that unfold slowly, requiring investigative processes unlike those used in most classroom science work.
Second, by spreading interaction with the phenomena out over multiple episodes we hope to take advantage of the well-established superiority of temporally distributed instruction over concentrated, "massed" instruction with respect to longterm memory and skill development .
But we believe that the more important motivation lies in the value of time for students to become meaningfully involved in the enterprise of scientific investigation: different learners engage activities at different paces.
Our prior classroom experience led us to expect that while highly motivated, achievement-oriented students would readily become engaged in our activities, other students would need time to move, in Lave and Wenger's terms, from the periphery to the center of the community of scientific practice .
The persistent representation of phenomena, combined with the spatial immersion, further promotes the goal of engaging all students; for all but the most dedicated non-participant, it eventually becomes easier to participate in an activity that impinges on his or her perceptual system all the time, wherever they look, than to ignore it, particularly when respected peers are engaged in the activity.
Persistence brings at least three additional benefits.
First, by continually representing phenomena, we create the opportunity to reinforce the concept that, in nature, important state changes are not always synchronized to fixed schedules, that "things happen when they happen," and that scientists  are often at the mercy of events rather than the other way around.
Second, persistence provides opportunities for "incidental" learning in much the same way that foreign vocabulary words adorning classroom walls may result in learning without explicit reference during formal instruction.
By adding an attentional channel that promotes curricular goals, we address the human need for variety and offer a potentially productive alternative to the normative instructional flow.
Finally, by interleaving salient simulations with regular instruction, we surreptitiously expand students' opportunities to engage science content, which, at least in the United States, is often given short shrift in formal instructional schedules because of the exigency of reading and mathematics instruction to accommodate high-stakes performance assessments.
In conjunction with a three-week unit on animal ecologies, we deployed four networked "sandboxes" in different locations within a sixth-grade classroom .
A simulation engine was used to dynamically generate the bug tracks based on initial population distributions and local environmental conditions .
Conservation of bug populations was maintained; when local conditions drove them out of the area of one sandbox, rather than dying off they migrated to other sandboxes .
The instructional challenge to groups of students was to experimentally determine the set of local conditions that would attract desirable insects while driving out the pests.
The field guide gave clues regarding which bugs fell into each category, and was reinforced with the printing and classroom distribution of a semi-weekly "local newspaper" that reported local farmers' observations of bugs in the various "parts of town" represented by the sandboxes, and their impact on crop yield.
The newspaper provided qualitative feedback on the impact of students' experimental manipulations; this was used to complement quantitative data obtained by systematically introducing changes in pesticides and moisture content and observing the effect on bug populations over time .
RoomBugs simulates the migration of bugs in a small farming community.
Horizontally oriented tablet computers are used to suggest "sandboxes" traversed by insects.
As they cross the sandbox, they leave characteristic tracks that vary depending on species .
By consulting an accompanying "field guide," users can distinguish one kind of track from another and identify the species of the bugs that crossed the sandbox.
Four control affordances are provided:  the ability to "smooth out the sand" to create a clean palate for observing tracks,  the ability to introduce one of three types of pesticide in an attempt to reduce the infestation of undesirable bugs,  the ability to control the amount of moisture in the local area of the sandbox, and  the ability to leave marks in the sand using a stylus as a simulated "stick."
This final capability was provided to support learners in the task of counting tracks, ensuring a comprehensive and non-redundant survey.
RoomBugs interface showing simulated tracks of insects and the presence of pesticide .
Students identify and count tracks to obtain local infestation estimates.
The interface is presented on a horizontally oriented tablet computer.
The X's were marked by users with a stylus to indicate paths already counted.
A comparison of simulation logs with student data representations showed remarkable work accuracy, with students correctly identifying almost 95% of over 1500 insect tracks.
Students' ability to design and conduct meaningful experiments by imposing experimental control improved over the course of the unit, with a marked decrease in the frequency of manipulations that involved simultaneous changes in two independent variables.
However, student ability to articulate a multi-variate control strategy, while trending in the positive direction, did not show significant gains from pre- to post-tests.
HelioRoom simulates the movement of the planets, adopting the conceit that the center of the classroom coincides with the center of the Solar system: the Sun.
Using Velcro, networked tablet computers are affixed to the walls of the classroom; each display represents a "viewport" providing a radial perspective from which to observe planetary motion.
As the planets orbit around the Sun, they pass through the viewports, temporarily disappear as they travel through interstices between displays, then reappear in the next view-port, along a counter-clockwise path.
HelioRoom is intended for use in lower elementary grades as a follow-on activity to an introductory unit on the Solar system.
The typical content of such units includes the principle of heliocentrism, along with the order, size, and orbital periods of the planets.
Ordinarily, this represents "tacit" knowledge for young learners: a set of facts without immediate applicability.
HelioRoom is designed to provide an environment within which new knowledge about the order and relative orbital periods of the planets may be reinforced by applying it in a problem-solving context .
In May 2005, HelioRoom was used for a 12-day period in a third-grade  classroom that had previously completed the basic Solar system unit.
Orbital periods were set in such a way that Mercury required eight minutes to complete a full orbit, resulting in an orbital period for Pluto of almost six full days.
The simulation was left running at all times.
Adopting the classroom teacher's standard practice of publicly representing emerging knowledge on a classroom "Idea Board" students used note cards to record and post their observations of planetary occlusions and relative orbital periods, along with assertions about planetary identities .
Periodically over the trial the students and teacher would gather at the Idea Board to discuss their current theories and attempt to reach consensus on the identity of the planets.
Within one minute of the introduction of the activity, students had identified Mercury by virtue of its very short orbital period.
Progress in identifying other planets came more slowly, but by the end of the 12-day trial, students had reached a consensus and successfully identified six of the nine planets.
Not surprisingly, the six planets identified were those closest to the Sun, with the shortest orbital periods, reflecting the need for qualitatively different strategies for observing planets that moved too slowly to compare relative speeds, or in which pair-wise occlusion occurred rarely or outside of classroom time.
While students used both occlusion and orbital periods as the basis for their investigation, analysis of student note cards revealed a somewhat surprising result.
In support of those learning goals, HelioRoom takes several liberties.
The planets are presumed to orbit along strictly planar, circular paths.
The depiction of the planets as they pass through the view-ports ignores visual differences owing to distances, size, or surface features; all of the planets are represented by uniform-sized solid circles of different colors .
The orbital periods of the planets are shortened, but proportional consistency is maintained.
The instructional challenge to the students is to determine which color has been used to represent each planet.
In RoomQuake, we use calibrated dry-lines anchored at the seismographs to sweep out arcs of potential epicenter loci; the solution is obtained when the students at the end of those lines converge at a common point.
Once the location and magnitude have been determined, the teacher hangs a color-coded  Styrofoam ball from the ceiling at the epicenter point, providing a salient historical record of the event series, and students update poster-based representations of the temporal and intensity distributions of the events.
Over the course of about two dozen earthquakes spread over six weeks, the classroom "fault line" emerges.
Figure 6 illustrates the complete process.
RoomQuake has undergone two extended trials in fifth grade , with an intervening design revision.
In the first implementation, PocketPCs were used to simulate the seismographs; their size, however, limited visibility, and they were replaced with tablet computers for the second trial.
In addition, the second version of the system added a data-entry form for manually recording event parameters through the ambient media.
In both trials, extensive formative and summative testing was used to assess student learning in the areas of seismological practice  and students' conceptual understanding of the spatial, intensity, and temporal distributions of seismic event series.
Performance on skill acquisition tasks showed a high level of competence during both trials; 70-90% of students were able to demonstrate mastery on articulated component skills associated with interpreting seismograms, including arrival latency of ground waves1, determination of graph maxima, use of a nomogram2 to calculate magnitude, and identification of epicenter loci.
While students were able to demonstrate the process of trilateration, translating that physical skill to a paper-and-pencil explanation was less successful, with only about 40-60% capable of constructing  or selecting  an appropriate rationale.
Student understanding of event parameter distributions proved strong, with 80-90% of students predicting linear or curvilinear spatial distributions and an inverse relationship between event magnitude and frequency.
A pre-post comparison with a non-treatment group in trial 2 confirmed a significant learning effect relative to pre-unit conceptions.
An orthogonal analysis of the note cards focusing on evidentiary reasoning showed a dominance of theory articulation over recording of observations, and an even split between unsupported and evidence-based theories.
It became clear that the large number of note cards  focusing on pair-wise comparisons of planets became too difficult to use in constructing arguments that required the application of transitivity.
Our most mature example of the embedded phenomenon model is RoomQuake, an earthquake simulation system.
Students adopt the pretense that their classroom is an active seismic field, and that a series of earthquakes is expected over the course of several weeks within that field.
Ambient media serve as simulated seismographs that depict continuous strip-chart recordings of local vibration , where locality is conditioned upon their specific placement in the classroom.
Most of the time, the seismograms reflect a low level of background vibration.
At  unpredictable times, a crescendoing rumble  signals the occurrence of an earthquake.
Upon this signal , students move to the seismographic stations to read the waveforms.
Reading the seismogram recorded at a single location provides two critical pieces of information: the magnitude of the event, and the distance  of the event from the recording station.
In RoomQuake, students use tablet computers  to read simulated seismograms  to determine event distances and magnitudes.
Trilateration of event epicenters  are obtained by pulling calibrated dry-lines  from multiple seismographs until they converge .
Color-coded Styrofoam balls are hung from the ceiling  to mark event epicenter and magnitude.
Over weeks, the collection of markers reveals the fault line in the classroom; students maintain poster representations of emerging data .
While the presentations above provide tentative evidence of learning impacts, a number of additional crosscutting issues have emerged from our classroom experiences with embedded phenomena.
We focus briefly on four of those in the following: instructional context, participation, scalability, and affective impact on learners.
In some ways embedded phenomena are nothing more than "plug-compatible" substitutes for natural phenomena.
They do not prescribe specific instructional sequences or materials, but rather demand design, adaptation, and scaffolding by practitioners.
In our work, our collaborating teachers have been critical partners in helping us to explore instructional contexts.
Among their many contributions, we believe that two have to be especially important lessons that will inform our ongoing work.
The first of these is the need to keep the ongoing products of student work as visible as the phenomena themselves .
In the first deployment of RoomQuake, for example, the historical record of seismic events was available by scrolling through history on the individual PDAs, but no public record was accumulated until the summative activities at the end of the unit.
The introduction of large posters in subsequent classroom embedded phenomena units helped to maintain the "thread" of the ongoing activity and keep attention focused on the accumulating empirical evidence.
The second contribution was recognizing the importance of teachers' knowledge of individual students, and how their activity should be organized and coordinated within the social fabric of the class.
Teachers were able to balance choice and responsibility, ensure productive team partnerships, and opportunistically engage in whole class and individual scaffolding that were essential to the learning process.
Brief interventions and point-based assessments do not necessarily provide a rich picture of the impact of experiences on learners.
While we saw positive short-term learning effects, we do not expect that a significant number of the students with whom we work to pursue careers as practicing scientists.
Our larger goal is simply to promote a science-literate populace by establishing a propensity toward evidence-based reasoning and empowering learners to believe in themselves as legitimatized observers of phenomena.
In the RoomBugs and  RoomQuake units, we administered a Likert-scale affective test based on the Test of Science-Related Attitudes  .
In both cases, students showed substantial positive movement on items such as "I would rather find out why something happens by doing an experiment than by being told" and "I would rather do my own experiments instead of finding something out from a teacher."
On a cautionary note, the most significant affective change in the RoomQuake unit was stronger agreement with the statement "Being a scientist takes too much work."
In the second RoomQuake pilot, we instrumented the classroom with six cameras, capturing and coding the participation of each student in the various roles 
We found striking individual differences in both the rate and variety of participation in various roles, ranging from students who maintained a consistent rate throughout the unit, to those who were active participants at first but appeared to lose interest over time, and finally to students who didn't begin to actively participate until long into the series of earthquakes.
Similar participation variability was evidenced in the distribution of note card authors in the HelioRoom unit, and anecdotally observed in RoomBugs.
The embedded phenomena described in this paper require only modest technologies.
Each of these embedded phenomena are delivered at the client end on conventional web browsers containing Flash plug-ins, served by an Apache web server running on a personal computer housed in our laboratory.
The minimal computational and communication demands imposed by these simple applications raise the possibility of the emergence of a class of "phenomenon servers" that could economically deliver simulated science phenomena to large numbers of classrooms, using conventional classroom computers as ambient media clients.
From an interaction perspective, embedded phenomena support the collaborative activity of workgroups through the use of multiple media devices distributed within a single physical space, a common deployment framework in CSCW and CSCL research.
Systems such as Xerox PARC's Colab , the University of Arizona's Planning Laboratory , and the Microelectronics and Computer Technology Corporation's Project NICK , and their successors, have focused on support for activities such brainstorming, decision support, and planning within group meetings.
Among instructional systems, ClassTalk , eClass  , ActiveClass , LiveNotes , and HubCalc  share a similar mix of private and public media .
While these systems are designed to support group activity in fairly structured settings in which participants are focused on a shared goal during a fixed time period, more recent systems, such as MessyBoard , Notification Collage , and Semi-Public Displays , among others, have explored the utility of embedded devices for opportunistic interaction within co-located work groups engaged in longer-term collaborative activity.
In such systems, public affordances provide focal points for informal discourse and activity that complement individual work undertaken in private.
Embedded phenomena are distinguished from these systems by their complete absence of private affordances; in this way, they more closely resemble a multi-display variant of single-display groupware  in which all interaction is undertaken publicly on shared devices.
And while they share with `roomware' projects such as iRoom  and iLAND  the notion of the designed physical space as the interface to the computational system, in embedded phenomena multiple devices are used not to partition information by functionality , but rather as a means of distributing the representation of state over physical space, requiring users to attend to multiple devices in order to understand and/or control the state of the ongoing simulation.
Like ambient displays , embedded phenomena are designed to provide representations of persistent, dynamic phenomena.
Although ambient media are often associated with non-display-based fixtures , and represent real, rather than simulated phenomena, a more important distinction concerns the peripherality of ambient media, in the sense that they provide access to "non-critical"  information that is not necessarily of ongoing or central concern to their users.
Embedded phenomena fall somewhere between the "take it or leave it" nature of ambient display data and the exigency of data in traditional CSCW and CSCL applications.
Embedded phenomena share with virtual, mixed, and augmented reality systems the goal of inducing among users senses of immersion  and presence  .
Embedded phenomena differ in that they introduce a new "flavor" of artificial reality, one characterized not by an attempt to substitute one reality for another, or to bridge the natural and artificial worlds, but instead allow distinct natural and artificial worlds peacefully co-exist in time and space.
There is a rich tradition of employing simulations in support of science inquiry learning through a variety of media including desktop-based microworlds , first-person virtual environments , and distributed handheld devices  3.
Simulations increase the space of accessible phenomena and afford the introduction of simplifying abstractions that scaffold learning.
Embedded phenomena draw special inspiration from pioneering simulation systems that enable students to serve roles  as embodied participants  engaged in the enterprise of authentic scientific investigation, particularly the concept of participatory simulations .
In recent years, several researchers have begun to employ embedded ubiquitous computing media to support science learning .
Two pioneering projects emanating from the U.K. Equator project bear special relevance.
In the Hunting of the Snark , young children seek to discover the characteristics of the mythical Snark by interacting with a variety of ambient media situated within a classroom.
A range of technologies, including RFID tags, accelerometers, pressure pads, and location tracking devices are provided to allow children to explore Snark characteristics in multiple modes of activity.
In the Ambient Wood projects , probes are used in conjunction with fixed-location "kiosks" that serve as complementary data sources.
In Environmental Detectives , activities situated in outdoor spaces are augmented with PDAs that provide simulated data on environmental parameters.
Like embedded phenomena, these innovative projects employ embedded displays to represent the state of dynamic  phenomena.
They differ from the embedded phenomena framework, however, in that the representation of phenomena is not persistent; the use of these systems is synchronized within the regular flow of instruction.
In this paper, we have sought to add to the practitioner's toolbox by introducing a new way to use existing technologies, embedded phenomena, which addresses the needs of learners while making innovative use of classroom space and time.
We showed that the framework is sufficiently flexible to manifest a broad range of curricular phenomena.
Our classroom experiences provide support for the assertion that the use of embedded phenomena can impact student learning, participation, skill acquisition, and attitudes toward the scientific enterprise.
Finally, we showed how the essential elements of the framework have been informed by research in human-computer interaction and learning technologies.
When describing embedded phenomena to people for the first time, we have found that once they understand the basic idea they are quickly able to suggest ideas for the representation of new phenomena.
We hope that the our framework will spur refinements and extensions that expand learners' opportunities to engage in the practice of science.
The author thanks Louis Gomez, Jennifer Wiley, Susan Goldman, Maria Varelas, Joshua Radinsky, Donald Wink, Jim Pellegrino, and Chris Quintana for helpful discussions during development of the conception of embedded phenomena.
Debi Kilb of the Scripps Institution of Oceanography served as our resident seismologist.
Syeda Hussain, Michael Barron, and Mark Thompson were responsible for the implementation of the example phenomena and their deployment in classrooms, and Barron for the conception of RoomBugs.
The author also wishes to acknowledge the contributions of teachers Tim Halter, Diane Conmy, and Jeff Maharry, as well as their students, without whom this work would not be possible.
We gratefully acknowledge the support of the Electronic Visualization Laboratory at the University of Illinois at Chicago.
This material is based on work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation under grants DGE0338328 and ANI-0225642.
Abowd, G. Classroom 2000: An Experiment with the instrumentation of a living educational environment.
Applegate, L., Konsynski, B. and Nunamaker, J.
A group decision support system for idea generation and issue analysis in organizational planning.
