Color is commonly used to convey information in digital environments, but colors can be difficult to distinguish for many users - either because of a congenital color vision deficiency , or because of situation-induced CVDs such as wearing colored glasses or working in sunlight.
Tools intended to improve color differentiability  exist, but these all use abstract models of only a few types of congenital CVD; if the user's color problems have a different cause, existing recolorers can perform poorly.
We have developed a recoloring tool  based on the idea of situation-specific modeling - in which we build a performance-based model of a particular user in their specific environment, and use that model to drive the recoloring process.
SSMRecolor covers a much wider range of CVDs, including acquired and situational deficiencies.
We evaluated SSMRecolor and two existing tools in a controlled study of people's color-matching performance in several environmental conditions.
The study included participants with and without congenital CVD.
Our results show both accuracy and response time in color-matching tasks were significantly better with SSMRecolor.
This work demonstrates the value of a situation-specific approach to recoloring, and shows that this technique can substantially improve the usability of color displays for users of all types.
There are several reasons for these colordifferentiation problems: people may have a congenital color vision deficiency , commonly called `color blindness', which affects almost five percent of users ; people may have an acquired CVD ; or people may have a situationinduced CVD, such as viewing a screen in bright sunlight, using a monitor with incorrect settings, or wearing tinted sunglasses.
Up to ten percent of users may have one of these forms of CVD at any time .
All of these types of color vision deficiencies can cause situations where colors in digital environments are indistinguishable for the user.
The cost of these interpretation difficulties range from annoyance  to severe security and safety issues .
To assist with this problem, adaptation tools have been developed that modify the colors in digital presentations to make them more differentiable .
However, current recoloring tools do not work for many cases of CVD because they only model a particular form of congenital CVD called dichromatism .
For users whose CVD arises from a different cause , current recoloring tools do not accurately model the source of the colordifferentiation problem, and cannot perform appropriately.
To address this limitation, we have built a new recoloring tool  based on Situation-Specific Models  of color differentiation.
SSMs are performancebased models that can capture the color differentiation abilities of any individual in any environment, by using an in-situ calibration procedure.
To use SSMRecolor, a user first carries out a two-minute calibration, which results in an SSM of their specific color-differentiation abilities in their current environment .
The recolorer uses this model to determine which colors will be confused, and modifies these problem colors until the SSM predicts that all colors are differentiable.
The modified colors are then used to replace the problem colors in the image to produce a differentiable version of the image.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
To evaluate SSMRecolor, we carried out a controlled experiment that compared our system against a common Internet-based recoloring tool and a recently-published recoloring tool that represents the state of the art.
We used two color-matching tasks to test the systems in three situations that induced an environmental CVD: yellowtinted glasses, a broken monitor with no red capability, and a darkened monitor.
In addition, we tested two groups of participants - those with congenital CVD and those with typical color vision.
Color matching was used because it is a typical real-world application of color differentiation.
We found that people's color-matching performance was significantly better when using SSMRecolor - matching accuracy was 90% on average with SSMRecolor, compared with 70% or less for all other tools.
In addition, SSMRecolor performed consistently in all situations, whereas the performance of the other tools was widely variable depending on the type of induced CVD.
We found similar results with response time data - participants found matching colors significantly faster with SSMRecolor than with any other tool, and times were consistent across situations.
Last, our results were similar both for participants with congenital CVD and those without.
Our main contributions are a demonstration that the situation-specific approach can be implemented in a recoloring tool, and empirical evidence that the approach performs better than current tools in non-standard CVD environments.
SSMRecolor requires only a short calibration step, is applicable to any situation, and works quickly enough to be used in everyday applications.
Situationspecific modeling can substantially increase the coverage of recoloring tools, for a wide variety of users.
These variations fall into two categories: those with cones with a shifted sensitivity and those missing an entire cone type.
There are three types of sensitivity shifts depending on which cone class is affected: protanomalous , deuteranomalous , and tritanomalous  .
Protanomalous and deuteranomalous CVDs make up almost 75% of all congenital CVD .
The severity of each of these three forms of anomalous trichromacy ranges from no difficulties with day-to-day life to frequent color perception problems.
There are also reported cases of individuals who do not fall into one of these three categories, and are diagnosed with extreme anomalous trichromacy .
Individuals missing an entire type of cone have dichromatic CVD: protanopia , deuteranopia , and tritanopia  .
Dichromatism constitutes about 25% of congenital CVD, and manifests in daily life with frequent difficulties identifying, matching, and reproducing color .
Any environmental factor that influences the brightness or spectral distribution of light entering the eye can induce a situational CVD.
Vision research classifies environmental brightness into photopic , mesopic , and scotopic  light levels.
In scotopic conditions, only the rods function, and no color perception occurs.
At mesopic light levels, both the rods and cones contribute to color perception, thereby changing how we perceive colors .
Color perception works well at photopic light levels, but excessive light or glare can overwhelm the capabilities of devices such as LCD panels.
In addition, factors that influence spectral distribution of light entering the eye can change color perception.
This happens when lighting is colored , or when wearing tinted glasses or contacts.
In digital environments, this factor can occur when display hardware or graphics software fails or is not properly calibrated.
Humans see color with three types of light-sensitive cone cells in the retina.
Each cone type is sensitive to a different portion  of the visible spectrum.
The cones' spectral sensitivity arises from photoreceptive proteins that are genetically determined, and variations in genetics can result in a variation in the spectral sensitivity of that cone type .
Considerable variation exists among non-CVD individuals.
For example, many men have multiple genetic encodings of their long- and medium-wavelength photoreceptive proteins leading to variations in male color vision ; and there is evidence that some female carriers of CVD genes may possess four types of cones instead of three .
Acquired CVD can result from factors that affect the light entering the eye , as well as neurological damage to the retina or visual processing centers of the brain .
Retinal damage can result from premature birth, long-term diabetes, hypertension, macular degeneration, or long-term exposure to organic solvents like styrene .
Neurological damage can arise from stroke or aneurism, as well as traumatic brain injury.
Acquired CVD can be short-term as well, being introduced by prescription drugs  or as a side effect of depression.
The idea of adapting colors on a computer display to match the color perception abilities of the user began with Meyer and Greenberg , who proposed a CVD simulation strategy, a computerized color vision test, and the idea of recoloring for individuals with dichromatism.
More recently, SmartColor  allows a designer to specify visualization properties that constrain the automatic production of a color scheme that accommodates CVD.
Many recoloring tools have been presented that deal specifically with images.
Methods for transforming color images to greyscale have been modified to accommodate individuals with CVD , and an interactive accommodation system has been developed  that allows the user to explore different recoloring strategies.
Both of these approaches modify all of the colors in the image, often resulting in dramatic changes.
Most recently, a relatively fast dichromatic recoloring tool aimed at maintaining the `naturalness' of an image has been proposed  to address this.
These systems all perform recoloring for dichromatic CVD, but do not attempt to accommodate those with other forms of congenital CVD or with acquired or situational CVD.
Here we describe the design and implementation details for our SSM-based recoloring tool - SSMRecolor.
Recoloring tools use a three-step algorithm to recolor an input image: 1.
Reduce the colors in the input image to a `key set' of colors .
Generate a recolor mapping from the key set of colors to a replacement set of colors.
Replace the original input image colors with the recolor mapping colors to generate a recolored image.
To find the key set of colors for an image in SSMRecolor , a target number of key colors is provided by the user.
Less-frequently-used colors in the input image are iteratively changed to a perceptuallysimilar color that occurs more frequently, until only the target number of colors remains.
To replace original image colors with recolor mapping colors , SSMRecolor examines each pixel of the original image, switching original colors for the replacements determined in step 2.
The main contribution in SSMRecolor is in this second step - generating a recolor mapping.
We illustrate the process with the chart shown at left in Figure 1 .
A protanopia-simulated view of this chart is shown at right in Figure 1 to illustrate the difficulties caused by this type of congenital CVD.
Figure 2 contains the key colors for the original chart.
Recoloring tools rely on models of CVD that provide the ability to predict which colors on a display will be confused.
Most recoloring tools use simulations of CVD vision based on early work by Meyer and Greenberg  or Brettel et al.
Both approaches produce simulated protanopic, deuteranopic, and tritanopic views that are compared to the original image to detect colors that are differentiable in the original, but not in the simulation.
The image colors are then modified to make them differentiable.
More recently, work has been done to simulate many types and severities of anomalous trichromacy .
Recoloring tools could make use of these models, but individuals with CVD rarely know the type or severity of their condition.
Existing models of CVD use a static mathematical representation of color differentiation which is unable to adapt to changing circumstances.
Basing a model on in-situ performance can automatically capture the influence of any factor that affects color perception.
As a result, situationspecific models can be constructed for any individual in any environment, giving these models specificity not available in the existing mathematical models.
In earlier work, we proposed SSMs for color differentiation  that can accurately represent the color differentiation abilities of non-CVD and CVD individuals with a variety of types and severities of congenital CVD, in a variety of situations.
These SSMs were built using an in-situ user calibration to capture their color differentiation abilities.
SSMRecolor builds a mapping from the set of key colors to a set of replacement colors.
This two-step process is iterative, first identifying a non-differentiable color from the key color set, then assigning a replacement color for the identified color.
This process is fundamentally different from previous approaches because any colors that are differentiable from all other colors are maintained, resulting in only problem colors being modified.
As mentioned earlier, most existing recoloring tools modify all of the colors in an image, resulting in unnecessary introduction of false colors.
An in-situ calibration is performed to generate a situationspecific model of color differentiation for the user .
This calibration captures the effect of any factor  on the color differentiation abilities of a user, and allows predictions to be made about these abilities.
The model provides the Boolean function areDifferentiable, which predicts whether colors C1 and C2 are differentiable or not.
For illustration purposes, let us assume that the user has protanopia and has performed the calibration procedure already.
SSMRecolor draws replacement colors from one of two sets: unconstrained and luminance-maintained.
The unconstrained set is simply a random RGB color generator; it is unconstrained because nothing restricts the suggested replacement color.
The luminance-maintained set contains RGB colors of the same CIE LUV luminance as the target.
This set is loaded at runtime from a pre-generated database by specifying the desired luminance level, and replacement colors are chosen randomly from this set.
For this illustration, we use the unconstrained set of replacement colors.
Next, the algorithm again selects the highest degree node .
Replacement colors are selected until this node's edge is eliminated, switching the problematic orange to a bright green .
When the color network contains no more edges, the recolor mapping is built  and used to generate the recolored image .
Figure 5 right shows the protanopia-simulated view for the recolored chart to show that the original color differentiation problems have now been resolved.
To generate the recolor mapping, the `areDifferentiable' function is used to compare key colors.
The result of this comparison is a network where key colors are nodes, and edges indicate confusion for the user .
The color with the highest degree in the network  is replaced with a color from the replacement set, and the network is regenerated using the SSM.
This process is repeated until no edges exist in the color network, at which point the recoloring is complete.
A map from the original key colors to the new set is returned.
It can be seen from the right chart in Figure 1 that some category color pairs are not easily differentiable for the protanopic example viewer: `screws' and `nuts', `screws' and `rivets', and `washers' and `nails'.
Given the key colors shown in Figure 2 and a color differentiation model for this individual, the initial non-differentiable color network can be constructed as shown in Figure 3, left.
Once this network is generated, the highest-degree color is identified .
SSMRecolor also maintains the maximum number of original colors, making Kuhn's a reasonable comparator.
We compared these systems in three different CVDinducing situations, with two color tasks, for individuals with and without congenital CVD.
The study was designed to determine whether the SSM approach can improve on the state of the art in recoloring - that is, whether our new recoloring tool allows people both with and without congenital CVD to better differentiate colors in a variety of CVD-inducing situations.
As Kuhn's tool is a dichromatic recoloring system, it requires the type of dichromatism .
We therefore created three versions of the Kuhn recolorer, one for each type .
All participants were screened for CVD using the HRR Pseudoisochromatic Plates ; of those with CVD, five participants had deutan vision, three had protan vision, and one had unclassified red-green CVD.
A custom Java application presented a matching task in which the user had to click on a single color that matched a given cue color .
Two tasks were developed that used two different color sets: a situation-specific set of nine colors, and the first fifteen colors from the Excel 2011 chart color set .
A control condition and three types of situationally-induced CVD were used in the study.
We chose situations that were likely to be commonly encountered in the real world, and that were representative of different color vision problems.
Colors were presented to the participant with no added situational CVD.
Participants wore yellow-tinted glasses while performing the matching task; this had the effect of altering the hues of the colors on the screen.
These glasses are worn for certain sports, or by people who experience glare when driving at night.
For this situation, the monitor's settings were adjusted to reduce the contrast and brightness of the colors produced.
Brightness was set to 50%, contrast to 0%, and the red, green, and blue primary gains were set to zero.
This condition reduces luminance differences between colors .
This situation simulated a monitor that cannot display red.
All colors displayed on the screen were programmatically altered to have their red channel values set to zero.
We compared six recoloring schemes: a control condition with no recoloring, SSMRecolor, Daltonize, and three variations of Kuhn's recolorer.
This tool uses a situation-specific color differentiation model, so the participant performed a calibration procedure  to generate the model in each situation.
To reduce the effect of calibration input errors, we performed three calibrations and used the median values as calibration values.
Three calibrations took 6.84 minutes, on average.
The study system presented the participant with a 3x3 grid  or 3x5 grid  of colored squares.
The arrangement of colors in this grid was randomized, and one of the grid colors was presented as the cue color on the right of the screen.
To reduce the contextualizing effects of color perception , all colors were presented on a neutral white background with sufficient gap between color squares to remove contextualizing effects.
The participant's task was to click on the grid square that matched the cue color.
Each color in every nine-color and fifteen-color set was chosen once to appear as a cue color.
Participant responses were recorded by the study system.
The study ran in a controlled environment on a Windows 7 PC with a 24-inch 1920x1080 LCD monitor.
The darkened monitor situation was carried out on a second  computer and monitor, with the display pre-set to the appropriate values for the condition .
The Excel task used the same colors for each situation, and was chosen to explore aspects of color use in the real world.
Nine isoluminant colors were selected to focus on the ability of the recolorers to deal with hue and saturation differences .
Healy suggests that a maximum of seven isoluminant colors should be used in a visualization ; we added two more to increase the difficulty of the task for the recoloring tools.
We chose the nine colors from the CIE LUV isoluminant plane with luminance of 53.3 .
Eight colors were taken from equallyspaced points around a circle of radius 100 on this plane, centered at the approximate center of the plane .
These eight plus the central color made up the set of nine.
The second task used the first fifteen chart colors from Excel 2011 for Mac .
Although fifteen categorical colors in a visualization is an extreme case, we chose these to introduce enough color differentiation problems such that the tools would actually perform some recoloring.
These colors were the same for all situations .
The study used a 4x6x2x2 mixed factorial design with three within-participants factors , and one between-participants factor .
The levels of these factors were: * Situation: Normal, Tinted glasses, Dark monitor, Broken monitor .
Dependent variables were accuracy  and the time taken to respond.
Participants carried out tasks in each situation type .
In each situation, the participant performed an SSM calibration to capture their color differentiation abilities for that specific situation.
Participants then carried out color-matching tasks as described above.
With three within-participants factors, and either nine or fifteen trials per task, there were 4x6x = 576 trials in the study.
At the end of the session, participants filled out a demographics questionnaire.
The entire study  took less than 90 minutes.
Broken monitor - no red.
This resulted  in nine identical colors, simulating an extreme color discrimination situation.
We chose nine equally-spaced achromatic colors .
Achromatic colors were chosen because the settings used in the darkened monitor situation affect the luminance range of the monitor without affecting hue and saturation, so colors that vary only in brightness were used .
The significant effects of Situation and Task were expected, because of the differences in the types of induced-CVD situations and in the requirements for the 9-color and 15color tasks.
No difference found between CVD and nonCVD participant performance is of interest, and suggests that recoloring works in a similar fashion for both of these groups, at least for the colors chosen for this experiment.
Our main interest is in the differences between recolorers.
Overall results for the different recolorers are shown in Figure 11; as can be seen in the figure, SSMRecolor allowed participants to find 20% more correct matches than the other tools.
This recolorer assumes deutan CVD, so it recolors by transferring red-green variations to blue-yellow variations.
However, the yellow tinted glasses reduce perception of blue-yellow axis variations, so this recolorer performed poorly for the nine-color task.
In the fifteen-color task, this transition from red-green to blue-yellow still occurred, but the colors contain variations in luminance which provide redundant cues that allow better color differentiation.
There was a small difference in performance between CVD and non-CVD participants with the different recolorers.
CVD participants performed better overall than non-CVD people when using the Kuhn-P and Kuhn-D tools.
This is because these tools are optimized for these participants' congenital CVD, performing a `worst case' recoloring which significantly aided these participants.
We carried out post-hoc pairwise t-tests between the individual recolorers, using a Bonferroni correction to maintain alpha of 0.05.
These comparisons showed that accuracy with SSMRecolor was significantly higher than any of the other tools .
None of the other comparisons showed any differences - in particular, no recolorer was significantly better than no recoloring at all.
There were, however, several interactions among our factors, and so these overall results must be interpreted in light of these additional analyses.
There were four significant two-way interactions, detailed below and illustrated in Figures 12-15.
The different situations had markedly different effects on the two tasks, as seen by comparing Figures 12 and 13 .
For example, tinted glasses had a much stronger effect on the situation-specific task than the Excel task.
This is because the situation-specific task was designed to highlight problems induced by the situation.
The Excel colors contain enough color variation to reduce the effect of the situation.
Different recolorers performed very differently in the different situations, because the CVD induced by some situations aligned well with some forms of congenital CVD.
Our evaluation provided three main results: 1.
Accuracy of SSMRecolor is 20% higher than existing recoloring tools.
Selection time for SSMRecolor is almost two seconds faster than existing recolorers.
Increased accuracy and reduced selection time of SSMRecolor is consistent across a variety of situations, color sets and users.
SSMRecolor achieves consistently higher accuracy and reduced selection time because the situation-specific model more accurately represents the color differentiation abilities of the user.
By capturing the abilities of the user with a performance-based in-situ calibration, any factors that influence color abilities are automatically encoded into the model.
This allows accurate predictions to be made regarding their ability to differentiate between two colors.
These predictions are the heart of SSMRecolor's recoloring algorithm, allowing both the accurate identification of problem colors as well as the selection of sufficiently differentiable replacement colors.
If this is the case, then SSMRecolor should do better in less extreme situations, and indeed that is what we see .
Even in these less extreme cases, however, perfect accuracy is unlikely - for example, even in the control case with non-CVD participants, people still made a few errors due to the difficulty of the task or selection mistakes.
Nevertheless, there are potential improvements to SSMRecolor that could increase its accuracy, as discussed below.
Any situation that results in reduced luminance range and contrast  can also benefit from SSMbased recoloring.
The study results from the darkened monitor situation show great promise for assisting users in these low-contrast situations.
The situation-specific model of color differentiation relies on an in-situ calibration.
This calibration is required when any of the factors that influence color perception.
Two ways of reducing calibration frequency are storing calibrations for future use, and expanding the applicability of a calibration.
Storing calibrations: A calibration is a set of numbers that represent key characteristics of color perception, and can therefore be stored and retrieved to use when similar environmental conditions arise.
By detecting environmental conditions automatically , an appropriate calibration could be loaded automatically, eliminating the need to recalibrate.
This can be extended to a central online repository of all users' calibrations, further reducing the frequency of calibration for each user.
Expanding Applicability of each Calibration: Although each calibration is for a specific user in a specific situation, the exact influence of environmental changes  on color differentiation is still poorly known.
As a result, it is unknown how the magnitude of an environmental change affects our ability to differentiate colors.
Our previous work on SSMs explored this issue , and suggested that SSMs are robust enough to handle small variations in environmental conditions.
This robustness can be used to reduce the frequency of calibration by allowing the system to extend the current calibration when conditions change, rather than requiring a new calibration.
Kuhn's recoloring tool  attempts to maximize the similarity between the original image and the recolored image.
This is achieved by restricting each replacement color to the luminance of its respective key color, and by attempting to maintain the visually-perceived difference between key colors and between replacement colors.
The existing recoloring algorithm for SSMRecolor is quite naive by comparison, but can be extended to incorporate the luminance and visually-perceived difference consistency as in Kuhn's method.
To do this, the replacement color set can be divided into a replacement color set for each key color, such that each set is isoluminant with its respective key color.
Multiple recolor mappings can then be generated, selecting the recoloring that maximally preserves the visually-perceived differences in the original image.
Current situation-specific models only encode basic color differentiation abilities.
Although differentiation is the central aspect of many color uses, there are additional uses of color that go beyond differentiation, such as popout  and highlighting  in information visualizations .
The current version of SSMRecolor makes no effort to preserve these perceptual properties through a recoloring, but the SSM approach is extensible to other color uses in visualization, allowing SSM-based recoloring to preserve perceptual properties in addition to differentiability.
Although our study examined specific types of situationinduced CVD, our findings should extend to real-world situations that are similar to our experimental conditions.
Any condition or situation that causes the perception of hue to change  can benefit from SSM-based recoloring.
Our evaluation shows that SSM recoloring is applicable to a wide range of situations , and should significantly improve the differentiability of colors on digital displays in these situations.
SSMs for color differentiation have a tunable parameter  that can be used to adjust how conservative the model is in its predictions of color differentiability.
Increasing the limit offset causes colors that are actually differentiable to be predicted as not differentiable.
This parameter can be used in SSMRecolor to adjust the number of original colors that are modified, and to adjust the differentiability of the replacement set of colors.
By increasing the limit offset, more of the original colors will be flagged as not differentiable, resulting in their subsequent recoloring.
An increased limit offset will also cause colors that are more differentiable to be used as replacements.
We presented a new recoloring tool - SSMRecolor - based on situation-specific modeling of color differentiation.
This tool was shown to be consistently more accurate and to provide shorter selection time than existing recoloring tools across a number of different situations.
Our work demonstrates the value of a situation-specific approach to recoloring, and shows that the technique can substantially improve the usability of color displays for users of all types.
In the future, we have two main goals: deployment, and improved speed.
First, SSMRecolor provides assistance for individuals with both congenital and situationally-induced CVD, and we believe this success will generalize to acquired CVD.
Because this recoloring tool covers all three types of CVD, we plan to develop and deploy a real-world version of this system.
This will allow us to further test the approach with real-world images and color-differentiation tasks, and will allow broader collection of data.
Second, we will improve the speed of SSMRecolor.
Currently, the tool takes a few seconds to perform color replacement on a standard PC, which is acceptable for static assistance , but is not fast enough for real-time applications .
Our goal is to extend the recoloring technique to work in real time.
We plan to use pixel shaders to construct a transparent `SSMRecolor overlay' that can be placed on top of the interface of any running application, to modify its colors as they are displayed.
