ABSTRACT Conflict is a natural part of human communication with implications for the work and well-being of a community.
It can cause projects to stall or fail.
Alternatively new insights can be produced that are valuable to the community, and membership can be strengthened.
We describe how Wikipedia mediators create and maintain a `safe space'.
They help conflicting parties to express, recognize and respond positively to their personal and substantive differences.
We show how the `mutability' of wiki text can be used productively by mediators: to legitimize and restructure the personal and substantive issues under dispute; to actively and visibly differentiate personal from substantive elements in the dispute, and to maintain asynchronous engagement by adjusting expectations of timeliness.
We argue that online conflicts could be effectively conciliated in other text-based web communities, provided power differences can be controlled, by policies and technical measures for maintaining special `safe' conflict resolution spaces.
Low-level dispute is a familiar part of collective experience: collaboration involves a combination of conflicts and cooperations among group members .
For example, people differ on what is currently `true' about the status of their activities, and the value of investing time and energy in one way of working versus another.
These `breakdowns' can normally be resolved by fixing inadequately grounded communications, or by agreeing to put egos to one side and dispassionately consider the pros and cons of the situation.
From time-to-time, more serious conflicts occur in all groups.
Typically they happen when personal stakes are high: those involved associate significant costs or gains with the alternative positions in the dispute .
When a more serious conflict breaks out, the experience can be deeply frustrating.
It can engender bad feeling beyond those in the dispute through to the whole community, leading to hostility, permanently damaged interpersonal relationships, extreme behaviours and `cognitive rigidity' - an inability to think around the problem .
All too often, the result can be a costly loss of members to the group.
It is important to understand how conflict can be handled effectively in online communities, given that they involve `persistent conversations' .
In this paper, we show how online conciliators can bring about positive outcomes to text-based conflict by actively working with the medium.
We address positive conflict together with the importance of preserving the legitimacy and substance of statements that form the record of the dispute and reflect on the implications of this for existing accounts of Computer-Mediated Communication .
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Conflict isn't all bad news for groups .
It can foster completely new perspectives on the activities and direction of the group, as the search for a resolution can produce new ways to conceptualize the issues at stake.
They may cause communities to question their own understanding of deviant behaviour and tolerance .
Conflicts can expose and fix deep-rooted mistrust issues .
To achieve a positive outcome, it is necessary to create a communication environment that is perceived as safe.
The safety of such a space for those in dispute means that they can expose their suspicions and concerns in a free and frank manner, alongside the development of a mutually acceptable position on the nature of the dispute and solutions to it .
The emotional component of a dispute is not just an inconvenience, or a cathartic opportunity to `let off steam': venting is a mechanism through which the intensity of feelings about the dispute in general, and particular sensitivity to certain of its elements, can be exposed and mutually recognized.
Thus, it is vital for an effective dispute resolution environment to make possible the mutual recognition of personal investment by conflicting parties.
Considerable work has been invested in the definition of online resolution services for legal and commercial disputes and these are now widely available.
For example, Ebay has a defined process for resolving transactional disputes over the sale of items1.
More sophisticated systems, such as SmartSettle, offer a range of algorithmic decision-making systems, based on optimizing gains from explicit but confidentially revealed positions on a set of defined value dimensions2.
However, these efforts are not concerned with restoring productive relationships within groups .
In this paper, we consider both how conflict arises in online communities and how to address it by restoring positive relationships.
Web-based communication tools enable the composition of groups and the formation of relationships between people who have never met face-to-face.
Sites can encourage or require collaboration between individuals with similar interests and lead to the creation of on-line communities.
Each internet community typically preserves its own history of member-to-member and member-to-group postings, embodying community relationships and norms.
In this way, online conversations between members are enacted in the form of persistent documents : communications that are potentially visible to all members in perpetuity.
As communities grow in size and scope, the potential for conflict increases - members can develop and contest different views about the purpose, nature and permissibility of various forms of conduct on the site .
Relationships between members are placed under strain, reputations can be put on the line, and continued membership can itself be called into question.
Theoretical accounts of computer-mediated communication suggest that conflict will be hard to handle in online environments, especially where asynchronous text is the primary communication medium.
It is important to understand the issues behind this problem, if effective interventions are to be designed.
Early accounts focused on the effects of anonymization and lack of non-verbal information.
The fundamental paucity of social information was said to make online behavior difficult to regulate and equivocation  becomes difficult to manage .
Disputes are more likely to occur as misunderstandings can easily translate into offence and are then difficult to fix with subsequent online exchanges.
Whilst `cuelessness' does suggest challenges for online conflict resolution, it is not the whole story.
The Social Identity Model of Deindividuation Effects  addresses the issue of emotional regulation with more sophistication.
It suggests that provocative statements are made, not so much because of a paucity of information about interlocutors, but because group and individual identifiers get out of balance .
CMC conversations can lead to a sense of personal anonymity, promoting a feeling that individual members are freed from obligations and accountability towards one another, both in terms of posting and response.
When disputants lose sight of their accountability to the group, or sense of sharing a common `super-identity', conflicts are more likely to be initiated and, once they have begun, CMC may promote an escalation of hostilities.
So the relative salience of personal statements is critical.
The Social Information Processing  model is aimed at online relationships .
Serious conflicts are entangled with the relationship between those in dispute and echo in their history of communications.
They are not just to do with the substance of the case they each wish to promote.
SIP suggests that the social nature of online communication is fundamentally dependent on the beliefs parties maintain about one another as social agents.
Walther describes mechanisms for generating hyperpersonal communication in terms of positive attributions .
In the hyperpersonal case, CMC interlocutors can build up exceptionally positive relationships as they receive positive feedback from their presentation of an idealised version of themselves.
In other words, the social emptiness of CMC can be compensated for by unusually positive elaborations in the minds of interlocutors.
The rarefied text medium presents little evidence to contest the interpersonal warmth of image they generate of one another.
All parties must believe in the impartiality of the conciliator.
They must feel they have an equal opportunity to voice their concerns.
Conciliators have no vested interest in outcomes, nor do they have powers to enforce any outcome.
Their intervention is limited to influencing the progression of the dispute through their expert use of language and deep understanding of conflict processes .
Conciliation is geared around parties' ability to express strength of feeling about underlying issues as well as the substance of argument.
Impartiality can extend to `levelling the playing field': helping low-status or relatively inarticulate parties to have a fair opportunity to contribute.
Conciliators begin by structuring the environment and preparing parties for the conditions they must observe whilst engaging in this special form of communication.
In offline contexts, this is usually with all parties co-present and in a carefully arranged and equitable setting.
Recording of statements is not normally permitted and ground rules are established to protect the parties from detrimental selective quoting.
Conciliators are practiced in the use of techniques and strategies specifically designed to position themselves so that they may most effectively help parties resolve their conflict.
The techniques used by conciliators include:  reframing - subtle changes in the language used invite parties to view situations and behaviours from a different position;  control over the floor or the topic this ensures that irrelevant power differences between the parties can be mitigated to ensure that any agreement reached is fair; and  demonstrating listening behaviour this encourages parties to be open and honest about their interests, desires and resources.
Before deploying these techniques, conciliators reflect on the situation, decide when it is necessary to shift from one technique to another.
In terms of strength of personal feeling, `demonstrating listening' can encourage parties to `vent', which may help them to feel as though their concerns have been heard.
Perhaps surprisingly, hostile talk can help to reduce hostility between the parties, provided the conciliator is both able to moderate it in some way, and it results in visible recognition of strength of feeling by the other party.
Billings & Watts investigated how professional conciliators approach the use of mediating technology to communicate with their clients, looking in particular at video mediation .
In this paper, we take forward the `safe space' proposition in the context of text-based dispute resolution in an online community.
In principle, the altered temporal and geographical situation means that parties are unable to address misunderstandings the moment they arise.
Furthermore, the persistence of the medium should generate additional tensions in the process, as parties struggle to redefine their conflict relationship.
We show how mediation occurs in a particular online environment to inform policies for conflict management by conciliators in other text-based settings.
Many online communities have had to confront dispute and unruly behavior.
Site builders and communities themselves have introduced sociotechnical measures  to try to forestall and contain disputes between members.
These include acceptable use policies ; special posting areas for newbies ; posting oversight and rating systems ; specific markers for offensive posts; active moderation; censorship and kill files; registration requirements ; through to account deletion .
So handling disputatious behaviour is an ordinary part of the online community experience.
However, active mechanisms for resolving conflicts are less common.
Some sites have explicit ways of handling serious disputes, requiring involvement of one or more senior community members to directly intervene in some way.
In this paper, we focus on `mediation' interventions of this kind.
Mediation is recognised as a powerful antidote to poisonous conflict in offline settings.
It is intended to create the conditions for disputants to be innovative with respect to the problem and in redefining their attitudes towards one another.
It can be defined as " a neutral third-party with no power over the parties, who attempts to help them settle their dispute."
This thirdparty is normally referred to as a `mediator'.
However, to disambiguate the effects of technological mediation from the role of the third party, we refer to the role as `conciliator', and the process they use as 'conciliation'.
A number of theories of conciliation exist.
Each varies in its conceptualisation of conflict and of the pragmatic effectiveness of communication in dispute resolution.
Early models, with their roots in labour union negotiations, focus on identifying and negotiating the value of resources, and developing a mutually agreeable compromise .
Contemporary models draw on theory and practice in counselling .
They focus on the relationship itself and parties' attempts to construct and explore explanations of one another's behavior.
Our approach to conflict draws in particular from Winslade's emphasis on narrative processes in conciliation .
Narrative conciliation can be related to the SIP concept of relationship construction, as CMC interlocutors develop and personally elaborate attributions of one another.
However, in terms of conflict resolution, we have an additional consideration: interlocutors have the opportunity to elaborate alternative `stories' about their dispute.
Wikipedia is an enormous collaborative volunteer effort intended to produce a free, on-line encyclopaedia.
The term describes both a community and a resource.
The resource is a collection of articles produced with collaborative editing technology.
Multiple contributors can work on the same article, logging changes with date, time and some form of identifier for the person who made each change.
Whilst the ethos of Wikipedia is that anybody may add, delete or edit any article, some contributors are more equal than others.
Coping with vandalism and the complexity of the `architecture of participation' for such a large enterprise has generated community administrative membership structures and governance through systems of policies .
These community policies serve to ensure that the articles conform to an objective ideal: they must be written to convey a Neutral Point of View , supported by sources that are legitimate and verifiable.
However, conflict management is a central problem for Wikipedia because of the controversial nature of some topics, especially given the breadth of readership and subjectivity associated with construction of an article overview .
To address this issue, Wikipedia has put in place a number of mechanisms intended to help resolve specific disputes between conflicting parties.
These range from a request for oversight of the dispute, through to binding arbitration 3.
Oversight means that a member in dispute can ask for the dispute to be witnessed.
Arbitration means that a senior member will assess the positions of those in dispute, decide on a course of action and then impose it.
Wiki:mediation  represents is a middle ground where a senior member will try respond to a request to work with those in dispute to help them find their own solution.
The SIDE and SIP concepts of relative salience and interlocutor feedback provide a general frame for our investigation.
At a finer level, our analysis draws on Clark and Brennan's approach to examining how the constraints of a `nonbasic conversational setting' can influence breakdown and repair in conversational grounding .
Clark discusses these in terms of a need for specialist skills to compensate for the additional constraints of nonbasic settings: constraints are taken to represent the omission of environmental properties that would otherwise benefit the grounding process .
Whilst conversational breakdowns are distinct from breakdowns in relations, attempts at recovery from both kinds of failure are subject to the same basic communication constraints.
We examined conciliation records for evidence of how conciliators' use of the medium enables them to carry out dispute resolution strategies.
Examples were most clearly manifest in edits of previously posted comments and attempts to restructure the debate.
We report our findings in terms of four research questions, each following on from the foregoing discussion.
Many hundreds of text-based conciliations of disputes over Wikipedia articles have been made publicly accessible.
In this paper, we report a qualitative analysis of exemplars of this type of dispute, coupled with interviews we carried out with Wikipedia conciliators4.
The three disputes referred to in this paper are: Redshift ; Christianity ; and Zhukov .
Thus, the other side of the `cooling' influence of the medium is that the persistence of the text can reduce parties' perception of freedom to express themselves as themselves .
It can lead to parties avoiding certain statements for fear of some form of retribution, such as public defamation, censorship or banning.
In Example 1, Grafikm directly copies and pastes statements that other parties have made, emboldening elements that they feel are inappropriate or offensive, and asks the conciliator take action.
Oh, btw, how about that wonderfully polite quote: "Look you trolls, none of pages quoted says that Zhukov was good strategist, except of quote of Vasilevsky.
Why you keep pushing this crap?"
They see part of their role as making explicit references to reduce ambiguity or uncertainty, to foster clarifications and reformulations and thereby reduce potential misunderstanding.
After disambiguation, common sense might lead one to believe that eliminating emotional outbursts and regulating turns would be a positive step.
Conciliator H feels that the asynchronous properties of the medium could productively the `cool' or reduce the emotional intensity of exchange.
Asynchrony restricts floor monopolization and could encourage parties to reflect before commiting a detrimental act.
Equally, parties have the opportunity to emotionally compose themselves before replying.
In this way, the emotional climate is shaped by the communication medium and this could serve to inhibit flooding behaviors .
However, as discussed in the introduction, a certain level of emotional engagement is not only desirable: it is necessary to tackle the underlying conflict.
The counterpart to eliminating hot-headedness can be an unwillingness to disclose.
Interviews with Wikipedia conciliators expressed their concerns about retribution and commitment in this environment.
Explicitly naming emotions can show that the intentions of the party have been understood.
The conciliator fills in the gaps.
As discussed in the introduction, mutual recognition of strength of feeling is vital to effective conflict resolution.
Personal elements thus potentially have a legitimate role to play and are necessary in dispute, in so far as they reflect strength of feeling, so parties must feel free to include them.
Either agree or respectively disagree.
Again you may correct word choice etc.
I'm interested in your input too Flying Jazz.
Conciliator I has found that the permanence of the medium can detrimentally alter the salience of ad hominem statements .
They indicate that the nature of the Wikipedia environment  means that parties can exploit the record of how one another have behaved prior to and during the conflict.
This can be used to develop a case against the other party, grounded in objective statements .
In Example 2, the conciliator identifies a number of issues in the dispute and asks parties to comment on them.
The conciliator makes clear that this is to uncover the areas of disagreement.
These statements help to identify substantive and personal issues which are crucial in the dispute.
Parties directly add to the text to say whether they agree with the conciliator's synopsis of the core issues, and whether they share that agreement with one another.
The conciliator uses this technique to make explicit that each party observes the other and explains their actions.
This technique for restructuring the argument represents a new opportunity to define what matters to all parties.
The properties of the medium allow the scope of the dispute to be established through systematic, mutually observable and mutually ratified or contested evaluations.
The use of a bulleted list to identify the breakdowns serves at least two purposes.
First it provides a structure for the discussions.
Each point can be agreed with or disagreed with by each party, those issues in which there is disparity can be identified separately from other issues.
Second, the asynchronous nature of the medium provides each party with the opportunity to reflect on each point and give a considered answer, rather than reacting to the comments as a criticism and entrenching them further in a position.
Parties are given time to understand and reflect upon the differences between them.
SA's response is to `correct' elements of the argument but does so in a patronising manner .
The problem for the conciliator is that the substantive and personal elements of the dispute are fused together in the text and that the persistence of the text could lock-in the dispute forever.
Not only is this peer-reviewed, it is apparently demonstrated in the laboratory, and there are reportedly over 100 papers on the subject.
And there are many other examples.
How about theoretical  redshifts, such as Intrinsic redshift, or "Redshift quantization"?
Again, all peer-reviewed with more than one article and more than one researcher.
Jimbo Wales himself said that "Usually, mainstream and minority views are treated in the main article, with the mainstream view typically getting a bit more ink, but the minority view presented in such a fashion that both sides could agree to it.".
After this "Jimbo Wales himself" wrote: "Singular views can be moved to a separate page and identified  as such, or in some cases omitted altogether.
Conciliator H has found that rephrasing and summarising points are effective tools for demonstrating listening in an asynchronous text-based environment.
The absence of paralanguage or other cues that can be used to quickly demonstrate that a point has been acknowledged or understood, means that a conciliator needs to make explicit that shared understanding has been achieved.
They cannot assume that any agreement has been reached.
Once made explicit, there is a permanent record of the agreement that can be used to form part of the common ground.
However, Example 4 from Zhukov shows that a conciliator can address the language used by disputants by working directly with the persistent record.
In this way comments can also be beneficial to the relationship.
Grafikm and Sigitas are venting about the way that they feel the other party is behaving and BrownHornet21 is conciliating.
The language is becoming heated in a way that could be damaging.
The conciliator chooses to `strike-through' some of the statements made by both Sigitas and Grafikm, to demonstrate how their exchange could be made more constructive.
Yes, the problem is that you never bother presenting other opinions.
You only quote Suvorov and Sokolov  and don't provide an alternate opinion.
This is a kind of antiZhukov crusade you're leading, and that's why I filed this medcab in the first place.
The following excerpts show evidence of the conciliator and participants editing previously posted comments in order to contribute to the dispute.
Example 3 is taken from Redshift.
In this dispute, the conflicting parties are Iantresman and ScienceApologist, and the conciliator is NickY.
It illustrates the challenges to conciliation arising from asynchronicity and persistence.
And I'm not quoting Suvorov in the article.
Sigitas 11:52, 27 July 2006  "Other opinions are already over-represented thanks to the decades of Zhukov's personality cult building by soviet propagandists."
To the mediator: do you see  what I mean now?
It is not my fault that documents and facts show incompetence and sadistic nature of Zhukov.
I do not invent anything.
I'm not against consensus building.
Quite contratry , it is Zhukov's fans who are pushing controversial claims, like that "brilliant strategist" thing.
There is no consensus on strategy skills of Zhukov, so why push it?
Iantresman agreed with ScienceApologist's responses about 25 minutes after that.
This is only possible if all are online and available, however; conflicts can last for weeks: periods of unavailability are likely to occur in the on-going dispute.
The conciliator needs to be able to anticipate the effect that these periods of absence may cause, and take steps to remedy this.
Note that this is not the same as simply eliminating the personal and retaining the substantive.
It is the result of a design decision to include this `formatting option' and the conciliator's decision to integrate the feature into their practice.
They are shown how to distinguish their personal and substantive differences.
Furthermore, in Example 4 the conciliator actively demonstrates impartiality by visibly altering contributions from both parties.
When the debate is denuded of its ad hominem elements, the positions of both parties become reasonable and clear.
In other words, it becomes possible for all parties to see the basis of one another's claims.
In Example 5, the conciliator  has identified that one of the parties  is eager to move the debate forward.
However, one of the other parties  will not be able to participate for a period.
The conciliator anticipates that the asynchronous nature of the medium might lead to a breakdown in understanding between the parties.
The emptiness of silent periods is prone to being filled with suspicions or false inferences.
Consequently, the conciliator explicitly draws attention to this to ensure that KV does not misattribute Str1997's lack of response withdrawal from the argument or lack of engagement.
Power differences are critical in conciliation.
Parties will have invested resources in the outcome of the conflict and will be reluctant to forfeit these should they be unsuccessful.
Parties often adopt strategies to frame the terms of the debate in ways that maximise the effect of their resources and/or minimise the efficacy their opponent's.
A conciliator must take steps to prevent these power differences from hindering resolution, yet must also not be seen to be favour one party, thus jeopardizing their impartiality: their mandate for controlling the exchange.
Example 6 shows how one party's technical skill with the medium interacts with the design decision to make Wikipedia policies and procedures permanent and accessible.
They attempt to bolster the substantive aspects of their case by using these policies as a power resource.
I've taken the liberty of reading through the Wikipedia policy pages on Verifiability and Neutral Point of View, and summarised those statements that appear to support the inclusion of minority views in an article on a majority view.
From Verifiability * The threshold for inclusion in Wikipedia is verifiability, not truth.
Here, a disputant makes use of a very large number of policy statements to lend credibility to their argument as a permissible minority viewpoint.
The wording of Wikipedia policy has been copied and pasted, together with links to the source policy statements.
The links are numbered from 60 - 106, demonstrating that this party wants to appropriate many different policies in support of their argument.
This can then allow one party to fashion a de facto framework for debating the way in which discussions should proceed.
Not all disputants are equally familiar with organisational policy or techniques for appropriating it to their own advantage.
Organisational and technical knowledge are combined to create an impression of general authority.
In this sense, it can be seen as a power display intended to legitimize the argument.
The sheer number of policy links are deployed to imply that the user's position is closest to that of Wikipedia policy on minority views and is thus entirely legitimate.
The above demonstrates how the persistence of the medium allows parties to build up intricate and sophisticated direct connections to their case.
Parties are able to copy and paste explicit norms of behaviour into the article and use these to claim `objective' support for their position.
If unaddressed, this can result in the dispute degenerating into a debate about the legitimacy of various policies, on the one hand, or their connection to the article on the other.
The party who is best able to argue that their view is legitimate in terms of these policies may be able to dominate the other without substantively addressing the underlying issues.
Given persistence, Clark's Common Ground  would suggest that breakdowns in understanding at the utterance level should be less likely - there is a permanent record of what has been stated and to which subsequent statements may be directly related.
But on the other hand, if all statements are permanently recorded, entrenchment will be hard to avoid.
Narrative perspectives on conciliation  would argue that narrative issues would be likely to continue to arise because the protagonists' systems of values are tied into the stories they tell across statements and edits they make.
The temporal information in the edited record seems to some extent to be used to track the development of the evolving dispute.
In particular, persistence seems to work differently in a wiki-based exchange than in a linear forum or blog.
Certainly, whilst persistent visibility of comments/edits means those in conflict cannot escape entirely from their past, the immediate juxtaposition of new and old timestamps provides an important narrative context to statements in the dispute.
Evidence of historical change in viewpoints, through extensions and qualifications, turns persistence into a mutable concept; a critical matter in our study.
Our analysis shows how the technical constraints of a textbased medium can be co-opted to help resolve conflicts.
Our findings depend on  a narrative approach to conciliation that defines a positive outcome in terms of relational benefits and  archived evidence of conciliation practices as enacted in settled disputes in a particular online community.
We now consider the place of these findings more broadly.
The conciliator may aid in the development of alternative narratives, if they are able to seed a restructuring of positions.
Our study showed this in the form of creating new synopses of the argument in text.
Ordered points could seed a new narrative if they are seen, understood and incrementally responded to by all parties.
We showed how this helped by scoping out the main areas of remaining contention.
Parties can then easily identify areas of agreement and disagreement.
Areas of agreement can be put aside and resources can be expended on addressing the remaining issues.
In extreme examples, parties could migrate aspects of the dispute to an entirely different forum.
In a related manner, the use of strikethroughs seems to have helped to address the problem of textual fixedness.
They show how text can be actively co-opted  to express, reflect on and revise their own and others' arguments, and the tone in which they are presented.
In other words, the lack of `recordlessness' need not leave interlocutors stuck in a frozen conversation.
Persistent text can be used as additional expressive material that can be remoulded in the ongoing relational exchange.
For the conciliator, mutated text could encourage reflection among disputants, informing their behavior in future conflicts.
It is difficult to imagine similar value in a face-to-face context.
The persistence of the medium is perhaps the most significant constraint in a conciliation context.
It has a vital impact on the relational exchanges between antagonists.
It alters parties' ability to express their emotions.
The persistence of the text causes parties consider how they wish to appear to the other, and use this to selectively selfpresent.
Parties are reluctant to express their true emotions for fear of retribution: as we have shown, statements made without consideration can be copy-and-pasted into the discussions at a later date.
The opportunity to reflect provides conciliators with a mechanism to encourage parties to consider their personal responses in a specific manner.
We found that conciliators were able to mitigate against entrenchments, and over-cooling, by encouraging parties to express themselves freely and explicitly legitimizing their freedom to explore without retribution.
Conciliators must be able to contain power displays if they are to maintain a level playing field.
In an evanescent environment, the conciliator is able to head off threats in advance by rephrasing or reframing to eliminate power elements while preserving substantive information.
Conciliators must openly address power displays, showing how and why they are doing so, or risk losing their reputation of impartiality.
One may consider power displays in terms of social identity: a party could try to use membership of a powerful social group to reinforce their position.
The SIDE account of CMC  would argue that text media tend to alter the balance of cues for group vs. individual identity and control over such cues could be used to exert control over influence of external group memberships.
However, the situation is complex in online conflicts.
Members have reputations and their own userpages linked to all postings.
They can create, manipulate and present their preferred identities to the dispute in the absence of other cues .
It is not simply a matter of promoting or attenuating the power of individuating cues within the confines of that particular conversation.
The construction of a text-based environment for handling conflict must be shadowed by the inauguration of a set of policies for its use: a conciliator's edits and treatment of reputation during a dispute must be allowed and impartial.
In asynchronous text, the conciliator is unaware of any aborted attempts to communicate.
Parties may have begun to raise a topic, and then on reflection, have decided that it is not something they are comfortable discussing.
The conciliator has no way of gaining awareness of these issues, and so is unable to address any deep-seated reticences.
Another way to consider the conciliator's ability to engage with parties is in terms of a more generalized loss of presence.
Being present to all parties means that the conciliator is able to encourage participation or maintain attention.
It influences how well they are able to appreciate how parties are elaborating their positions in the argument and the extent to which their antipathy may be developing.
Conciliators must keep parties focussed throughout the delays imposed by the medium.
In addition, parties are able to draw on resources from beyond the current conciliation environment and the conciliator may be unaware of these.
The conciliator must engage parties in the dispute, through encouragement and remaining enthusiastic, or explicit requests for participation.
Lampe & Resnick identified timeliness and fairness  as a critical issue in the success of moderation in SlashDot ; we find the same for conciliation in Wikipedia.
Engagement and the norms of interaction are different in conflict relations: policy and technical support both need to be adapted accordingly.
In communication environments that support extemporaneity, instantaneity and simultaneity, the construction of contributions can be observed and interpreted by all parties at the same time as they compose their responses.
The conciliator is able to interrupt, or otherwise modify a contribution as a party is uttering.
This can be used to preserve the safety of the space and ensure that discussions remain on-track.
However, in an asynchronous environment, parties are able to prepare a lengthy contribution without the conciliator's supervision, before adding it to the discussion.
One impact of the medium on conciliator practice is the loss of shared understanding being built in successively managed increments.
This alters the way in which parties are able to vent.
The conciliator is unable to pre-empt venting or flooding behaviour, but must take steps to retrospectively address this when it occurs.
The examples above show that conciliators are able to manage this when it occurs through the `special skills or procedures'  such as strikethroughs, interposition of comments and recapping.
However, the effect appears to be very positive, so that describing it as an necessary reaction to an unwelcome constraint seems to misrepresent how valuable it might be.
It is hard for text-based conciliators to maintain engagement with conflicting parties: the lack of instantaneity and simultaneity limit their ability to draw out contributions.
This means that the conciliator has to reassess the way in which they demonstrate listening.
In a synchronous environment, the conciliator can use non-verbal continuers to encourage a party to keep talking.
In this paper, we have shown a positive benefit for technical mechanisms that make text `mutable'.
That is, earlier statements in a dispute can be preserved but also actively and visibly altered.
As they are remoulded, they are able to reflect the narrative that participants are creating whilst preserving evidence of the path they have taken to accomplish it.
Mutable texts offer a real opportunity for parties to innovatively explore alternative narratives.
Wikipedia, as with the great majority of established online communities with large memberships, has rules and policies for good behaviour.
Participants are aware of these rules and may draw attention to any behavior that violates these policies.
The conciliator must establish a resolution environment as a special space in which these policies are not as important as behaviors appropriate for the construction of new narratives.
This can be achieved by setting special ground rules and de-emphasizing group norms.
The safety of a space is as much to do with altering perceptions of acceptable conduct as technical isolation or `recordlessness' of heated, disputatious conversations.
Migrating a dispute to a unique environment can be very helpful in altering perceptions of norms.
Accountability is very important but it must be understood in the context of changing attitudes, and the temporary disharmony that goes with remediating relationships.
Nevertheless, it may be difficult to carry a resolution achieved within this special environment back to the community, if its `rule breaches' are not ratified as legitimate in the context of dispute.
Billings, M. and Watts, L.A. A safe space to vent: Conciliation and conflict in distributed teams.
European Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work, Springer Verlag, Limerick, Ireland, , 139-158.
Bruckman, A., Danis, C., Lampe, C., Sternberg, J. and Waldron, C. Managing deviant behavior in online communities.
Burke, M. and Kraut, R. Taking up the mop: identifying future wikipedia administrators.
Don't look now, but we've created a bureaucracy: the nature and roles of policies and rules in wikipedia.
Social Values and Social Conflict in Creative Problem Solving and Categorisation.
How oversight improves member-maintained communities.
Daft, R. and Lengel, R.H. A proposed integration among organizational information requirements, media richness, and structural design.
Deutsch, M. A Theoretical Perspective on Conflict and Conflict Resolution.
Conflict Management and Problem Solving: interpersonal to international applications., Pinter, London, , 38 - 44.
Erickson, T. Persistent Conversation: Discourse as Document.
National Institute for Dispute Resolution, Washington, DC, 1995.
A Multi-Method Examination of the Benefits and Detriments of Intragroup Conflict.
Katash and Rifkin Online Dispute Resolution: resolving conflict in cyberspace.
Jossey-Bass Publishers, San Fransisco, 2001.
Social psychological aspects of computer-mediated communication.
Handbook of Conflict Resolution: Theory and Practice, Jossey-Bass, .
Kriplean, T., Beschastnikh, I., McDonald, D.W. and Golder, S.A. Community, consensus, coercion, control: cs*w or how policy mediates mass participation.
Lampe, C. and Johnston, E. Follow the  dot: effects of feedback on new members in an online community.
Lampe, C. and Resnick, P. Slash and burn: distributed moderation in a large online conversation space.
The Emergence of Institutionalisation of ThirdParty Roles in Conflict.
Conflict Management and Problem Solving: interpersonal to international applications., Pinter, London, , 17 - 29.
Picard, C., Bishop, P., Ramkay, R. and Sargent, N. The Art and Science of Mediation.
Emond Montgomery Publications, Toronto, 2004.
Poole, M.S., Homes, M. and Desanctis, G. Conflict management and group decision support systems.
Proceedings of ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work, ACM Press, Oregon, , 227-243.
Spears, R., Lea, M. and Postmes, T. Social psychological theories of computer-mediated communication: social pain or social gain?
The handbook of language and social psychology, Wiley, Chichester, .
Thom-Santelli, J., Cosley, D. and Gay, G. What's mine is mine: territoriality in collaborative authoring.
Cues Filtered-Out, Cues Filtered-In: Computer-Mediated Communication and Relationships.
Handbook of Interpersonal Communication , Sage, .
Winslade, J. and Monk, G. Narrative Mediation: A New Approach to Conflict Resolution.
