ABSTRACT The paper describes how we designed and prototyped HandJive, a haptic device for interpersonal entertainment.
Handlive is notable because it relies entirely on haptic input and output.
The design process included typical steps such as analyzing user needs and performing iterative prototyping 2nd testing.
However, developing a haptic interface like HandJive also presented special challenges, such as creating rapid physical prototypes that could withstand abuse, developing a preliminary system of haptic interaction, and testing haptic interfaces through low-tech prototypes.
HandJive is a handheld object that allows remote play through haptic input and output.
For the 1996 University Workshop at Interval Research, we developing a system based on the workshop theme "remote play-" The challenge in the design brief was to "prototype ways in which people could use computer-mediated objects/interfaces together for enjoyment."
Our four-person team combined a variety of academic pursuits including drama, product design, communication, psycholo,y, mechanical engineering, computer science, computer ,mphics, and human-computer interaction.
We worked on this project for approximately three months.
Although we began without biases towards any user group or resulting technolo,v, our eventual goal became to create a haptic-only, "ubiquitous computing" device for entertainment and interpersonal communication.
We hoped to push the computerized aspects of our device into the periphery, making the computer more transparent to the user.
This briefing explains the incremental steps in our design process, as well as the resulting system which we call `?%ndJive."
Permission to make digitalhrd copies ofall or part ofthis material for personal or classroom use is granted without fke provided that the copies are not made or distriiuted for profit or commercial advantage, the copyri&t notice.
Haptic research in the Computer Graphics and HCI communities has blossomed during the past few years, in part due to the development of high-fidelity force feedback devices such as the PHANTOM .
Tangible Bits  extends this approach by seamlessly integrating these physical objects with the virtual world.
However, our project scope differs from all the above systems in that none of these technologies focus on interpersonal communication or on entertainment.
At the same time we were developing HandJive, other research projects also began incorporating haptics into interpersonal communication devices.
The Bed environment  connects two people remotely to allow for intimate and non-verbal communication.
Both of these interfaces combine tactile input with auditory, visual, and/or ambient media.
In contrast, HandJive has no audiovisual component: the interaction is completely haptic.
Also developed during this timeframe, inTouch  gives the illusion that two people in separate locations am interacting with one shared object through a haptic-only interface.
Our work differs in that HandJive allows orthogonal or indirect manipulations coupled with discrete articulation positions .
We feel this distinetion leads to a significantly different design space.
The first step in our research and design process was to put aside all ideas about interfaces and technologies; instead, we wanted to focus on a user group that had unmet needs.
After considerable brainstorming and lightweight investigations, we found that our team was generally interested in designing for people who were "captive in silence."
In other words, we wanted to create entertaining activities for people who were isolated in a public context .
We then began "people watching"; we observed individuals on buses and subways, at airports, in elevators, at cafes, at classes, in church services, and so on.
We eventually discarded situations involving complete strangers, primarily because we feared that the interactions could be creepy and/or awkward.
After much observation, we decided that our key user group was friends isolated in classrooms and meetings.
For purposes of research, design, and evaluation, we narrowed our user group further, focusing on freshmen and sophomores in college classes.
We accepted the special challenge of this user population: On one hand, we wanted to create a device which allowed students to interact playfully with each other, but on the other hand we did not want to create something so immersive that it would distract students from the class content or interactions.
This was an important objective throughout the project.
However, in a broader sense,we hoped to develop a system that would allow people to interact playfully with each other in any context in which they were isolated in silence.
We then began to study our user group so we could understand their needs, behaviors, attitudes, and contexts.
Both at Stanford and at Foothill Community College, we attended classes with a high percentage of freshmen and sophomores.
We also observed listeners in other related contexts, including a BayCHI meeting.
We soon realized that almost everyone seems to fidget in these situations.
As one user later commented, "Fidgeting is a national pastime."
In addition to making observations, we questioned students about their classroom behaviors.
Through these informal interviews, we learned that some students come to class prepared to play games with others .
So at a later stage of research, we provided our users with some simple games, such as "Hangman," to play in class.
We wanted to see how different types of activities fit into the classroom context.
We discovered that interactive games which allowed students to stop and restart were most amenable to a classroom setting.
Other games were simply too immersive, either in pacing or in mental effort.
From our observations and interviews we created six user profiles of fictional characters who represented key users.
These profiles were intended to run the gamut of our user population.
Creating these profiles helped us gain a clearer picture of the attitudes and behaviors exhibited by our typical users.
Once we defined our users and narrowed our design space, we began exploring ways to fill our users' needs.
We created various narrative scenarios that described how our target users could overcome their isolation in classes by using technology.
Some of these scenarios we visually scripted with storyboards .
Others we enacted verbally using improvisational techniques.
The storyboards and improvisations helped us face key design issues.
For example, the following questions emergedrepeatedly as we discussed our scenarios: Should we design a gaming device OR a communication clevice?
We decided to develop a gaming device because the task seemedto be a more constrained and challenging problem.
Also, the gaming device pushed our scenarios in more interesting directions.
Should our device be exclusively haptic OR multi-modal?
We hypothesized that a tactile-only device might be better suited for the classroom context in comparison to a multimodal system.
Ultimately, we chose the exclusively haptic route because the possibilities intrigued us more.
Direct hydraulic resistance Explore indirect interactions inspired users to fight for to reduce the impulse to fight control We found that most users were intrigued by this type of interaction, although a few also felt the interaction was too "one-dimensional," which did not surprise us.
What did surprise us, however, was that during the tests many users would squeezetheir balloons very hard to force the liquid into their partner's balloon.
In other words, the direct resistance of liquid moving back and forth seemedto make people want to fight for control.
One user commented that she wanted to see if she could make the balloon pop on the other side.
Of course, this type of reaction put considerable stress on our prototypes .
More important, discovering users' inclination to fight started us thinking about indirect haptic interactions.
We hypothesized that an indirect interaction-one that did not allow direct resistance-would likely produce a more cooperative environment than a direct interaction could provide.
Toward the end of these user tests, we asked people to imagine themselves with a similar device in a classroom setting.
Many volunteered that they would use the device to communicate.
A few suggested the possibility of playing games.
We learned that although this balloon device may not compete with video games for entertainment value, users thought it would be fun in a classroom setting.
In other words, "fun" is a relative concept, depending heavily on context.
Even a simple device could be fim in a situation where people are isolated in silence.
The next step was to have users play `Three's Company," a game much like "Follow the Leader," with the balloon prototype.
Users liked `Three's Company," but it seemed to require too much concentration to be useful in a classroom setting.
Students would not be able to play the game and listen at the same time.
At this point we built physical prototypes for some of the sketches in our design notebooks, and we began to test the prototypes with users.
The next sections describe the five basic iterations on our design.
Proof of Concept Prototype We built the first prototype as a proof of concept for interpersonal haptic interaction.
The prototype was simply two balloons filled with liquid and connected by a tube .
Prototypomania Alpha With someconfidencein our idea for an exclusively haptic device, we began to rapid prototype many possible solutions, keeping in mind that an indirect haptic interactionwould likely be betterthan a direct one.We used Play-Doh, clay, and Styrofoam to quickly mock up potential devices.
By building these 3-D prototypes, we were able to communicateour ideas better than by just using the drawingsin our designnotebooks.Our ideas for a handheldhaptic device included finger rings, a joystick, spinning disks, and a squeeze ball.
We explored different kinds of playful activities that eachof the various devices would allow.
And we prototypedsome of theseideaswith more robust materials, giving them some limited movement Figure 4 showsa variety of theseprototypes:
In general, it seemed that users took great liberties in squeezing,bending, and generally manhandling thesecreations.
We suspectthat two factors causedthis reaction:  these were handhelddevices, and  they looked playful.
We also found that some users were suspicious of our purposes.
Userssometimes perceivedthesehaptic devicesto have sensual undertones,causing them to question our motives.
Although we never intendedto design a sensual device, Hofmeester et.
Prototypomania Beta For our next iteration, we developeda range of new prototypes based on the design implications from the previous step.
During this phasewe specifically explored two types of motion: sliding  and rocking .
We also compared various form factorssuchasrings  and within-hand devices.
We then testedour rapid prototypes with target users.
At the beginning of each evaluation, we simply handedthe devicesto usersto get their reactions.Later, we specifically asked them to compare and contrast different devices, hoping to gain insight into what people did and did not like.
The tests on.these rapid prototypes provided us with many insights, including the following:
Although we are still not certain why users preferred discrete over continuous manipulations, we suspectit hassomethingto do with the greatercertainty and feedback a discretemovement provides.In contrast, perhaps our continuous-motionprototypesofferedtoo many degrees of freedom,creatinga lesscompelling interaction.
Although other types of form factorsand articulations were possible within our design space, because of time constraints we settled on the above prototype for further refinementsand testing.
We madethesebasic deviceswith superballs, two electrical switches ,and various kinds of putty.
This kludge of materialhad a strongappealfor our users.In fact, reactions to this simple toy hinted at how much adults like to play, though they often hide that fact.
We refined this basic three-part device with further usertesting, learning that most people liked a squishy center with a combination of one large and one small ball at each end.We also found that one size did not fit all; users were sensitiveto moderatevariation in the size of thesedevices.
HandJive As we went through the previous steps, we simultaneously exploredthe interactions users could have with the various prototypes.
Creating an indirect, orthogonal intetzxtion Oneimportant challengewas to developan indirect way of interacting through the devices.Our first prototype test bad shown that dir& resistancewould likely inspire fighting for control, so we discussed a numberof alternatives.
The interaction schemethat seemed most viable was to give eachuser control over a separateand orthogonal plane of movement.More specifically, a user could manipulate each ball on their deviceforward and backwardinto three discrete positions, like articulating a hinge forward and backward.
The balls on the device could also lean from side to side in three discrete positions; however, this side-to-side movementwould be a result of the forward andback motion on the partner's device.
Figure 6 attemptsto show how this ,orthogonalinteraction works.
Becausethese three types of interactions were built of smaller units, we suspected that a haptic interaction languagefor HandJiveshould rely on putting smaller units together to createa larger possibility of interactions.
At first we called these sets of movements "grammars."
Although this term worked well for us, we later realized that "grammar" was not a word our users associated with fun, so we changedthe terminology to "patterns" and "routines."
After various attempts at defining and user testing `Tactilese," our haptic language, we eventually settled on the following: Tactilese consists of single units called "positions," simple movements called "patterns," and more complex movementscalled "routines" .
A user can move the HandJive into one of nine discrete positions.
Patterns combine these positions and are the building blocks for the routines.
For example, the TwoStepPatternis embedded in the Mambo Routine below.
We hypothesizedthat these patterns and routines could be the building blocks for both collaborative activities and competitive activities .
To become a competent HandJive player, one would need to learn a certain number of patterns and routines.
Both types of interaction would involve computermediation.
Figure 6: A schemefor orthogonal interactions.
Using words and pictures to explain this scheme of orthogonal and indirect interaction was a considerable challengethroughout the project.
In contrast, wheneverwe had the opportunity to demon&ate the interaction with a physical prototype,peoplereadily understoodthe interaction scheme.This difficulty illustrates how words and pictures are often insufficient to communicate ideas about movement, and it shows the value of quick physical prototypes,especiallyfor haptic-only devices.
ELDevelopingpatterns and routines With our orthogonal interaction schemein place, we then begandeveloping our first iteration of a haptic languagefor HandJive.
We hypothesizedthat HandJive would allow a new type of interaction not found anywhere else.
Alternatively, a user can compete in single-player mode against the computer: Since Sweet Spot requires significant computing and microelectronic technology, we could not user test this tactile game with the mechanical prototypes we built.
Instead, we developed a software version with HyperCardand tested the game in a visual manner .
In conducting user tests, we found that people could easily perform the patterns.
However, these users could not master the routines during the timeframe of a testing session, giving us little helpful feedback As a result, we asked five users to practice these more complicated movements.
During this period, we also created three interactive prototypes.
These prototypes allowed the balls on the HandJive to rock side to side in the user's hand, while the user manipulated the balls forward and backward.
These devices simulated our proposed HandJive movements almost exactly and would allow for "Wizard of 02" testing.
We built our prototypes using bike cables that ran to a control board .
We tested the interactive prototype with our five experienced users.
We had two key questions going into these interactive user tests:  Would users be able to sense the side-to-side position of the balls?
We took each user into a classroom and allowed him or her to interact via the HandJive with our wizard at the control board.
These tests showed that users:
In addition to developing a tactile language, we also explored different games people could play with HandJive that did not rely on Tactilese.
One challenge in creating a game was finding activities that were rewarding all along the learning curve.
In other words, we wanted a game that was easy to learn but still interesting after playing it for some time.
One of the games we invented was "Sweet Spot," which somewhat resembles the childhood favorite "Battleship."
Initially, the computer secretly assigns each player two sweet spots.
The two players take turns moving their own HandJive, which in turn affects the position of the opponent's HandJive.
The objective is to position the top ball into one of the sweet spots and the bottom ball into the other.
Oneunanswered question is whether users would adopt the patternsandroutines we created.We think not; userswould likely invent their own language and games.
Another question is whether Ha&live would be used as we have intended.We cannotbe sure,though we suspectthat people would use Handhve in unanticipatedways.
Becausethis device does not rely on visuals or sound, it could be a significant communicationor entertainmentmedium for the deafor blind.
Fun is a relative term: What is fun in one context may not be fun in another.
A major challenge for a play device is providing rewardsall along the learning curve.
Meeting in locations like toy stores andparks inspires design.
Having toys at design meetings is also helpful.
Play is never free-form; it relies on some form of imposedstructure.
Peopleexert considerable force on handheldobjects.
Handheldobjectseasily become"objects of desire"and can often be chargedwith sensualundertones.
Handheldobjectsarenot "one size fits all."
It is difficult to communicatehaptic eventsin words or pictures.
Rapid prototyping is more effective than languagein conveying haptic ideas.
Peoplecan learn haptic skills fairly quickly.
A simple haptic device can support complex interactions.
Our usersliked discretemanipulations over continuous ones.
Haptic interactions can be compelling and powerful, making this an exciting areafor researchand design.
We also tested the interactive prototype on five novice users-people who had never used HandIive before.
Although these users had not practicedany of the patterns or routines, they seemedfairly adept in manipulating the interactive deviceand enjoyedthe moving sensationin their hands.Even novice userscould manipulatethe balls forward and backward, despite the fact that the balls were simultaneouslymoving side to side.
Massie, T. and Salisbury, J.
The PHANTOM haptic interface: a device for probing virtual objects, Dynamic Systems and Control, Chicago, 1994.
Pausch, R., Bumette, T., Brockway, D., Weiblen, M. Navigation and locomotion in virtual worlds via flight into hand-held miniatures.
J., Deveault, M. Adaptive user interfaces with force feedback.
