Typically this happens in noisy and busy environments  and/or when physically active .
Shape-change is one alternative for providing notifications, for example Hemmert et al's backplane tapering for in-hand information transfer ; Gomes et al's display bending for ambient  notifications  and; Horev's actuated pixel matrices .
Audio and vibrotactile output are the standard mechanisms mobile devices use to attract their owner's attention.
Yet in busy and noisy environments, or when the user is physically active, these channels sometimes fail.
Recent work has explored the use of physical shape-change as an additional method for conveying notifications when the device is inhand or viewable.
However, we do not yet understand the effectiveness of physical shape-change as a method for communicating in-pocket notifications.
This paper presents three robustly implemented, mobile-device sized shapechanging devices, and two user studies to evaluate their effectiveness at conveying notifications.
The studies reveal that  different types and configurations of shape-change convey different levels of urgency and;  fast pulsing shape-changing notifications are missed less often and recognised more quickly than the standard slower vibration pulse rates of a mobile device.
The increasing array of applications available for mobile devices has resulted in a steady rise in the number and frequency of notifications pushed to users.
Some of these notifications are urgent , while others are less worthy of immediate attention .
Missing high-priority notifications is at best annoying, but can also lead to more serious consequences.
Current mobile devices use audio and vibrotactile channels to attract the user's attention.
Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
By augmenting audio feedback with shape-change  mobile devices may provide more reliable event notifications.
However, we do not yet understand the effectiveness of this new modality for attracting users' attention when the phone is in their trouser pockets .
In this paper, we evaluate the effectiveness of three shapechanging devices for providing notifications.
We implemented devices capable of delivering variable-urgency notifications while in the user's pocket .
In static protrusion, the arm moves immediately to its final position ; slow pulses move to the protruded position , pause for 500ms, return to the rest position  and pause for a further 500ms before repeating and; fast pulses continually move between protruded and rest position.
These terms are also used to describe the movement in the remaining devices.
Audio and vibrotactile channels are typically used to provide notifications on mobile devices.
Audio provides `public', attention-demanding notifications that are often perceived as inappropriate .
Vibrotactile notifications provide a personal  channel to alert the user, with Tactons defining a structure for non-visual communication using time- and intensity-based patterns .
Visual-only cues are typically not used as a primary alerting function as they are likely to be missed if the display does not have the user's full attention .
Based on Hemmert et al's phone-tapering , the backplate expands from the base to increase the device's volume .
In full expansion mode, the whole backplate moves away from the device; in tapering mode, one end moves away from the base.
The urgency and intensity of notifications are configured by adjusting: the operation mode , the height of the expansion , and the type of expansion .
There is growing interest in developing mobile-sized shapechanging interfaces to provide an additional information channel to the user.
To describe such interfaces, Coelho categorised technological properties , Rasmussen et al.
Several point-designs in this space already exist.
Hemmert using back-plane tapering  for in-hand information transfer finding users could estimate the angle between the device's front and back planes.
Horev  used a matrix of actuated pixels to convey in-pocket dynamic information.
Several examples also combine visual displays with mobile shape-change.
We use these previous designs as inspiration for deriving three shape-changing devices suitable for in-pocket notifications.
Drawing from MorePhone , Morphees  and Tilt Displays , each of the four corners of the device can individually, or in any combination, bend away from the base's corner .
Notifications are configured by adjusting: the number of corners actuating , the tip of the bend's height , and the type of movement .
Our devices were constructed using laser cut 3mm wood, actuated by servo-motors, and controlled by an Arduino microcontroller.
They were 70mm   105mm   20mm , approximately the size of a mobile device, meaning they could easily fit into participants' pockets .
Tasks are conducted with one of the devices placed into the participant's preferred front trouser pocket with the shapechanging components facing their body.
A notification on the device is randomly triggered within a 4sec window and the participant presses a physical button held in their dominant hand when they feel the device move, stopping a timer.
The notification lasts for 10sec; if it's not recognised within this time it is deemed `missed'.
The participants then provide an urgency rating for that notification .
If participants fail to recognise the notification within 10sec it is deemed `missed' and the next task is then attempted.
We conducted a within-subjects study where each participant completed tasks with all three devices  in a variety of device-specific configurations.
This allows us to form a greater understanding of the individual devices.
The configurations tested were:  Corner Bending: number of corners , expansion height  and corner movement type .
Protrusion: protrusion height  and protrusion movement type .
Volume Expansion: expansion type , expansion height  and expansion movement type .
Participants recognised all 96 notifications from this device.
There was no interaction between protrusion and speed.
Overall, the protrusion device creates reliable notifications, with low-urgency transmitted using small protrusions in a static position and high-urgency using high-frequency pulses of large protrusions.
In total, participants only missed 2 of the 192 notifications using this device.
There was no significant difference in response time between full expansion and tapered expansion.
There were no further time-based interaction effects.
Overall, Volume Expansion creates reliable notifications, with high-urgency transmitted using fast-pulsing, largedepth, full expansion.
Less urgent notifications can use static, tapered expansion with a shallower depth.
All of the devices were successfully able to convey notifications, with different configurations conveying differing urgency.
Greater protrusion and fast pulse rates created more quickly recognised and higher urgency notifications.
Participants indicated their overall preferences as: Volume Expansion , Protrusion , and Corner Bending .
Shape-change notifications are likely to be most effective when audio is not available .
To validate this assumption and to compare against the status-quo of vibrotactile feedback , we conducted a study where participants walked and were unable to hear the device's audio.
We choose the most efficient notification configuration of each of our three devices for comparison, as follows:  Protrusion, 15mm, fast pulses,  Volume Expansion, full expansion, 10mm, fast pulses,  Corner Bending, four corners, 12mm, fast pulses  Samsung Galaxy S3 default vibration mode .
We implemented three shape-changing devices and conducted two user studies to evaluate their effectiveness for in-pocket notifications.
Shape-change can successfully alert the user and be configured to output a range of variableurgency notifications.
In busy/noisy environments, shapechange provides alerts that are missed less often and recognised faster than the traditional vibration of a mobile phone.
We conducted a within-subjects study with a single independent variable, device, with the four levels described above.
Notifications were provided to simulate a phone call, so lasted for 20sec.
To simulate a noisy/busy environment, users walked in a figure-of-eight with marker distances 2.3m apart and wore headphones playing white noise.
Participants pressed a physical button whenever they felt a notification from the device in their pocket.
Each device provided five notifications, with the order counterbalanced.
Ten participants  between the ages of 22 and 27  took part in the study.
Three wore tight jeans and the remainder wore looser pants.
Half placed the devices in their right front pocket, the rest in the front left.
21of the missed notifications were from the mobile phone in vibration mode, the remainder from the Corner Bending device.
There was a significant difference in response time between devices ; a post-hoc Tukey test showed an HSD of 2.2sec , showing the vibration alert  was recognised significantly slower than the three shape-changing devices .
There were no other differences between pairs.
Our studies established in-pocket shape-changing notifications are effective, complementing previous findings .
Real deployments would continue to also use audio for outof-sight notifications.
The biggest limitation to their deployment is power.
Alexander, J., Lucero, A., and Subramanian, S. Tilt Displays: Designing Display Surfaces with Multi-axis Tilting and Actuation.
Tactons: Structured Tactile Messages for Non-visual Information Display.
Australian Computer Society, Inc. 3.
Coelho, M. and Zigelbaum, J., Shape-changing Interfaces.
Gomes, A., Nesbitt, A., and Vertegaal, R. MorePhone: a study of actuated shape deformations for flexible thinfilm smartphone notifications.
Hemmert, F., Hamann, S., Lowe, M., Zeipelt, J., and Joost, G. Shape-Changing Mobiles: Tapering in Twodimensional Deformational Displays in Mobile Phones.
Talking to the hand-The interactive potential of shape-behavior in objects and tangible interface.
Ichikawa, F., Chipchase, J., and Grignani, R. Where's The Phone?
A Study of Mobile Phone Location in Public Spaces.
Ling, R., One Can Talk about Common Manners!
The Use of Mobile Telephones in Inappropriate Situations.
Rasmussen, M.K., Pedersen, E.W., Petersen, M.G., and Hornbaek, K. Shape-Changing Interfaces: A Review of the Design Space and Open Research Questions.
Roudaut, A., Karnik, A., Lochtefeld, M., and Subramanian, S. Morphees: Toward High "Shape Resolution" in Self-Actuated Flexible Mobile Devices.
