In this paper we investigate how people use online rating information to inform decision making.
We examine whether a theory of searching for information to discriminate between alternative choices can explain behavior, and we contrast it to the normative theory.
Partly in accord with the theory, findings from a controlled experiment suggest that in an environment dominated by positive reviews, such as the World-Wide Web, people gather more information for the best alternative under consideration, and they take more time to inspect reviews of lower rating.
We discuss the theoretical and experimental implications, and propose a bounded optimal account of the way in which people acquire information in service of decision making.
Choice information search presents an important HumanComputer Interaction  design challenge.
It has been known for many years, for example, that simply designing e-commerce sites so that they present a logical organization of products, with meaningful link labels, is insufficient to support critical aspects of the user's task.
Rather, what is needed is functionality that allows user's to bring the details of alternative products into close temporal and/or spatial proximity so that they can be contrasted .
It is also known that choice tasks can be supported through web sites that encourage the propagation of word-of-mouth, experiential, information .
Indeed, systems for providing reviews, ratings, and information about what others' also liked have become pervasive , while some studies of how people search reviews have been conducted .
In parallel with the proliferation of exciting design work, HCI research has made substantial advances in understanding the ways in which people navigate the web for information.
Information Foraging Theory  , for example, has substantially advanced our understanding of how people search information using computer systems.
IFT explains user behavior in general search tasks, for example how people locate articles relevant to a topic in a large collection of documents.
IFT predicts that a patch of information  should be left, so as to exploit another, when the rate of within patch gains diminishes below the expected average rate of gain.
However, Pirolli and Card noted  "information foraging is usually a task that is embedded in the context of some other task, and the value and cost structure of information foraging are consequently defined in relation to the embedding task".
More generally, it might be the case that the embedding task has substantial consequences for the information search strategy.
The Bayesian Satisficing Model   and SNIF-ACT  also offer substantial and rigorous explanations of information search in HCI.
BSM  has been applied to explain information seeking in a map navigation task.
BSM successfully explained when participants stopped gathering information and made a choice of a route.
SNIF-ACT  has been applied to explain when people stop evaluating links in a web page and either follow a link or backup a page, and successfully predicted user navigation behavior.
Through a deep mathematical analysis of optimal behavior,
People sometimes search the World Wide Web so as to inform decision making.
They use the web to help choose clothes, movies, vacations, and even homes.
They choose which stocks to invest in, and which healthcare treatments to adopt.
To make these decisions, people collect information about alternatives and engage in a process of comparison that is then terminated with a choice.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
In the current paper, we report models that are inspired by the rigor of IFT, SNIF-ACT and BSM but which aim to complement them with analysis of choice information search.
We are concerned with how information search is shaped by expectations about the value of information in embedding tasks, particularly embedding tasks that involve discriminating between choices.
We distinguish between expectations about the utility of alternatives and expectations about the value of information, and examine how the former guide the latter.
We are particularly interested in the effect of prior expectations concerning the utility of the choices on which alternative people decide to find out more about.
Here we focus on this latter situation.
We refer to the effect of prior utility on choice information search.
In addition, we complement our interest in understanding whether people search for information about preferred products with understanding how they use product ratings.
For example, a review site may contain two reviews for a particular camera, one with 5 stars and the other with 2 stars, and we might ask which review should a consumer read first?
In the marketing literature there is evidence that people place more weight on negative information  than positive in their decisions .
However, the evidence about whether people prefer to seek positive or negative information and the explanation of their preferences is limited .
In this literature the positivity or negativity of information is called valence, and in the current paper we adopt the same term.
The goal of this paper then is to examine the effects of  prior utility and  review valence on choice information search.
We first review theoretical questions concerning the value of information in choice tasks.
Subsequently we develop a new theory of searching for information to discriminate between alternatives, and contrast it to the normative theory of information search.
The review and theory development take Optimal Experimental Design   as a point of departure.
Finally, we describe an empirical study designed to test both theories.
The study uses an ecologically motivated product purchasing task that focuses on online consumer reviews search, and which is amenable to formal analysis.
There are many explorations of theories of the value of information as explanations of choice information search .
These studies have largely focused on the normative definition of the value of information known as the Expected Value of Sample Information  .
As with all theories of the value of information, the starting point for EVSI is Bayesian inference.
It is assumed that people have prior beliefs about the utility of alternatives in choice, and that these prior beliefs guide the estimations of the value of information about the alternative.
Where EVSI is distinctive, is in the idea that the value is the utility that would be gained by improving the decision.
EVSI is defined as the expected gain in choice utility obtained by a likely choice reversal.
A number of studies of choice information search have examined whether people's information gathering actions conform to the predictions of EVSI .
Hagerty and Aaker  examined information gathering actions in alternative-by-attribute matrices.
They found that in threealternatives-by-seven-attributes choices EVSI correctly predicted what information participants collected in 19.3% of the cases.
Although this is a three-fold increase compared to random selections, it also suggests that EVSI cannot offer a comprehensive account of information search.
Simonson, Huber and Payne  also examined information search behavior in alternative-by-attribute matrices.
They measured participants' prior beliefs about alternatives and the certainty with which the beliefs were held, and they examined the acquisition order of information items.
They found that, in accordance with EVSI, information concerning prior beliefs that are more uncertain is acquired earlier in the search process than information concerning more certain prior beliefs, and information about alternatives with high prior utility is acquired earlier compared to information about alternatives of low prior utility.
Yet, they also observed an effect that cannot be explained by EVSI; that information concerning prior beliefs that are less favorable is acquired earlier in the search process than information concerning more favorable prior beliefs, especially for alternatives of lower utility.
In summary, these two studies  offer partial support for EVSI as a model of information search in decision making.
In this article we explore an alternative theory of the value of information, the Discriminating Information Value .
The theory is motivated by recent findings suggesting that people collect information to increase the discrimination between the alternative choices.
Bolger  examined choice information search between apartments in alternative-by-attribute matrices.
In these studies participants were remunerated according to a points system; the system attached a point score in each alternative and participants were awarded the points of the alternative they chosen.
The studies were designed to examine whether, rather than using EVSI, participants collected information in an attempt to maximize the point score of the chosen apartment or, perhaps, to provide a basis on which alternatives could be eliminated.
The authors found that neither premise offers a comprehensive account of information gathering actions, but rather that people collect information to increase the discrimination between the alternatives.
In this article we explore this possibility.
Below we describe the Discriminating Information Value  theory, and we also contrast it to EVSI - the normative theory.
We contrast DIV to EVSI because we expect that, even if DIV cannot fully explain information search, the comparison will reveal the relative advantages of the discriminating search strategy.
To do that we should firstly define the prior beliefs about the proportions of alternatives' ratings, and derive alternatives' expected utility.
Let the decision maker hold beliefs about the proportion of alternative's i ratings, i,r, where r stands for rating.
We assume that the beliefs follow a Dirichlet distribution with known parameter vector , where R is the number of possible ratings.
The i,r terms can be seen as the number of times that a review of rating r has been obtained for alternative i and are called the prior strengths.
Given the prior beliefs, the utility of alternative i is given by the formula  Where ur is the utility assigned to rating r, and is defined as the utility that the decision maker would obtain when experiencing an alternative of which all reviews are of rating r. The expected utility of alternative i is given by .
When a rating r is obtained the posterior beliefs of the proportion of ratings still follow a Dirichlet distribution with the rth component of the parameter vector increased by one .
Therefore, the projected expected utility of the alternative after obtaining a review of rating r, E, is given by Equation  with the updated beliefs.
The probability of occurring a rating r, pi, is given by the Dirichlet distribution of prior beliefs.
The calculation of the ratings' and alternative's DIV then follows.
In this section we first describe the theory of the discriminating information value.
Subsequently we deploy the theory to generate predictions about the preferences for which alternative to seek information, and the value of processing an information item  as a function of its valence.
In addition we outline the predictions of EVSI, the normative theory.
In operationalising the value of information as the extent that it discriminates between alternatives we follow Optimal Experimental Design  theories of the value of information .
In OED theories the value of a question's usefulness is defined as the expected usefulness, given current knowledge of the possible answers.
Each question is an information gathering action, and in our task the action is the one of obtaining and processing a review about an alternative in a choice scenario.
We assume the rating of the review as the outcome of the information gathering action, or, in OED terminology, as the answer to the question.
In a binary choice between alternatives i and j we define the Discriminating Information Value  of a rating r for alternative i, as the extent that it increases discrimination between the expected utilities of the two alternatives.
DIV predicts the value of processing a review for each alternative, and the value of processing a review as a function of the review's rating .
To develop DIV's predictions we assume ratings with values from 1 to 5, and take into consideration the distribution of review ratings in the WWW.
Consumer reviews about products are highly positive, resulting in negatively skewed or J-shaped distributions of ratings per product , with average ratings greater than four .
Let a binary choice and one of the alternatives being better than the other, i.e.
Is there a preference for which alternative to seek information?
To examine this we performed a simulation exercise to determine whether the information value of processing a review for the best alternative is higher than the information value of processing a review for the second-best.
In the simulation we assumed that ur, the utility assigned to each rating, is r. Alternatives' prior beliefs were initialized by firstly utilizing the hypergeometric distribution1, and subsequently modifying ratings' occurrence probability so as to result in J-shaped distributions.
The number of successes in the hypergeometric distribution was varied from 86 to 90 out of 100 for the best alternative and from 81 to 85 for the second-best.
Subsequently 0.1 and 0.04 was subtracted from the probability of the 4- and 3-star ratings occurrence respectively, and 0.07 was added to both the probability of 1- and 5-star ratings occurrence.
This procedure resulted in J-shaped beliefs with expected value larger than 4.
Further we initialized the total prior strength of the beliefs to integer values from 1 to 10.
The simulation results showed that in 82.4% of the cases the DIV for information about the best alternative is higher than the DIV of the second-best.
First, obtaining a review for the best alternative is not always of higher value than obtaining a review for the second-best.
Second, the percentage is higher than 50%, demonstrating that in most of the cases obtaining a review for the best alternative is of higher value than obtaining a review for the second-best.
We have verified that the percentage is similar for other J-shaped, and for negatively skewed distributions.
Consequently, the DIV theory predicts that, when the prior beliefs are J-shaped or negatively skewed with expected value larger than 4, there is a higher preference to obtain reviews for the best alternative than the second-best.
To demonstrate why DIV predicts that people will have a higher preference to obtain reviews for the best alternative consider a choice scenario with J-shaped prior beliefs and average rating larger than 4.
A positive 5-star rating for the best alternative increases discrimination, while the same rating  for the second-best alternative decreases discrimination.
This is because a 5-star rating increases the excepted utility of the best alternative, shifts it further away than the utility of the second-best and therefore increases discrimination.
On the other hand, a 5-star rating for the second-best alternative decreases discrimination because it shifts its expected utility closer to the utility of the best alternative.
Figures 1a and b illustrate this.
They show the distributions of the posterior expected utility, E of the best and second-best alternative respectively .
The prior expected utilities of the alternatives, E and E are also depicted.
A 5-star rating for the best alternative increases the discrimination from E - E to m1-E , while a 5-star rating for the second-best alternative decreases it to n1-E .
The hypergeometric distribution describes the number of successes in a sequence of n draws without replacement from a sample of m objects, among which k are considered a success and m-k a failure.
For n = 4 the hypergeometric density function has 5 values , and for high k relatively to m the shape of the distribution is negatively skewed.
Consider a 2-star rating for the secondbest alternative.
It considerably reduces its expected utility, shifts it further away than the utility of the best alternative, and increases discrimination from E - E to E - n2  A 2-star rating for the best alternative also increases discrimination but only to E-m2 .
Note that for some of the moderate ratings of the best alternative the discrimination may be decreased, while it is increased when the same rating is obtained for the secondbest alternative, for example the 4-star rating in Figure 1.
Consequently, as Figure 1c, which depicts the DIV of each rating for both alternatives, also illustrates, the DIV of negative and moderate ratings is higher for the second-best alternative, while the DIV of positive ratings is higher for the best alternative.
However, positive ratings are very common, while negative and moderate ratings are rare.
Thus, the DIV of the best alternative is generally higher, because the larger increases in discrimination for the best alternative realized by obtaining a positive rating, generally overshadow when taken in average, the larger increases in discrimination for the second-best alternative realized by obtaining a negative or moderate rating, because positive reviews are considerably more likely.
We also performed the simulation we described above for EVSI to examine the theory's prediction for which alternative to seek information.
The simulation results showed that in 81.8% of the cases the EVSI for information about the best alternative is higher than the EVSI for information about the second-best.
Consequently, and similarly to DIV, in a choice scenario EVSI predicts that people will obtain more reviews for the best alternative.
EVSI predictions: Before developing the predictions of EVSI about the value of processing a review as a function of a review's rating let us recall the definition of EVSI.
EVSI is the expected gain in choice utility obtained by a likely choice reversal.
This would imply that if a rating does not reverse the choice it has zero EVSI.
Nevertheless, as Chater et al.
Consequently, a rating that brings the expected utilities of the two alternatives closer, thus making a future reversal more likely, has a higher value than a rating that increases the difference between the expected utilities of the two alternatives, thus making a future reversal less likely.
For the best alternative under consideration EVSI predicts that reviews of 4-star rating are of higher information value than reviews of 5-star rating.
A 5-star rating for the best alternative increases its expected utility, does not reverse the choice, and makes a future reversal less likely.
On the other hand a 4-star rating decreases the expected utility of the alternative and may reverse the choice.
If it does reverse the choice it has a positive information value.
Yet, even if it does not reverse the choice it makes a future reversal more likely than a 5-star review.
This is because it shifts the expected utility of the best alternative closer to the one of the second-best .
For the second-best alternative EVSI predicts that reviews of 4-star rating are of lower information value than reviews of 5-star rating.
Note that a 4-star rating decreases the expected utility of the alternative, does not reverse the choice, and makes a future reversal less likely.
On the other hand a 5-star review increases the expected utility of the second-best alternative and may reverse the choice.
If it does reverse the choice - which is the case in Figure 1b - it has a positive information value.
Yet, even if it does not reverse the choice, it makes a future reversal more likely than a 4-star review.
This is because it shifts the expected utility of the second-best alternative closer to the one of the best.
To summarize, the two theories give contradicting predictions about the value of processing 4- and 5-star reviews.
For the best alternative DIV predicts that 4-star reviews are of lower information value than 5-star, while EVSI predicts that 4-star reviews are of higher information value than 5-star.
For the second-best alternative DIV predicts that 4-star reviews are of higher information value than 5-star, while EVSI predicts that 4-star reviews are of lower information value than 5-star.
Finally, note that the predictions are the same for J-shaped and negatively skewed distributions with expected value larger than 4, as they are independent of ratings' occurrence probabilities.
Here we examine the information value of processing a review as a function of a review's rating.
We restrict the discussion, and therefore the predictions, to 4- and 5-star ratings, and distributions with expected value larger than 4.
DIV predictions: For the best alternative under consideration DIV predicts that reviews of 4-star rating are of lower information value than reviews of 5-star rating.
This is because a 5-star rating increases the excepted utility of the best alternative and therefore discrimination, while a 4-star rating decreases the utility of the best alternative, shifts it closer to the expected utility of the second-best, and therefore decreases discrimination .
For the second-best alternative DIV predicts that reviews of 4star rating are of higher information value than reviews of 5-star rating.
This is because a 4-star rating decreases the excepted utility of the second-best alternative and therefore increases discrimination, while a 5-star rating increases the utility of the second-best alternative, shifts it closer to the expected utility of the best, and therefore decreases discrimination .
The experiment used a digital camera choice task with high ecological validity, in which participants were first exposed to attributes information and then reviews.
We used multiple levels of differences between alternatives attribute values in order to ensure that the results are robust to these differences.
The attribute information was presented in a single web page, with layout very similar to the `Compare Products' pages of real web sites like, for example, Epinions.com.
To enhance the ecological validity of the study, choice alternatives were described in addition to features with a fictitious name and a camera picture.
The pictures were randomly selected for each trial from a pool of ten camera images.
The ten images were of similar looking compact digital cameras, downloaded from amazon.co.uk and processed to remove any brand information.
Camera names, pictures, and order of presentation, were randomized for each choice.
Each alternative was described with fourteen attributes, and the values of six of them were randomized resulting in a large number of different choice sets.
The randomization was performed so as to give multiple levels of differences between alternatives attribute values.
As a result in some of the choices one alternative was better than the other two, while in others the three alternatives were more or less similar in terms of attribute values.
This was done in order to make sure that people's preference for which alternative to obtain more reviews is robust to these differences.
Table 1 shows an example choice scenario.
After inspecting the attributes information participants were free to read consumer reviews for each alternative.
They were forwarded to another web page.
In this page they were presented in a structure similar to the attributes web page, and in one column for each alternative, with its name, picture, and a numbered list of its reviews in the form `Review 1', `Review 2', etc.
To access a review participants should place the mouse pointer over the text `Review x' and the review opened automatically in a pop-up window.
The task involved a choice between three alternative digital cameras2.
Participants were initially exposed to information about alternatives' attribute values.
Subsequently, they were free to read consumer reviews for each camera, and the number and order of reviews obtained for each alternative, and the time they took to read each review, were measured.
Each participant performed a practice task, followed by two experimental tasks.
The practice task involved a choice between three mega-pixel cameras, and the experimental tasks involved choices between five and seven mega-pixel cameras.
In each task participants were first presented with attribute information in a single web page, and when they indicated that they had obtained as much information as they wanted, they were forwarded to another web page listing consumer reviews about the alternatives.
While in this page participants could not go back to the page presenting alternatives' attributes and obtain more information.
Specific instructions were given to the participants.
They were instructed to imagine that they needed to purchase a digital camera and select one that was suitable.
They were told that they could take as much time as they wanted in order to inspect information and make their choice.
Figure 2 depicts the web page with one of the reviews opened.
There were 15 reviews for each alternative.
The ratings of each alternative's reviews were the same in all choices.
Alternatives were firstly assigned ratings and then reviews according to the assigned ratings.
Three sets of review ratings were utilized, and each set was assigned to one of the alternatives.
The means of the ratings sets ranked them as best, second-best and worst.
The distribution of ratings was similar to the type of distributions obtained for real products in the World Wide Web; i.e.
The best and second-best ratings' sets were negatively skewed, and the worst set was J-shaped - reflecting the statistics of the environment reported earlier.
The sets were assigned to alternatives as follows.
In the choices where one of the alternatives had better attribute values than the other two, the best set was assigned to this alternative, and the other two alternatives were randomly assigned one of the second-best and worst sets.
In the choices where attributes were more or less similar for all attributes, the three sets were randomly assigned.
Below I refer to the three alternatives as best, second-best and worst as prescribed by the rating sets that was assigned to it.
Six sets of reviews according to alternatives' ratings were constructed; two for each alternative.
Each set contained 15 reviews, which were selected so as not to contradict each other.
Each alternative's sets of reviews were randomly, and separately for each participant, assigned between the two tasks that s/he made.
So as to maintain ecological validity we sampled reviews from amazon.co.uk.
The reviews were selected according to specific criteria.
The criteria were that the review  had a length between 100 and 150 words,  did not mention attributes different to the ones of our fictitious products,  did not mention specific characteristics of other reviews,  did not mention Amazon,  did not mention that the camera comes with extras such as case, camera dock etc.,  did not compare the reviewed camera to competitors, or describe the choice between two cameras, and  did not extensively review the video capability.
No further control was exercised on the sample.
Further, a total of 90 reviews was used , so as to minimize any effects of idiosyncratic reviews on the dependent variables.
After sampling, some reviews were slightly edited for spelling, and brand and model names were replaced by the fictitious ones.
The order of review ratings was semi-randomized, and the order of reviews was fully randomized.
This was done so as to  avoid any effects of sequential, highly positive, or negative ratings,  equally position reviews of all ratings throughout the search process in order to control for the effect of fatigue on the dependent variables, and  position full reviews in various stages of the search process so as to further control for the effects of fatigue and idiosyncratic reviews.
The set of ratings for each alternative were grouped into subsets of mean rating similar to the average of the whole set .
The order of subsets was held constant, yet the order of ratings within each subset was randomized.
This procedure resulted in a large number of different ratings orders for each alternative.
After determining the order of ratings, the full reviews were randomly selected according to their rating from each alternative's set of reviews.
Finally choice , and order of differences between alternatives' attribute information were counterbalanced across participants.
Twelve members of a large UK university's community volunteered to take part in the experiment and were paid 5 for their participation.
The participants were recruited by a posting an add to the university's web site.
After the completion of the study, the incentive for engaging with the task was administered, and a randomly selected participant was awarded one of the digital cameras s/he chose.
Since the digital cameras used in the experiment were fake, we awarded a camera with features similar to the one the randomly selected participant chose.
To examine participants' preference for which alternative to seek reviews we consider two dependent variables; the number of reviews participants acquired for each alternative, and the acquisition priority of each alternative's reviews.
Figure 3a shows the number of reviews participants acquired per alternative.
An analysis of variance  was conducted using alternative  as the within-subjects variable.
As Figure 3a illustrates participants obtained more reviews for the best alternative than for the second-best and the worst.
The planned comparisons between the number of reviews participants obtained for the best and the other two alternatives were tested by performing pair-wise two-tailed t-tests.
The acquisition priority  is a measure of the order of reviews processing.
It summarizes how early or late in the search process reviews about each alternative are acquired.
AP is the measure described in , updated with the total number of information items  in our task , the number of alternatives , and the number of reviews that each participant acquired.
The larger the value of AP the earlier the reviews about this alternative are acquired.
Differences between the value of AP were tested with a one-way ANOVA using alternative  as the within-subjects variable.
As Figure 3b illustrates, the best alternative has the largest AP while the second-best and the worst alternatives have relatively equal.
That is, participants obtained reviews for the best alternative earlier than for the second-best and the worst.
The planned comparisons between the AP of the best and the other two alternatives were tested by performing pair-wise two-tailed t-tests.
Only 4- and 5-star reviews were examined.
For the best alternative a one way ANOVA was conducted using rating  as within-subjects variable.
As Figure 4a illustrates participants took more time to inspect 4-star than 5-star reviews.
For the second-best alternative a one way ANOVA was conducted using rating  as within-subjects variable.
One participant who did not obtain a 5-star review was removed from the analysis.
Participants took on average more time to inspect 4-star than 5-star reviews, Figure 4b.
Finally, a one way ANOVA was conducted for the worst alternative using rating  as within-subjects variable.
Two participants who did not obtain a 4- or 5-star review were removed from the analysis.
As Figure 4c illustrates participants took more time to inspect 4-star than 5-star reviews.
In this paper we have addressed the question of how people use rating information, found on many e-commerce web sites, in order to support choice information search tasks.
We described how the Discriminating Information Value  theory made a number of predictions about user' behavior and we showed how results of an empirical study provide some evidence in favor of DIV.
First, in an environment dominated by positive reviews, such as the World-Wide Web, participants gathered more information for the best alternative under consideration.
Second, participants took more time to inspect reviews with lower ratings for inferior alternatives.
However, we also found evidence that is counter to DIV's predictions: when evaluating the best alternative,
In fact, the experimental results suggest that people have a tendency to take more time to inspect a review with lower rating irrespective of the ranking of the alternative.
This, in turn, suggests that for participants, if not for the DIV theory, the lower the rating of a review the higher its information value.
Further analyses of the implications of the data for the normative theory of information search  were conducted.
In contrast to DIV, we found that EVSI could explain why participants took more time to inspect 4-star than 5-star reviews for the best alternative - because it increases the chance of a response reversal.
However, EVSI did not explain why participants had the same preference, for 4-star over 5-star reviews, when evaluating an inferior alternative.
Therefore, neither EVSI nor DIV offers an explanation of participants' information gathering preferences in the experimental choice task.
In sum then, while the results show unequivocal effects of beliefs about prior utility and of rating value on choice information search, the direction of the effects does not support existing theoretical accounts.
The findings therefore present a considerable challenge to explanation, a challenge that we start to address in the following section.
Here we briefly sketch how DIV and EVSI might work together to explain the results of the reported experiment.
DIV predicts that reviews of lower rating are of higher value for inferior alternatives because they largely increase discrimination.
In effect these lower ratings decrease the utility of the alternative considerable, and allow the decision maker to eliminate it from further consideration and save information processing costs and time.
On the other hand, EVSI predicts that reviews of lower rating are of higher value for the best-alternative because they significantly reduce its utility and have the potential to reverse the choice, therefore saving utility.
That is, processing less favorable information for all alternatives results in gains; it reduces the costs of processing information and time effort , and increases the choice utility .
Therefore, it appears that both theories have advantages in explaining review processing, and together contribute to the understanding of why people take more time to inspect less favorable reviews.
In order to introduce a new approach to understanding choice information search we take a step back and reframe the problem as a problem of bounded utility maximization .
Bounded utility maximization assumes that individuals adapt rationally to a utility function given constraints imposed by their cognitive abilities and their experience.
Bounded utility maximization radically differs from normative accounts of behavior, by taking into account cognitive and task constraints.
For example, the normative account of choice information search, EVSI, is only normative if temporal information constraints are ignored.
We need a theory that is optimal given the constraints experienced by users.
The constraints experienced by users include time.
Users have limited time to process information, and they trade-off time for choice utility.
A means to reduce the time effort of choice is to simplify the decision by increasing the discrimination between alternatives .
On the other hand a means to increase choice utility is to search for information that may reverse the choice .
From this perspective we can see that EVSI and DIV are not in competition, but rather that they can each contribute toward solving the utility maximization problem in different ways.
The balance between them may be quantified and studied by examining the maximization of the difference between the choice utility and the cost  of making the choice.
As we have said, it is critical that web site designs are sufficiently flexible to allow people to easily compare alternative choices, whether the choices are between health plans, holidays, or financial investments .
Supporting comparison involves supporting low cost of access to the most useful information when it is needed.
To the extent that the reported study reveals the information that participants find most useful in choice information search, it could form the basis of research aimed at informing design.
For example, the results of the study suggest that in an environment dominated by positive information, such as the World-Wide Web, people will prefer to process more information for the best alternative, and that they will prefer to process negative information about all alternatives under consideration.
These findings suggest that any interface that reduces the cost of access to information about higher utility products and to negative reviews will make it easier for people to make choices.
There may be ways to take advantage of these ideas in single vendor sites, as well as on product comparison sites, and product forums.
Contrary to earlier findings , it suggests that people do not collect information merely to discriminate between alternative choices.
In addition, by contrasting the theory to the normative account of information search , it offers a descriptive, yet formally justified, explanation of users' preference to obtain less favorable information in environments dominated by positive information, such as the World-Wide-Web.
Finally, building on its theoretical and experimental insights, it paves the way for the development of a promising theory of information search in choice tasks.
This is the author's version of the work.
It is posted here by permission of ACM for your personal use.
