Previous research and development efforts have emphasized the potential for "crowdsourcing" via social media to increase situational awareness during crisis events .
However, use of the popular umbrella term risks both obscuring the underlying behaviors that constitute "crowdsourcing," and erroneously casting them as novel by-products of new media.
Spontaneous volunteerism is not a new feature of crisis events -- disaster events in the pre-ICT era were places where such large-scale self-organizing phenomena could previously be seen.
This paper attempts to unpack "crowdsourcing" in crisis response by applying an existing framework of self-organizing in disaster settings  to new digital volunteer behaviors.
In so doing, it reveals new forms of volunteerism that were not previously possible.
This work extends previous research on the use of social media during crisis, e.g.
We begin with an overview of a disaster-response initiative based on the Twitter platform--one that our group helped deploy.
Though the initiative was not widely used, the innovation nevertheless served as an opening to seeing and subsequently studying the broader sphere of digital volunteerism.
This overview then sets the stage for describing the multi-phased empirical study of digital volunteerism and self-organizing behavior.
This empirical study of "digital volunteers" in the aftermath of the January 12, 2010 Haiti earthquake describes their behaviors and mechanisms of self-organizing in the information space of a microblogging environment, where collaborators were newly found and distributed across continents.
The paper explores the motivations, resources, activities and products of digital volunteers.
It describes how seemingly small features of the technical environment offered structure for self-organizing, while considering how the social-technical milieu enabled individual capacities and collective action.
Using social theory about selforganizing, the research offers insight about features of coordination within a setting of massive interaction.
The new behaviors of mass interaction that information and communication technology  enable are affecting the way we seek and provide information, as well as the way we imagine our roles and responsibilities in such matters.
Here we empirically consider the emerging role of the "digital volunteer" as an element of the phenomena popularly known as "crowdsourcing."
We relate these behaviors to the social science theory of collective behavior , and show how microblogging platforms serve as a new arena for self-organizing.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Twitter is a communication platform that allows users to broadcast 140-character messages  to groups of other users who subscribe to their accounts .
In turn, Twitter users  receive tweets from the set of users they elect to follow.
For twitterers whose accounts are not explicitly set as private, every tweet is also posted to a public, searchable timeline.
In a process of crescive adaptation, twitterers have developed a variety of linguistic conventions to meet communication needs, including addressed tweets, the retweet, and the hashtag.
Twitterers began to use the @ sign preceding another user's account name as a way of mentioning or addressing tweets to that user.
This convention, termed addressivity, allows users to engage in one-on-one, yet still public, conversation .
The retweet  emerged as a forwarding technique whereby twitterers pass on tweets with attribution to the original author.
During the 2007 Southern California wildfires, Messina explained how hashtags could be particularly helpful during disasters .
Messina, Boyd and others have gone on to propose other microsyntaxes for increasing the information capacity of the 140-character tweet, some with specific application during emergencies .
The Tweak the Tweet  syntax is another entrant to the field of Twitter microsyntax proposals, designed to assist in computational filtering and classification of emergencyrelated information tweeted during an event .
The original TtT concept, generated in November 2009 at the Random Hacks of Kindness barcamp, proposed an extension to the role of the hashtag, encouraging users to mark up tweets in a way that would allow computers to easily identify and parse key pieces of information, such as the type of report, location, contact, etc.
By placing specific hashtags preceding words related to those hashtags, the information can be automatically identified and parsed into a record.
The original TtT proposal suggested using accounts from formal response agencies and news media to distribute prescriptive tweets.
The hope was that instructive tweets would teach twitterers how to use the syntax :
We updated our project website to explain how the syntax worked, developed a web-based editor that helped people generate tweets in the syntax, and created how-to screencasts posted to YouTube.
We issued a press release to encourage broad attention to and adoption of the syntax.
Though the effort to support syntax use continued for several weeks, we ended our active campaign and sent our last prescriptive tweet on January 24, due to the recognition that the syntax was hard to use from the ground, and that we could not assure users that TtT tweets were being channeled to people and agencies who could respond.
The TtT syntax was originally intended for use during a disaster by those directly affected by the event.
We deployed the idea during the aftermath of the Haiti earthquake knowing that only a small percentage of the population of Haiti were Twitter users, and that using a syntax could be difficult, but hoping that the structured data format could nevertheless be useful in some fashion.
Not surprisingly, few people used the syntax from "the ground."
However, what was unexpected were the many twitterers located around the world who emerged as "translators"-- those who translated information from multiple sources into the syntax and tweeted it out to their followers.
Previous research indicates that "synthetic" information activity--where users modify and synthesize information from multiple sources, including Twitter itself--is an important form of information production on Twitter .
We recognized this synthetic information generation in the activity of translation from raw, unstructured information to structured data forms as the basis for a new form of the volunteerism that pervades disaster response .
We initiated this study to investigate the behavior and motivations of the TtT translators.
Note that for this paper, translating and translator specifically refer to TtT syntax translation, though many digital volunteers contributed by offering classic language translation to assist in this international response.
On January 12, 2010, a 7.0 magnitude earthquake struck Haiti near its Port-au-Prince capitol.
Due to the earthquake's intensity and shallow depth, as well as Haiti's vulnerable infrastructure, the destruction was catastrophic.
In the aftermath, thousands were trapped beneath collapsed structures, hundreds of thousands were injured, and nearly 1.5 million people had been displaced .
Relief agencies struggled to meet basic needs in this catastrophic event.
With a desire to assist the response in Haiti during a time of overwhelming need, and in collaboration with the CrisisCamp initiative , our research group deployed the Tweak the Tweet  syntax on January 14, 2010 at 19:51 EST.1 We activated a Twitter account to distribute prescriptive tweets at regular, automated intervals , in both English and French.
At the same time, several team members began to tweet information from various sources, including other tweets as well as email messages from disaster-related lists, using TtT syntax.
We employed a multi-step process for data collection, beginning with large-scale tweet data collection using Twitter APIs, then a preliminary tweet content analysis to identify the target study population, and finally email-based interviews with a sample of the population to understand their motivations and experiences while tweeting during the immediate aftermath of the Haiti earthquake.
During the active TtT campaign period , we used the Twitter Search API to collect every tweet that contained both the #haiti hashtag and at least one specialized TtT hashtag .
On February 1, we identified every twitterer who had at least one tweet in that set and, using the Twitter REST API,
These streams contain all of a user's public tweets, including public tweets addressed to other users.
We conducted an analysis of tweet content in the contextual streams to better understand the behavior of twitterers in our data set, and to identify how each was using TtT syntax.
Discerning between TtT translations and retweets could not be done computationally because some retweets are not "properly" credited using one of the known conventions, and because many of the twitterers in our sample generated tag-added retweets, meaning that they began with a conventional retweet, including the RT @ marker, but then modified it by inserting TtT tags.
Table 1 shows the number of tweets in each category, excluding those sent by our team.
Of 2911 total tweets in the syntax, 1040 were translations of information found in other sources, including other, non-TtT tweets.
This tweet coding differentiated people who were using TtT on their own behalf, those who were translating other information into TtT, and those who were only retweeting messages already in the syntax.
Table 2 shows the frequency of the different TtT user types.
Though only ten twitterers  used TtT syntax for directly tweeting their own needs, 74 of the 333 twitterers were found to have translated at least one tweet into TtT syntax.
The 74 translators were identified as candidates for the interview phase of the study, designed to better understand volunteer translating behavior.
We attempted to contact participants through their Twitter accounts, the only available point of access, using "direct messages"  to those who were "following" our account , and publicly addressed tweets to those who were not.
Between the Haiti earthquake and the commencement of the interview study in the summer, two accounts were deleted, and several others became inactive, making it likely that many of our addressed tweets went unread.
37 of the 74 twitterers responded; 27 of these consented to participate and 19 completed the full interview.
Respondents were widely distributed across volume of TtT tweets, from one TtT tweet sent to 171 TtT tweets sent.
The response rate among those who were reachable was 51%.
Eight initial respondents did not complete the interview for reasons including ongoing involvement in Haiti relief efforts, illness, and others not specified.
The interviews were conducted via email for all participants, though participants were given the option of a verbal interview.
Each participant was sent a message with the same set of open-ended questions.
The section themes and the questions within them were derived from the prior qualitative analysis of the contextual tweet streams.
Because our analysis began to reveal that Twitter connections served critical functions in volunteering behavior, respondents whose tweet streams showed interactivity with other translators were sent a follow up email inquiring about their twitter-related social connections.
Though non-translators were not included in the interview portion of the data collection , qualitative analysis of their tweet streams suggests that many exhibited similar remote volunteer behaviors as those in the primary participant pool.
For this paper, we have anonymized all interview response data.
Because Twitter data is public and searchable, we have carefully disassociated the interview identities and responses from Twitter accounts and their data streams.
For Twitter data reporting, we asked each participant to choose between three kinds of anonymity.
We treat three participants under the default, using a pseudonym and altering the language of their tweets to reduce searchability.
Two participants elected to use a pseudonym but maintain original tweet language.
Fourteen participants indicated that they wanted their original tweet content attributed to their real Twitter account name.
We also changed usernames for all twitterers who are mentioned in tweets but were not participants in this study.
The experienced twitterers in the study offer a variety of reasons for joining Twitter, including promoting a cause with which they are personally connected, and keeping up on pop culture and politics.
Three report tweeting during previous disasters or crises and two of those specifically mention the political protests in Iran  as their entry point to "crisis tweeting."
Emily: "My brother, a volunteer teacher in Port-au-Prince, had arrived in Haiti two days before the EQ.
We... were not able to contact him and not sure where he was staying... As you know, the news was horrific and we were beyond worried.
I joined Twitter approximately 12 hours after the EQ in order to try and communicate with surviving students from his school to find out if they had any news on him."
We asked gender and age questions and used tweet analysis to capture basic demographics for our interview group and make comparisons to the larger group of TtT translators.
A majority of twitterers who translated information into TtT syntax tweets are women.
In our interview pool, there are 17 females and two males.
To determine if this breakdown is representative of all translators and not due to other factors, we coded each twitterer for gender by analyzing the name and photo associated with the Twitter profile and the content of the account owner's tweets.
For the entire 74 TtT translators, we found 46 females, 16 males, one account that was operated by two people , and 11 accounts where gender could not be determined.
Where we could determine and assign gender in the entire translator group, 74% are female.
Though most were located in North America during the event , our interview group includes one twitterer each from Turkey, Australia, Switzerland, and the UK.
The average age is 40.1 years.
Three other participants cite connections to people in or from Haiti as reasons for starting to tweet.
Four of the five personally connected twitterers began with a single cause-- a person or place with specific needs--and later branched out to communicating about other needs and issues.
Among those without personal connections, interview responses and tweet streams reveal the singular motivation of trying to help out, in any way possible:
Alena: "Why I did it?
One part of the world was in pain and I could not sit back watch others do something when I had a little chance to send some drinking water to people if I could."
Maria: "I think that's when I went on Twitter and started tweeting.
Then I discovered a whole bunch of people tweeting for Haiti and started doing it myself and building up connections as much as I could in order to try to save some lives if possible.
I just hoped what I was doing was helping.
I'll never know if my tweets actually helped but that's ok as well."
Figure 1 shows the date that each study participant joined Twitter.
Three participants created their accounts after the earthquake, though one operates another account started nine months earlier.
Two others joined Twitter earlier, but they did not send their first tweet until after the event.
The remaining 15 interviewees were actively tweeting from their current accounts before January 12, 2010.
As these excerpts suggest, many of these people began tweeting for Haiti as a way of volunteering their time-- sometimes entire waking days--from areas far removed from the event.
Most, like Maria, entered the space with little direction or knowledge about how to help.
Maria mentions that one of her first volunteer activities was to build up connections.
We will return to these connections at length below to explain how volunteers were able to begin with little more than a Twitter account, yet end up helping in remarkable ways.
Five participants report being directed to the syntax instructions by other twitterers in their networks and two mention receiving help from another twitterer who "explained" the format to them, or "taught" them how to use it.
A few interviewees appear to have learned the format by mimicking its use in others' tweets.
One of these did not realize she was using TtT syntax, though her tweet streams show that she began to use the #location and #contact data tags.
Another explains that she discovered TtT when one of her tweets was retweeted in the format:
Emily: "Another Haiti volunteer on Twitter retweeted my post with the correct syntax, and I went to the "Tweak the Tweet" website, read up on it, and started using it for all my Haiti tweets and retweets except personal responses to people looking for information or offering help to  directly."
Jenny: "I choose to tweet with the syntax because uniformity in messaging is essential in high pressure, emergency situations ...
I also noticed that people ... spent a lot of time trying to decipher messages with missing info and what the source of the info was....
In short the time spent looking for missing parts to a message could be avoided by using TtT."
These responses suggest that some Haiti twitterers adopted TtT as another resource in their own volunteer work.
The syntax helped them format tweets to include all the necessary pieces of information, such as contact number, location, and source.
It was a signal they could give to say that the information in their tweets had been verified by someone who had experience in the space.
TtT also helped some do manual filtering by allowing search on certain hashtags to identify important, actionable information, a topic we return to later.
The statement above suggests that this twitterer welcomed a standardized method for her tweeting and it echoes Emily's comment about "correct syntax."
When these twitterers say that TtT made sense, they may not be talking about the rules of the syntax, per se.
In fact, many of the same report that it was quite hard to use.
What seems to appeal to them was the idea of standardization.
The syntax itself became an object of authority--an organizing feature in the socio-technical milieu of Twitter activity.
This is an idea we return to in the Discussion.
Some participants saw the syntax as a way to manually filter and identify key information for themselves, from within an inherently noisy information space:
For their own translated TtT tweets, interviewees reformatted and passed on information from a variety of sources.
Most report using other tweets as a key source.
They first located tweets with key information that were not initially in TtT format, then added the TtT tags and retweeted them.
Several mention verifying the content before passing it along.
The example below shows how one twitterer took the information from a tweet she saw and translated it into TtT syntax, noting her source.
Participants also listed public blogs and Facebook posts, as well as DMs, emails and phone calls from contacts , as sources for their TtT tweets.
Another key source for TtT tweets noted by six of our interviewees was Ushahidi.
Ushahidi is a collaborative reporting environment that aggregates and maps information provided by citizens .
Originally developed during violent political unrest in Kenya in 2008, Ushahidi was used during the Haiti crisis in conjunction with an SMS shortcode to collect incident reports from the ground.
Ushahidi organized and encouraged volunteers to help process the raw SMS messages into structured reports .
Some of our respondents monitored Ushahidi incident reports, identified new or newly verified information, and then tweeted it in TtT syntax.
A few also directed these tweets to users they felt could act on the information.
A few noted that the format could be used as a way to make individual tweets more useful, regardless of back-end tools for filtering.
By formatting or "syntaxing" their tweets in this way , they made sure tweets had the necessary pieces of information.
They could use the syntax as a way to instruct others to do the same:
In this second group, twitterers were not simply translating information, but instead were acting as remote operators, moving information between many sources using a variety of tools.
TtT was only a small part of that activity.
Many exerted considerable effort into building and leveraging connections to move information-- and in some cases supplies--between affected people on the ground, response agencies in Haiti and abroad, and other volunteer crisis workers all over the world.
None of the twitterers in the second category were able to simply log on to their Twitter account and start acting like remote operators.
Instead, they progressed from simple activities  to more complex ones .
Ushahidi was a key bridge between information-based activities  and the more complex volunteer work of remote operators.
Over time, some volunteers shifted from taking information from Ushahidi incident reports and tweeting it  to other activities, including verifying details, especially the origin date, and following up on contact email addresses and phone numbers to confirm reports.
Others began to monitor Twitter by searching for certain hashtags, including TtT tags, and then used that information to create new Ushahidi reports or update existing ones.
This shift between translating and pure data entry to information verification is one we see in several interview responses.
Though TtT translation and Ushahidi data entry were the primary entrance points to crisis tweeting for many, others began with different types of tweet-driven activities.
One started her Haiti volunteer work by adding minutes to Haiti residents' cell phones as requested by other twitterers who were in Haiti or had connections to people there.
They R helping Amer families to contact their haiti relatives.
Help me add minutes to a WACK of phone numbers I have been sent!
At Brochette , 1500 ppl have nothing to eat or drink since Tues evening.
Later, she would use these contacts on the ground to get information on ground conditions, verify reports, and even request help for other needs she identified.
The interview excerpt below shows the evolution of isolated activity to a set of network connections and expanded set of activities:
The exchange below, taken from the contextual streams of one of our translators and another twitterer in our initial 339 , demonstrates how some volunteers came to use connections and information on Twitter in combination with contacts on the ground to act as remote emergency operators.
IstanbulTWSTVL : @CarolB @janeSM Needs a truck by Clercine and help with & UN DRS that need ride at rue de l'enterrement #xx CarolB : Okay made contact with someone should be sending truck.
IstanbulTWSTVL : @CarolB Second situation was stevePs people on the way to Clercine had no phone contact he has posted number @steveP is this solved CarolB : @IstanbulTWSTVL It has been arranged.
In this example, @IstanbulTWSTVL routes information gleaned from Twitter sources to @CarolB, who has a connection to people on the ground.
Volunteer twitterers like @IstanbulTWSTVL would find information that had not yet been acted on through Twitter and Ushahidi reports, then act on it themselves in one of two ways.
Some would follow up with contact numbers directly, calling affected people or responders on the ground in Haiti to confirm and update their reports.
Others tried to find another twitterer to whom they could direct the information, getting it closer to those who could physically act on it.
The ability to leverage connections was a powerful part of the work process for the digital volunteers in this study.
When we examine their contextual tweet streams, we see that the TtT translators were a highly interconnected group.
Figure 2 shows a visualization of the entire network of translators , including our own research group members .
Edge thicknesses represent the  amount of interactions between each pair of twitterers as determined by addressed tweets or mentions within the contextual tweet streams.
This is not a measure of Twitter followers and followings, but rather of who was publicly "talking" to whom during the January 10-February 1 time window.
Four translators were unconnected to the network,
Nine others were connected to one other twitterer within the group.
The rest had direct interactions with multiple members of the network.
The network is dense, with each translator connecting with, on average, 7.7 other translator-volunteers , and some of these connections are leveraged repeatedly, with over 40 mentions.
Our accounts  are visible on the top right of the dense part of the network cluster.
Note that we are not central to the network, and that the density exists elsewhere .
In fact, when we create another graph removing all of our researchers from the network, the core of the network remains intact.
Several cited the need to verify and manage misinformation as rationale for moving to tools with more access control, like Google Wave.
Carla: "Social media will evolve to meet the needs that present during a crisis.
That may be true but that's when solutions are inspired.
To understand when and how these connections were formed, we sent each interviewee a list of all the other translators that they addressed a tweet to during the study time window in a follow-up email.
We asked whether or not they knew each twitterer in real life or through Twitter prior to the earthquake.
Though a few listed one or two previous connections, a clear majority replied that they had never previously connected with these other twitterers.
For many respondents, crisis tweeting during the Haiti event became and continues to be a significant part of their Twitter identities.
Over half of interview participants report or have evidence in their recent tweet streams indicating continued volunteer tweeting during crises.
Five still appear active in their Haiti tweeting  and seven have tweeted for other, more recent, crisis events.
In their profile descriptions, @rachellehoude now refers to herself as a voluntweeter, @Meira_Davi claims to be a crisis tweeter, @MelyMello states that she is "heavily involved in Haiti relief via working w/ an amazing, effective, dedicated group of volunteers," and @cait proclaims that she "won't forget Haiti."
Their crisis tweeting--a term we have adopted from the practitioners to describe this behavior-- has come, in some ways, to define their Twitter personas.
Participants we identified as remote operators incorporated a variety of social media and communication tools into their work practice, including email, Twitter, Skype, Google Wave, and Ushahidi.
These tweets show a growing self-identification with the role of crisis tweeting as crisis tweeters, or voluntweeters.
For those who embraced this role, the connection between their publicly enacted crisis tweeting behavior and their Twitter persona seems to contribute motivation for continued participation.
A few participants displayed another layer of awareness, that these digital volunteer activities represented the birth of a new phenomenon.
It's been incredible to be part of it and connect with like-minded people.
It's been awesome to witness the birth social media's soul."
Long-standing research on the sociology of disaster suggests that the desire to help in times of crisis is age-old, and in fact is a behavior in disaster response that is critical to response and recovery .
Large numbers of people are known to converge onto the site in the wake of a disaster event to observe or to help .
Currently, novel forms of this phenomenon result from the affordances of social media tools, which allow more and remote people to contribute in ways not previously possible .
Kelly: "I don't have a lot of money and I'm not brave enough... to travel to Haiti, but this was an opportunity to get involved and, with the use of twitter, in a big way!
I was already impressed with the reach twitter had, but seeing what it could do during a crisis like Haiti BLEW my mind away."
In their initial responses, few interviewees mentioned the emotional impact from their digital volunteering.
Follow up comments were far more likely to touch on this, even though we did not ask specifically about these experiences.
Some remarked about rescue attempts that arrived too late and calls for help that went unanswered:
The activities of the crisis twitterers are a new form of previously recognized organizing behavior made possible through the availability of new media.
Sociologists of disaster, including Dynes , call organizations that did not exist prior to a major disruption of the social order emergent organizations--groups of people that previously had no standing structure or defined tasks.
Emergent groups are usually self-organizing, and come about in disaster settings to meet some unmet need.
How they come together is the subject of Kreps and Bosworth , who discuss a "theoretical tool" to explain collective behavior and organizing through a progressive manifestation of key features: Domains , Activities , Resources , and Tasks .
Organizations can arise out of any sequential permutation of these mechanisms , as Kreps and Bosworth  empirically describe in a historical survey of accounts of emergent organizations in numerous disasters.
Employing their framework to the behavior that many have come to call "crowdsourcing" we believe helps better explain and identify the underlying phenomena behind this term, including what makes it possible in disaster, and perhaps in other aspects of social life as well.
The temporal sequence that we believe best explains the behavior of the emergent voluntweeter population we studied is the R!A!T!D configuration of selforganization, with the Resources and Activities mechanisms of self-organizing being most developed, and with some indications of progression to the Tasks and Domain mechanistic stages.
Groups that begin with Resources or Activities appear less often in Kreps and Bosworth's empirical taxonomy; this might be a type we see arising more often from today's ICT-supported environments.
Note that not all emergent organizations endure long enough or organize completely enough to manifest all four attributes in their lifespans.
One respondent told us that she had not continued crisis tweeting and remarked that she was not sure that she could do it again, because the work was too "emotionally draining."
Another respondent, one who had participated in crisis tweeting during the political unrest in Iran, talked about how she backed away from her account after that event, before starting all over again for Haiti.
After over a week in the space, coordinating small-scale response using ad-hoc networks and over-the-counter digital infrastructures, this voluntweeter felt unappreciated and even obstructed when the "formal" response moved into place.
Another explains how the new "organization" of response prevented them from accessing the resources that they had been using for their "informal" response activities.
For the "voluntweeters" in crisis events as described here, the means by which they began to work as volunteers in the Haiti event was the medium of Twitter.
In other words, their initiation into the space was through the accessibility of resources, which are the "individual capacities and collective technologies of human populations" .
Hashtags were used by many as an entrance into the space to find key information and identify the people participating in relevant conversations.
Hashtags can be used to filter information to help narrow the focus of search.
They were an important basis for the eventual organizing of activities .
For example, #rescuemehaiti signaled a particular kind of help request, and became a tag around which people organized:
Alena: "One of them...proposed an idea; to use #rescuemehaiti hashtag.
Promptly me and him made sure people asking for help would tag this word and within half hour everyone was following and using this tag.
He said one day later officials contacted him and said this tag was very helpful so we should continue using it."
Among our population, the TtT syntax also served as an organizing feature  within the network of crisis tweeters.
TtT added structure to tweet information; even when the syntax wasn't used in full, it helped voluntweeters to remember to include--and teach others to include--the necessary pieces of information into a single tweet to make it complete.
There was also indication that some saw the syntax as imparting a kind of authority because of its perceived rigor and assumptions about attention to accuracy by those using it.
The manner in which some interviewees referred to the TtT syntax suggests an important structuring effect.
One participant speaks about "syntaxing" as a task; another refers to the syntax as a kind of language, as in "translated into syntax."
Though TtT syntax users may not fully understand what a syntax is, this co-opting of the term into language about voluntweeting suggests the syntax's role as an organizing feature.
A few notable organizations were entities to which the emergent band of voluntweeters began to connect.
These included Ushahidi, Crisis Commons and Shaun King, an Atlanta, Georgia pastor of a faith-based organization.
Thirteen of the 19 interview respondents mention or address him in their tweets, and two talk about him in their interviews.
His activities began during the early aftermath of the quake and are ongoing in September 2010, with his aHomeInHaiti.org website serving as a place to coordinate donations and provide shelter for Haitians.
The self-organizing mechanisms of resources  and activities  seem to be clear in this emergence of a coherent, productive group of voluntweeters.
In some cases, we begin to see introduction of division of labor-- which in part describes tasks --and some instances of movement to more formal collectives of domains .
Tasks are defined as "collective representations of a division of labor for the enactment of human activities" .
As a core set of crisis voluntweeters gained experience with this emergent practice, some broke off to have extended and more private conversations elsewhere.
These interviewees note that Skype and Google Wave became the means by which coordinated activity was discussed.
Conversational excerpts provided earlier, including that between @CarolB and @IstanbulTWSTVL, demonstrate some division of labor, as does @MelyMello's activity of adding minutes to cell phones.
Some establishment of norms, especially with respect to how and when to retweet and verify information, begins to occur with the newly experienced, acting as mentors, pointing out to less experienced people what constitutes the most helpful tweeting behavior.
Volunteers also began to challenge possible hoaxers, a Twitter behavior that Mendoza et al.
Here, stepping into the Twitter space as well as the disaster volunteer role , the basic activities of retweeting and entering data into a syntactical form using TtT, or entering data into Ushahidi's records, were the origins of a crisis tweeting practice.
Activities are defined as "conjoined actions of individuals and social units" , and we find this to be the second organizing mechanism in a large sector of the crisis tweeting network.
It is in this stage when those drawn to Twitter, having discovered and used initial resources, begin to coordinate activities.
Finally, for Kreps and Bosworth, domains are "collective representations of bounded units and their reasons for being" .
For emergent, self-organizing groups, "bounded social collections" may or may not come about.
Our investigation reveals some mix of consequences in social sub-groups of the broader crisis twitterer population.
There are volunteers who did a good amount of work for Haiti, but then fell away after a time.
With Haiti as the sole focus of their Twitter use, their accounts go dormant or are even deleted entirely after their event participation ceases.
Still, others started reflecting on what it meant to be a good "crisis tweeter," and publicly identify as such.
Though some of these multi-event crisis tweeters continued to work without affiliating with an organization, others found emerging organizations like Humanity Road as digital "places" to focus their volunteer activities.
Humanity Road  is a virtual organization that was sparked by digital volunteering activities during the 2009 political unrest in Iran, but then formalized during the Haiti event .
Its members, two of whom were interview respondents, describe themselves as performing crisis tweeting during disaster events, as well as mentoring crisis tweeters between events.
The formation of Humanity Road represents the full culmination, as described by Kreps and Bosworth, of the graduation from resources and actions  to "domain"-driven features of organization .
Guy, M, Earle, P, Ostrum, C, Gruchalla, K & Horvath, S. Integration and Dissemination of Citizen Reported and Seismically Derived Earthquake Information via Social Network Technologies.
Advances in Intelligent Data Analysis IX, Lecture Notes in Computer Science.
Beyond Microblogging: Conversation & Collaboration via Twitter.
Kendra, J. M. & Wachtendorf, T. Reconsidering Convergence and Converger: Legitimacy in Response to the World Trade Center Disaster, Terrorism and Disaster: New Threats, New Ideas: Research in Social Problems and Public Policy, 11, , 97-122.
Organizing, Role Enactment, and Disaster: A Structural Theory.
Cranbury, NJ: Associated University Presses, 1994.
Liu, S. Iacucci, A.A., & Meier, P. Ushahidi Haiti & Chile: Next Generation Crisis Mapping.
American Congress on Surveying and Mapping  Bulletin, August 2010.
Mendoza, M, B Poblete & C Castillo.
Twitter Under Crisis: Can we trust what we RT?
1st Workshop on Social Media Analytics.
Messina, C. Twitter Hashtags for Emergency Coordination and Disaster Relief.
Messina, C. Stowe Boyd Launches Microsyntax.org.
Okolloh O. Ushahidi, or `testimony': Web 2.0 tools for crowdsourcing crisis information.
Citizen Communications in Crisis: Anticipating a Future of ICT-Supported Participation, Proc.
Qu, Y., Wu, P. & Wang, X. Online Community Response to Major Disaster: A Case Study of Tianya Forum in the 2008 China Earthquake.
In Proc 42nd Hawaii Int'l Conf.
Starbird, K. & Stamberger, J.
Tweak the Tweet: Leveraging Microblogging Proliferation with a Prescriptive Syntax to Support Citizen Reporting.
Starbird, K, Palen, L, Hughes, A & Vieweg, S. Chatter on The Red: What Hazards Threat Reveals about the Social Life of Microblogged Information.
Facing the Unexpected: Disaster Preparedness and Response in the United States.
Vieweg, S, Hughes, A, Starbird, K, & Palen, L. MicroBlogging during Two Natural Hazards Events: What Twitter May Contribute to Situational Awareness Proc of CHI 2010, 1079-88.
The empirical examination of the products and motivations of crisis tweeters who emerged in the aftermath of the 2010 Haiti Earthquake reveals important features of selforganizing in a highly networked world.
The broad attribution of social media-related behaviors to "crowdsourcing" can be more finely understood, in this case, as a collection of resources, capacities and a progression to increasingly more defined tasks and even organizational identity.
In the matter of sudden and tragic events, the desire that some feel to help is newly enabled by resources like Twitter, where assistance can be provided remotely.
Information creation and movement as the basis for social connection and subsequent collective action is at the core of these operations.
The emergent ICT-abetted behaviors we have documented here and their consonance with knowledge about existing self-organizing mechanisms suggest that the digital volunteer will become a common and likely influential feature of social life.
Cavallo, E, Powell, A, & Becerra, O. Estimating the Direct Economic Damage of the Earthquake in Haiti.
Response to Disaster: Fact Versus Fiction & Perpetuation, 2nd ed.
Fritz, C. E. & Mathewson, J. H. Convergence Behavior in Disasters: A Problem in Social Control, Committee on Disaster Studies, National Academy of Sciences, National Research Council, Washington DC, 1957.
