Sami Vihavainen1, Sujeet Mate2, Lassi Liikkanen1, Igor D.D.
Curcio2 2 Helsinki Institute for Information Technology HIIT, Nokia Research Center Aalto University, P.O.Box 19215, 00076 Aalto, Finland P.O.
Digital memorabilia, such as video remixes, can increase the value of attending music events.
Remixes can be made using video clips recorded by attendees during the event; however, producing them is a laborious task.
In this paper we study the prospects of automatic video remixing and present the results of a study on users' perceptions and attitudes towards collaborative automatic mobile video production.
The three findings are as follows: People assess automatic video remix memorabilia as fairly equal to amateur-made manual ones, even if the manually-created video remixes are better in overall quality; as a remixing actor, a computer can be perceived to be more trustworthy than a human remixer; and, the quality of the video remix and the publication forum of the remix outcome plays a significant role when people are deciding whether or not they need public acknowledgement for their contribution.
We conclude by discussing the design implications for collaborative automatic mobile video production.
However, producing multi-camera video remixes is laborious due to material handling and the number of people involved.
Previous research shows that automating the editing process can ease the burden of remixing , but this requires human-produced video material to edit.
Users must also be willing to hand over their personally-recorded footage to the automatic system.
This study aims to provide design insights to the CHI community for building collaborative video production tools.
We believe the insights can be valuable also to video or photography services for large-scale events in general.
Through our earlier study with an automatic video remixer , three issues emerged.
It was unknown how potential users would perceive automatic video remixing systems in terms of personal value, need for control and public acknowledgement.
By personal value, we mean how useful people perceive the mobile video remixes as memorabilia.
Previous research has shown the importance of visual media for reliving an event .
Also more broadly, mobile media plays a major role in attendees' active construction of a shared experience at large-scale events like music festivals .
By need for control we mean the level of control that people desire when contributing personal video content to be remixed by an automatic video remixing system.
Previous research has shown that too much automation with too little user control may affect the perceived usefulness of the system  and cause withdrawal .
By public acknowledgement, we mean peoples' attitudes about being publicly acknowledged if their clips were used in the remix.
Previous research has shown that in remixing culture, acknowledgement plays a significant role in the negotiation of rights to use material .
Live music events are one of the most important sources of revenue for artists.
Many people invest considerable time, effort, and money to attend live performances.
Different types of artist memorabilia from concerts provide added value for music consumers.
Technology facilitates this process; nowadays it has become common for the audience to capture video clips and photos with smartphones during live music performances.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
We arranged a two-day field trial at Provinssirock music festival in Finland during summer 2010.
We collaborated with two of the performing rock bands and recruited 51 festival attendees to take mobile video clips during two concerts.
A real-world trial was conducted to ascertain user attitudes based on experiences in the context for which the system was designed.
We recruited 22 users via the bands' Facebook sites and 29 on-site.
All recruits were young adults, no minors.
The participants were given Nokia smartphones for the task.
They were told that, after the festival, all the video clips would be used as material for video remixes produced by the Nokia's automatic video remixer system ; their material also would be made available for video remixing using a web-based video editor called Jaycut .
After the event, we encouraged the participants over email to create video remixes.
All together, four automatic and six user-generated video remixes were made.
After receiving the artists' permission, we published eight of them on YouTube  to give them visibility.
We invited the participants to complete a web-based questionnaire, which also included links to five of the YouTube remixes .
The questionnaire asked: How do people perceive automatic remixes as memorabilia?
How do people perceive the sharing of personal video with an AVRS compared to the music artist or an unknown peer as the editor?
What kind of attitudes do people have about receiving public acknowledgment for contributing their videos?
We compared the automatic system with the two human actors  to ascertain if there were dimensions other than human vs. automation in terms of how people perceive the remixing actors.
The questionnaire was pretested with eight researchers.
In the first section, the respondents gave their subjective assessments about automatic and manual remixes as memorabilia.
They were asked to watch the five remixes: Auto1 and Auto2, and Manual1, Manual2, and Manual3.
They were then asked to respond to the claim: "This remix works very well as memorabilia from the concert".
They were also asked for a rationale in an open-ended field and to put the remixes in order based on their overall quality.
The labels of Auto1 and Man1 did not indicate whether they were manual or automatic but this information was visible in the other remixes.
However, we found that the labeling did not influence the ratings significantly.
In the second section, we concentrated on how much people want to have control over their video clips.
We presented claims concerning sharing video clips to other actors to be remixed .
We presented three claims related to each actor.
In the third section, we asked about people's willingness to receive public acknowledgment if their clips were used as part of a video remix.
We presented two claims and an open-ended question about willingness to get one's name published as part of the video remix.
The claims were again presented three times, separately concerning each actor.
In the open-ended question, we asked about their reasons for wanting or not wanting acknowledgement.
The AVRS utilizes context data from multiple sensors, including a compass, GPS, and an accelerometer.
The availability of these sensors is becoming increasingly common on mobile devices.
The multiple modalities of context data, which is obtained from these sensors, is stored as timestamped data while the video recording is in progress.
AVRS is critical to generate memorabilia for events.
Since the initial version , the AVRS was improved to include interesting happenings and information from the live music event, thus adding to the video remix's value as memorabilia.
This information is enabled by analysis of context data jointly with the recorded videos, contributed by the users attending the event .
This data is used to determine interesting occurrences, perspectives and high quality media segments; which are then included in the video remix .
The higher the number of video clips contributed and the greater the number of users contributing clips, the higher the probability of capturing interesting occurrences from the event.
Such capturing has the capacity to fill in the experience gap of an individual's video recordings providing added value to the experience.
Such added value signifies the high importance one must assign to designing the AVRS in a way that reassures that users' content and identities will be used properly and respectfully.
The results of rating automatic and manual remixes show that the best of the manual ones were perceived as better than the automatic ones overall .
Man2 and Auto2 were significantly different .
The remixes separated into two groups, Man3 and Man2 being significantly better in overall quality than the rest .
However, when the participants were asked to rate the same video remixes based on their value as memorabilia, the remixes were rated much closer to each other .
They might perceive the AVRS as "deterministic" and incapable of "abusing" the material, and trust that AVRS will not violate their impression management goals.
Also in a long run, trust on the system may change depending on the type and frequency of possible faults.
Fault in this case would occur if a user was associated with a published video remix that is not in line with the public profile she is building.
A significant difference was found only between Man1 and Man3 .
The results indicate that, although the automatic remixes were not perceived to be as good as the best manual ones, they were still perceived to be good memorabilia.
In the open-ended questions, some of the respondents described the automatic remixes as a bit convoluted and bumpy.
However, many also described the automatic remixes as representing the overall atmosphere well.
They also noted familiar angles of view:
Based on medians and modes , we can see that most of the participants do not want to get public acknowledgement when the AVRS makes the remix.
However, most of them did want to receive authorship if the artist made a video remix.
We believe this finding might indicate that the respondents perceive the AVRS as a black box.
The artist, on the other hand, represents something that the participants probably want to be associated with.
Nonetheless, the differences between the actors were not statistically significant .
Based on median and mode values, the respondents were less likely to want to see the final video remix before deciding whether to be acknowledged in the case of the AVRS than in the cases of peer and artist as actors.
In this case also, the differences were not statistically significant.
The open-ended question on whether and why the participants  would like to be publicly mentioned as the authors of the final mix  showed that half expected acknowledgement.
More importantly, acknowledgement expectations were divided among conditional and definite opinions.
Only a few participants expressed an unconditional desire for acknowledgment or desire for publicity .
The people who expressed a conditional need for acknowledgement would like to provide their consent after their evaluation of their own or the final content.
There were several reasons for not wanting an acknowledgement.
For example, one participant said that because of professional reasons he does not want his name to appear on the Internet.
Many respondents indicated skepticism towards the technical quality of the recording, their own capacity, or the quality of the final video remix.
Claim: If the remix made by  includes my video clips, I want my name to be mentioned in the remix.
Actor Median Mode N Artist 3 3 18 Peer 2 2 18 AVRS 2 1 18 Claim: If the remix is made by , it is important for me to see the complete remix before I decide if I want my name to be published as part of the remix.
We sought to study if users' need for control of their clips depended upon the actor with whom the clips were to be shared.
As such, we compared control variable scores of the three actors .
Significant differences were found between AVRS and Peer  as well as between Artist and Peer .
Interestingly, this finding implies that respondents preferred to hand over clips to the AVRS over an unknown peer.
It might also be that in the case of the artist and the AVRS as the actor, the users did not feel a need for control because they trusted these entities more than an unfamiliar person.
Trust itself always involves risk , and is crucial in systems of distributed agency like our collaborative video remixing where labor is allocated to external actors.
One respondent mentioned consideration of fair use, the need for awareness of commercial or any other type of use that was previously unknown.
No one explicitly expressed a need for individual parts of the video remix to be attributed to them.
We thank Provinssirock, Fullsteam Records, Lapko, Disco Ensemble, and Teosto organizations.
Anonymous CHI reviewers, and additional researchers Lassi Seppala, Suvi Silfverberg., Arto Puikkonen, Pirkka Aman, Francesco Crikri, and Vilma Lehtinen for organizing the study.
Academy of Finland project MusiQuitous funded work at HIIT.
The overall quality of the automatic remixes did not match the quality of the best manual remixes.
However, the automatic video remixes were perceived to be as good as memorabilia as the manual ones.
This finding indicates that the video remix does not have to be superb in order to trigger memories from the music event.
One way to provide that emotional response is to offer varied perspectives of the event through different camera angles.
This technique allows people to relate to the video because they see views from places they themselves had occupied during the show.
People need significantly less control of their personal clips when sharing them with an AVRS, as compared to other concert attendees with whom they are not familiar.
We believe that this result indicates that the automatic remixing system was seen as trustworthy with regards to sharing one's personal video clips to be used in creating a public video remix.
With an AVRS, a user veto may not be required before publishing the automatic video remix.
However, users should not be hurried into handing over their video clips to the system either; they should have a chance to preview their clips.
Only the clips that are explicitly chosen should be included for remixing.
Novice users are uncertain about the outcome and thus unlikely to want to be acknowledged without the chance to review the video remix.
The willingness to share is largely dependent on the quality and subjective meaningfulness of the final content as well as the reputation of the venue where the final content will be published.
It seems that people want to be aware of how they are presented as part of the outcome and want to control it in such a way that matches their impression management goals.
Since many of the participants did not expect acknowledgment and many saw it as very conditional, we do not think people should be acknowledged as a default, unless they separately agreed to do so.
Users should be informed from the start about the intended use and licensing.
However, they should not necessarily be asked for consent for acknowledgement at an early stage, either before recording or after uploading the material.
If after production consent is impractical, the decision should be made thoughtfully.
