The Cognitive Function Analysis is a methodology supported by a mediating tool for the human-centered automation of safety-critical systems .
It is basedon a socio-cognitive model linking the artifact being designed, the user's activity, the task to be performed, and the organizational environment.
Cognitive functions can be allocatedto humans or machines.They are characterized by their role, context definition and associated resources.The methodology is supportedby active design documents as mediating representations of the amfact, the interaction description and cognitive function descriptors being designed, redesigned andusedasusability criteria to evahrate the distribution of cognitive functions among humans and machines.
This methodolo,y enhancesusercentered and participatory design, and traceability of design decisions.It was successfully tested on three main applications in the aeronauticsdomain.
One of them is presented.
Keywords Active documents, aeronautics, evaluation, function allocation, automation, organizational memory systems, participatory design,safety critical systems.
A wrong function allocation in such systems may result in catastrophic accidents.The paper will first introduce an agent-oriented cognitive engineeringmodel.
Subsequently,the concept of cognitive function will be developed.
Human-centered automationwill be described in terms of cognitive function allocation among humans and machines along four fundamental dimensions: task, artifact, user and environment.
Active design documents supporting the Cognitive Function Analysis  will be presentedand illustrated as mediating tools that support the allocation process.An aeronauticalexample will illustrate the use of CFA.
Conclusions and perspectiveswill be given in the balanceof the paper.
Automation has been mostly constructedand applied by engineersin the past.
Human factors people have brought new principles and methodsto test the usabiity of complex systemsduring the designprocess.However, end users am only one concern.Automation needsto be considered in a broadersensethan just user-centered automation  because it should be done for the benefit of the largest range of people including users, designers, support people and trainers.
Safelpxitical systems include, for example, critical-care, nuclear, emergency, military and aerospace systems.
Permksion to make di&alhard copies of all or pti oft& m&d fir Personal Or dmroorn use is grantedwithoutf~ providedthattbe copies ax not made or diiiuted for profit or commercial advantage, the copyridrtnotice,uletitteofthepublicationandits d&appear, andnot&is giwn lhti copyri&t is by p eon ofthe ACM, Inc. To copy other~,~ 10 republish, lo post on servers or lo rediibute to lists, re@es specific permission a&or fee.
Safety-critical systems such as aircraft currently include a tremendous amountof computer software.Previous humanmachine interaction that was energy-intensive has now evolved towards human-computer interaction that is information-intensive.
The nature of interaction is quite different to the point that new jobs  have emerged.An aircraft pilot has become a manager of what can best be thought of as artificial agents.
He or she needs to coordinate, trust, superviseand cooperate with theseagents.Severaltraditional human factorsprinciples and approaches have also become obsolete becausethe paradigm of a single agent, as an information processor,is no longer appropriate.Multi-agent models  are better suited to capture the essenceof today's information-intensive safety-critical systems.
A human agentinteracting with a software agent  must he awareof: what the other agenthasdone ; what the other agent is doing now and for how long ; why the other agent is doing what it does ; what the other agent is going to do next and when .
Thesefour situation awareness issuescorrespond to the most frequentlyaskedquestionsin advanced cockpits .
An artifact is a physical or conceptualhuman-designed entity useful for a given class of usersto perform specific tasks.
Carroll andRossondiscussed transactionsbetweentasks and artifacts in the human-computer interaction world .
It is sometimes very difficult to know if the task defines the artifact or if the artifact defines the task.
In reality, users' profiles, tasks and artifacts are incrementally defined to satisfy a specific objective.The task andthe user are usually taken into accountimplicitly.
Task can be modeledfrom a task analysisor a model of the processthat the artifact will help to perform.
A specified task leads to a set of information requirementsfor the artifact Conversely, the artifact sends back its own technological limitations accordingto the current availability of technology.Userscan be incrementally taken into accountin the designloop either through the developmentof descriptive or analogous user models.User modeling can be implicit or explicit, andleads to the definition of appropriateuserprofiles.
When a version of the artifact and the task are available, a user can use the artifact to perform the task.
An analysis of the user activity is then possible, which contributes to adaptboth the task, procedures andtraining, and artifact ergonomics.
The artifactuser-task triangle  implicitly defines an incremental approachto design/evaluationthat is similar to the spiral modelfor softwaredevelopment.
Artifact design and use are definednot only from a local ergonomics viewpoint, but also from management and organizational viewpoints both in the short term and the long term.
Global ergonomics expendsthe triangle to a pyramid by introducing a fourth concept: organizational auijhzt-user-task-organizational environment.
The environment  pyramid introduces three additional issues : the designedartifact emergesin the environment, and the environment evolves from the integration of the artifact; the task requiresthe organization of new jobs, and the environment sendsback new roles;
In highly dynamic complex automated systems, users develop cognitive skilled processes that are very contextsensitive.
These numerous skills can be approximatedby cognitive functions.
By definition, a cognitive function enablesits user to transform a task into an activity .
Unlike goal-drivenmodels,such as GOMS , that tend to valorize smaller numbers of methods,context-driven models such as cognitive functions try to elicit organization of context patterns that facilitate the access to the right cognitive function at the right time.
Cognitive functions axe incrementally categorized according to context.
A cognitive function is implementable when it is linked to right resourcesthat are cognitive functions themselves.
An analysis of the cognitive functions involved in the use of the Multifunction Command and Display Unit , the user interface of the FMC, enabledus to elicit a set of cognitive functions categorized accordingto the AUTO pyramid.
Programming a flight plan using a MCDU is a complex cognitive function that may be decomposed into several layers of simpler cognitive functions.
Only task-based and artifact-based cognitive functions areelicited first.
User-based and organizationalenvironment-based cognitive functions are subsequently addedto describeuser's assetsand problems as well as environmental issues.
For instance, the Preflight task-based cognitive function is decomposed into three taskbased cognitive functions Setting up, Flight plan preparation, andPerformance.
Setting up is then decomposed into two task-basedcognitive functions System status check, and Nava& &selection.
An important issue is to make the constraints explicit enough to guide the decisions during the design process.
Cognitive functions are experimentally elicited by interpreting the deviationsbetweenthe task and user activity in terms of role, context and resources.
Examples of highlevel cognitive functions are: situation identification, decisionmaking, planning, and actions coordination.
HUMAN-CENTERED AUTOMATION OF SAFETYCRITICAL SYSTEMS The procedure-interface duality In safety-critical systems,operationalprocedures are usedin either normal or abnormal situations.
Operationalprocedures are supposedto help operators during the execution of prescribed tasks by enhancing an appropriate level of situation awareness and control.
It is usually assumedthat people tend to forget to do things or how to do things in many situations.Procedures are designedasmemory aids.
In abnormal situations, pilots need to be guided under timepressure,high workload and critical situations that involve safety issues.
The main problem with this approachis that people may even forget to useprocedures!Or they anticipatethings beforethe execution of a procedure.People tend to prefer to use their minds to recoa&ze a situation instead of immediately jumping on their checklist booksas they are usually required to do in aviation, for instance191.
In other words, people are not necessarilygoodprocedurefollowers.
They want to be in control 111.Ultimately, if the user interface includes the right situation patterns that afford the recognition of and responseto the right problems at the right time, then formal proceduresare no longer necessary.In this case, people interact with the systemin a symbiotic way.
The better the interfaceis, the less procedures are needed.
Conversely, the more obscurethe interfaceis, themore proceduresare needed to insure a reasonablelevel of performance.This is the procedure-interface duality issue.
Example of advanced cockpit automation Prior to the integration of flight managementcomputers  onboard&craft, pilots planned their flights using paper and pencil technolo,~.
An FMC is a real-time database management system where flight routes are stored.
It enablesthe pilot to program or recall a flight route and adapt it to the current flight conditions.
An easy-to-useuser interface usually results in affordable artifact-basedcognitive functions.
Most pilots find the MCDU difficult to learn and use.
This complexity of use can be illustrated using two kinds of observations.First, the pilot needsto push keys, browse menusthat can be more or less complicated due to the depth or recursion of these menus, i.e., artifact-basedcognitive functions are often complicated.
Second, pilots delegate complex cognitive functions, such as minimizing the distance between two geographicalwaypoints or satisfying a constraint imposed by air traffic control, to onboardcomputersthat help manage the flight, i.e., task-based cognitive functions delegated to the machine are complex and require the involvement of information-intensive cognitive functions such as situation awareness and supervisorycontrol .
Cognitive function allocation The first step of CFA involves eliciting, constructing and chaining cognitive functions that arc involved in a specific task.
A second step involves a set of principles and guidelines that guide cognitive function allocation among agents, and help understand the repercussions of this allocation.
Theserepercussions can be expressed in terms of new cognitive functions createdand new relations between agents.
The development of new tools can facilitate the execution of such cognitive functions by taking over part of the job currently done by humans.
PAPERS Formalizing cognitive function allocation is a means of betterunderstanding andcontrolling automationaccordingto a list of automation goals such as those proposed by Billings for the air transportation system : safety: to conductall operations,from start to end, without harm to persons or property; reliability: to provide reliable operations without interference from environmental variables; economy: to conduct all operations as economically as possible; and comfort: to conduct all operationsin a manner that maximizes users' aud related persons' health and comfort.
Human-centered automation principles should be clearly defined, e.g., technologymediated human-human communication can be greatly enhanced by directing tediousand time-consumingcognitive functions towardsthe machine, and cognitive functions that keepuserawareness andcontrol of the situation towardsthe human.
CFA provides a theoreticalbasissupporting a current debate on direct manipulation versusinterface agents.
Artifactbasedcognitive function transfer from the user to the machineusually definesan automation that enhances direct manipulation.
Task-based cognitive function transfer from the userto the machinedefines an automation that enhances task delegation to a software agent.
It distributes the responsibility of the task between the human and the machine.
The way task-based cognitive function transferis understoodby designersis crucial becauseit defines the user'srole and context of useof the machine.This is why a careful CFA is requiredto defineroles, context of use and resources of eachcognitive function involved in the humanmachineinteraction of safety-criticalsystems.For instance, it is often crucial that usersperceivethe level of autonomy of the designedartifact.
The result is that the context of use of a cognitive function must be incrementally co-constructed by both designers aud users in a participatory design frameworkthat is proposedin the next section.
After a first active design document is designed and developed , a firstround of analysis determines the first contextual links.
Such an analysis is basedon the evaluation of observedor reported human-machineinteractions produced by typical users.An active designdocumentcan be refined either by: revising interaction descriptionsunder the requirementsof previously generatedcontextual links and possibly the modification of interfaceobjects;modifying interface objects under the requirementsof previously generatedcontextual links and possibly the modification of interaction descriptions; or generating contextual links to provide information on flaws aud relevant comments of the congruencebetween interaction descriptions and interface objects.
Active designdocumentcreation and refinement is guidedusing usability principles and criteria that are based on domain requirements.
In particular, contextual links ate generated and structured according to these usability principles and criteria.
They can be generated as: free text, quantitative and qualitative evaluations based on specific criteria andconstraints.
Measuringis evaluating.A measurement is always basedon a model or a theory.
It can be subjective or objective accordingto the confidence that we have in both the model and the measurer.For a long time, human and social sciences implicitly acknowledged that quantitative measures were good  evaluation tools, Unfortunately, quantificationworks on a closed-worldand do not take into accountunanticipatedevents very well.
Thus, there was a needfor a new type of approach.
The expertsystemapproach has revealeda new type of model based on the use of qualitative expertise.Insteadof having a specified metrics, e.g.
This approachis thus more open-world and enablesevaluation to take into account unanticipated events.Its weakness is that expertsare subjective, basedon their background,experience,skills and situation awareness.
The choice of a  numberof evaluatorsis thus crucial.
It is guidedby a good mix of common senseand domain knowledge.
The descriptionof a cognitive function by a domain expert is often a good measure of the quality, relevance and usability of an artifact.
Cognitive functions are elicited with respectto their role, context and associated resources.
CFDs should be clearly defined in order to be further compared and widely acceptedIn other words, a CPD has the following properties: two CFDsprovided by two experts A and B should be comparable,i.e., expressedproperties should be clearly definedand consistent in both CFDs; this is a comparisonissue; any CFD template should be de&red according to current cognitive engineering results and the terminology of the application domain; this is a standardization issue.
CFDs are usually defined from aobservation in work situations andin meetings of experts.
In addition, eachqualitative CPD is typically evaluatedaccordingto a five-value scale:1: excellent; 2: good; 3: medium; 4: poor; 5: unacceptable.
An example of evaluation results included in a contextual link of an active design documentis provided in Table 1.
These affordable interface objects are hypermediaobjects that can be easily modified during the designprocess,andinclude relevant properties andbehaviors that are specified from the first CPA results.
Figure 3 presents au example of an alternative interface for programming the INC.
In this kind of interface, waypoints andtrajectoriesare interface objects that have properties and behaviors.For instance,de preprogrammed waypoint TRS 1 canbe changedinto the waypoint TRS2 by simply selecting it.
When TRS2 is selected,the trajectory is automatically r&awn.
In other words, the pilot does not have to search for waypoints by browsing FMC pages using a classical MCDU.
He or she directly manipulatesmeaningful objects that appropriately react to provide immediate possible configurations.
Active design document generation and maintenance concretizesMuller's arguments in favor of participatory design : to combine diverse sources of expertise; to formalize the ownership and commitment by all of the people who will eventually work on or with the designed artifact; to participatein decision-makingby the people who will be a&ted by the design decisions.
Active design documents are shareable prototypesof the real artifacts being designedthat can be used by real users to assesstheir usability.
Prototypes should be familiar to users.
Their limitations should be clearly identified.
A shareable prototype should be understandable by all the members of the design team andkeep them on a common track.
Active design documentsenablethe design team to share concepts by writing and reading their expression in the form of multimedia objects.
They are incrementally modified to harmonizemutual understandingof design team members.
Active designdocumentsdefine an active external memory.
They are incrementally moditied according to possible design options,humanfactorsevaluationcriteria and organizational requirements.In the CFA approach, modifications PIE induced from interaction among design team members.
Active designdocumentsmay come to deadends as well as evolve into currently valid documents describingthe artifact.
Corresponding document evolution is kept to preserve designhistory.
Later in the life cycle of the artifact, active design documents interface objects become more sophisticated and user-friendly, interaction descriptions should become minimal, and contextual links richer in commentsand feedback from tests.
The shorter and crisper interaction descriptionsare, the easierthe interaction with interface objects is.
An important issue is to handle the growth of contextual links.
This is precisely where traceability problems arise.
We call traceability the process that enablesone to recall design decisions and the various alternatives as well as why these alternatives were not chosen.Contextuallinks are usedto implement an indexing mechanism.
They should be classified, generalized, and incrementally simplified in order to be efficiently used.
A first solution is to group them by viewpoint.
Dependingon the type of behavior,two types of analysisare possible: l A goal-oriented task analysis involves a hierarchic decompositionof goals into subgoals, and so on until basic actions are found and executed.
The corresponding scientific approach is top-down, based on analytical descriptions.
It usually attempts to model internal cognitive mechanismsof a single agent, and to describe exhaustively the goal space.
It usually attemptsto model multi-agent interaction within an organizational environment, and to describe exhaustivelythe context space.
When a human performs a task, his or her behavior is opportunistic, i.e., both intentional and reactive.
In the control of complexdynamic systems,human operatorsneed to be and are opportunistic.
They needto be aheadof the machine  and respond quickly to eventsthat are not anticipated.
PAPERS cannot be isolated from the actual work that includes a descriptionof three types of contraints, i.e., roles, contexts and involved resources.Similarly, Vicente and Pejtersen  propose a constraint-based approachto work analysis , instead of an instruction-basedapproach to task analysis .
A constraint-based approachdoesnot tell you the right way to do your task.
As in CFA, this approachleadsalso to a functional description for humanmachine systems.
Active design documents support sketching  as mediating tools for design team members.They also enable one to trace design decisions based on the evaluation of cognitive function descriptors.From this perspective,CFA has similarities to Raison d'Etre .
CFA contributes to the creationandmaintenanceof a living designmemory .
Since safety-critical systems such as aircmft induce both intentional and reactive behaviors, CFA is very appropriateto study and descrii situation awareness, human errors, cooperation, coordination,for instance.
This paper has presented a methodology for human-centered design of highly automated safety-critical systems.
It focusseson cognitive function allocation using a combined analytical and situated  methodology to humancenteredautomation.
CFA enablesthe investigator to describecognitive functions with respectto the constraints and limitations imposed by the artifact, the user, the task, and the organizational environment.
CFA attacks the difficult issue of function allocation.
It enablesthe description of how new technology influences distributed cognition by using a participatory design tool both mediating creativity and evaluation, and accounting for design history.
Since it is very difficult and sometimes impossible to predict design-inducederrors that lead to incidents or accidents, incremental evaluations and refinementsaremandatoryduring the overall life cycle of an artifact.
Active design documentsoffer the opportunity to usersand otherpartiesinvolved in the life-cycle of an artifact to formally influence its design.
CFA supported by the effective use of active design documents provides descriptions of possible interaction, design rationale and evaluationslinked to the actual artifact.
By enabling the visualization of interaction descriptions, interfaceobjectsand cognitive functions involved in the use of the artifact being designed,the design team is likely to anticipate and discover more contexts of use, more appropriateresourcesto perform the task and cooperative features reqired within the organizational environment.
Since automation always leads to the definition of new roles, and possibly jobs for users, CFA offers a framework to elicit and analyze these new roles and changes.
In particular, CFA is useful to analyzeand possibly anticipate new risks in safety-critical systems.
Table 2 Goal- versus event-orientedtask analysis.
Table 2 presentsthe advantages and drawbacks of these two different task analysis approaches.Goal-driven approaches are well adaptedto analyze problem solving.
Event-driven approaches are better suited to analyzeproblem formulation or problem setting  in complex system environments.
Indeed, a problem is characterizedby a problem statement and a problem solving processleading to a solution.
Eveubody lmows that a well statedproblem is alreadyhalf solved and this is well adapted to  reactive behavior.Moreover, when a beginner starts to learn a particular domain, he or she starts learning problem solving methods which he or shewill improve incrementally simply by augmenting and improving thesemethods,and also by improving the way he or she formulates problems.
In a cognitive function analysis, the emphasisis put more on problem formulation, and then context, than on problem solving.
CFA combines both goal- and event-orientedanalyseswithin a single l%mework uspportedby active designdocuments.
The traceability of design rationale and associated humanfactors-oriented evaluations representsa real asset for the organization that develops an artifact.
Active design documents aredesignedandrefined from the beginningto the end of the artifact life-cycle.
A remaining important issue is to justify time andmoney spent in the implementation of CFA in a large-sire industrial organization.
Estimated developmentcosts should be compared to the costs of late modifications of the artifact, incidents and accidentsdue to designflaws, and unnecessary training or maintenance.An evaluation framework, such as proposedby Zimmermann and Selvin 1261, should be set up to assess the methodology againstorganizational requirements andcurrentneeds.
Hubert L'Ebraly, Thierry Broignez, Meriem Chater, Mark Hicks, Christophe Solans and Krishnakumar greatly contributedto the current state of the CFA methodology at EURISCO, AerospatialeandBritish Aerospace.
Jonathan Grudin, David Novick, Helen Wilson and anonymous reviewers provided astute advice towards improving de quality of this paper.
Scientific dicovery; An account of the creative process.
Participatory design in Britain and North America: Responding to the &candinavian Challenge>>.
In Reading Through Technology, CHI'91 Conference Proceedings.
Turn Signals are the Facial Expressionsof Automobiles.
Pilot interaction with cockpit automation II: An experimental study of pilots' mental model and awarenessof the Flight ManagementSystem.
International Journal of Aviation Psychology, 4, pp.
Supervisory control of remote manipulators, vehicules and dynamic processes: experimentin commandand display aiding.
Advances in Man-Machine Systems Research, J.A.I.
Direct manipulation vs. Interface agents.
The problem of human-machine communication.
The focus of automation: Which tasks should be automated.
EURISCO Industrtal Summer School on Human-Centered Automation.
A liamework for assessinggroup memory approachesfor software designprojects.Proceedings of DIS'97.
