Predictive text entry provides a fast way to enter text on phones and other small devices.
Early work on predictive text entry highlighted that the reaction time for checking the screen dominates text entry times.
Improving accuracy of predictions brings a downside: as prediction gets better, users will drop the slow operation of checking the screen and will thus miss prediction errors and system feedback/suggestions.
In this note, we present an experiment into the use of vibration to alert the user when word completion is likely to aid them, using a dynamic approach based on their current typing speed, and when there are no dictionary matches to their entry.
Results show significantly faster entry rates for users with vibration alerts, raising speeds from 20wpm to 23wpm once practiced.
We also add tactile feedback when a user's input no longer matches any words in the dictionary.
The note starts with an overview of text entry and tactile feedback and a description of our system, including how we make predictions and how we decide when to give vibration alerts.
We then present the design and results from a twenty user evaluation comparing performance of text entry with and without vibration alerts.
Predictive text entry and word completion are two techniques used to increase text entry speed on devices too small to have a full sized keyboard.
Predictive text entry was popularized with Tegic's T9, now deployed on over 2 billion handsets with ISO standard 12key keypads.
Predictive text enables users to type one-letter per key for most words with a frequency weighted dictionary disambiguating the ambiguous keystrokes.
User studies have shown that users achieve around 20 words per minute  using T9  or similar technology .
While still slow compared to best performance on miniature QWERTY keyboards  and on-screen keyboards , the 12-key pad has significant benefits for mobile devices: in both physical and touch-screen forms the layout can have a small overall footprint while maintaining relatively large buttons compared to a full QWERTY layout.
Word completion can also help users on small devices or while mobile, by allowing them to pick full words without entering all the letters.
User studies have shown that novice users can noticeably increase typing speed with word completions and full word suggestions on touch-screens .
In  we proposed a text entry model, based on Card, Moran and Newall's keystroke level model , as a method for predicting likely performance of mobile phone interaction.
The model was based on predicting the time T taken by an expert user to enter a given phrase and calculates this as an equation that combines a set of small time measurements for elements of the user interaction.
In the case of text entry: * * * the homing time for the user to settle on the keyboard, Th ; the time it takes a user to press a key, Tk ; the time it takes the user to mentally respond to a system action, Tm ;
Text entry is core to many mobile applications such as text/instant messaging and email.
Furthermore, text entry is likely to become more dominant with new data services and mobile applications.
Predictive text entry, where users type one key per character on an ambiguous keypad, is now deployed as standard on traditional format phones and provides a relatively fast way to enter text on a range of small keypads.
Increasing processor and memory capabilities linked with improved algorithms are leading to better prediction and word completion solutions.
However, improving accuracy of predictions brings a downside: as prediction gets better mistakes will be rarer and, we anticipate, users will stop checking the suggested words, thus missing prediction errors and any suggested word completions.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
The overall time equation for entering a phrase is given in Equation 1.
T = Th + w  Equation 1: Dunlop and Crossan's keystroke model  This model, as corrected by Pavlovych & Stuerzlinger , predicts a text speed of 19.3wpm - matching very closely with independent T9 results of 20.4 wpm .
This model highlights how mental response time, Tm, can dominate predictive text entry for expert users: one mental operation to check a predicted word is roughly equivalent to 5 keystrokes, or one English word!
MacKenzie  also highlights the problems of the different foci of attention for text entry stating that "mobile phones beep or vibrate on incoming text messages... however, there is preciously little feedback that accompanies text entry".
Word completion/suggestion often adds a third focus of attention to interactions with users having to check the visual feedback on the text entry line  and the suggestions while also focusing on the keypad .
In order to investigate tactile feedback on a standard mobile phone we developed a Java Mobile Edition application, see figure 1, that uses the in-built vibrator for tactile feedback.
We implemented two different vibration feedbacks, both of which can be interpreted as "please check the screen": when word completion would help enter text faster and when a word is not in the dictionary.
The problem of a slow mental response time discussed above for predictive text is theoretically much worse for word completion.
To use word completion as often as possible, the user would, theoretically, have to add a mental operation to every keystroke in Equation 1, not just after the last letter of each word.
This would clearly slow users too much and users of word completion are likely to develop heuristics for when it is worth checking the screen.
In our prototype system we dynamically compared the users typing speed with the mental response time, Tm, to alert them when it would be beneficial to use the suggested word completion.
Given a word completion suggestion of n letters where the user has already entered m letters, we gave a short vibration alert  if Tk' > Tm where Tk' is the average typing speed for the user over the last 10 characters.
For example in " and we figure 1 the user has entered "MY suggest STRONGEST as the most likely word after MY that can be composed with a P, Q, R or S as first letter and T, U or V as second.
We also copy the entry-length prefix of this word, here ST, to the main entry area as the user types.
The device used a large  dictionary for base unigram statics and learned from all 500 of MacKenzie's standard test phrases  to gain bigram statistics.
All dictionary-based text entry methods fail when the user enters a word that is not in the dictionary.
Tactile feedback research has a relatively long history that demonstrates the benefits for general interaction and for interaction on mobile devices.
Studies have shown, for example, that tactile feedback through a mouse increases both the final selection speed and area of the target that was used for selection .
On touch-screen mobile devices it has been shown that tactile feedback on widgets made onscreen buttons feel very similar to their mechanical counterparts .
There has, however, been very little work on giving tactile feedback during text entry Brewster's group have shown that tactile feedback can help improve text entry speed and accuracy on stylus-based soft-keyboards  and raise finger-based text entry to close to that of physical keyboards on larger on-screen keyboards .
Furthermore, and vitally important for mobile designs, they showed that tactile feedback was still beneficial in noisy mobile settings.
While it has been shown that tactile feedback can considerably improve interaction with touch screens for text entry, no work has attempted to give feedback from the text-entry engine itself to the user.
We feel that tactile feedback is ideal for this task as we know the user is holding the device during text entry and that text entry is used in a very wide range of environments making tactile feedback both more likely to be attended to in noisy settings and more discrete in quiet settings than aural feedback.
In our prototype system we added a longer vibration  to indicate that the word the user is typing does not match any word in the dictionary.
The longer vibrate was used to highlight the different nature of this event and to stress that it is more serious than a word complete suggestion.
These results translate to 19wpm on average without vibration feedback, rising to 21wpm with.
Figure 3 shows that vibration feedback helps from task 3 onwards.
The first two phrases are, arguably, not in line with the remainder - this may indicate that our subjects were still becoming accustomed to the device, method and/or feedback - a feeling strengthened by some user comments.
This performances is equivalent to 20wpm for non-vibration condition rising to 23wpm with vibration feedback and is significant at 5% .
While numbers were small, it is worth noting that nonpredictive text users appeared to gain most from tactile feedback with an average rise of performance from 15 to 22wpm over the last four phrases, compared to a rise from 22 to 24 for non-predictive texters.
Error rates in both conditions were too low to be significant, thus no conclusions can be drawn with respect to H2.
Finally it should be noted that the bi-gram prediction model was performing very well in the tests, to the notable comment from some subjects.
While we learned from 500 phrases to predict only 12 of them, there may still be an over-training element in the prediction.
This leads to more suggestions being made and those suggestions being more accurate than in normal usage.
In practice the wpm gains reported here may be less but the benefit of the tactile feedback will still be considerable as users will make use of the given suggestions more often.
There were two experimental conditions:  without vibration feedback and  with vibration feedback.
In both cases the visual feedback was identical and no audio feedback given.
Twelve phrases were picked at random from MacKenzie's test phrase set .
Users were given an initial familiarization phase then asked to enter six phrases in one condition followed by six phrases in the second condition .
Experiments used a Nokia E65  phone .
Twenty subjects took part in the study, 15 of whom normally use predictive text entry and 5 who normally use other input methods .
Users ages varied between 18 and 50 with 11 female and 9 male subjects.
All tasks were conducted with the users sitting.
In order to account for differing user effort, the main statistic used to measure speed was time per character measured by the total time for each phrase divided by the length of the phrase.
With no vibration alerts users averaged 629ms per keystroke .
This note reports an experiment into use of tactile feedback to alert the user when to focus attention on the screen during text entry.
We implemented two trigger events: a word completion suggestion that would save input time  and when the user's input no longer matches any word in the dictionary .
Results show significant results with text entry speed rising from 19 to 21 words per minute overall .
For any text prediction system there are some keystrokes which are unambiguous, e.g.
Given the success of basic tactile feedback we are looking at giving feedback on the state of the prediction engine such as alerting the user when a sequence is highly ambiguous, and thus worth checking.
The experiment reported here was exclusively on traditional physical keyboard phones, it would be interesting to combine our feedback with that given on touch screens using more complex tactons  and more controllable actuators to see whether this combination would improve interaction or confuse users given the very short time in which feedback can be given.
Many thanks are due to Sebastien Avenet  for developing the core text editor we built our application on and to our subjects for their time given freely to take part in this study.
We also gratefully acknowledge funding through the EPSRC summer internship scheme to support the work and studies reported here.
Thanks also to our reviewers for their comments which have sharpened this note considerably and to Dr Mark Baillie  for his help with the statistical analysis and related rebuttal.
