This paper presents a study of event-based news production in a popular social news site, Reddit.com.
We use the case study of Hurricane Sandy and Reddit's topical community /r/sandy to examine how a social news platform shapes how and what users produce and curate as relevant news content for an ephemeral event.
Through content coding and data analysis, we provide topologies of content and users to describe how levels and types of participation frame news in /r/sandy and contribute to the shifting role that the subreddit plays, from information sharing and citizen journalism to humor and social support.
This study also examines how networked gatekeeping structures various dynamics around what kind of information can become relevant in a social news setting.
We find that, contrary to the established literature, information shared in a social news setting focused more on perspective-based citizen journalism than official news reports, and while /r/sandy users were more experienced compared to average Reddit users, user experience did not affect the types of content they shared.
We explore the production and filtering of this information through the lens of networked gatekeeping, where a mix of elite moderators and average users work together to curate the most relevant content.
In this study, we look at one "subreddit" , /r/sandy, that was created in late October 2012 to curate information related to Hurricane Sandy.
We then ask how a social news site can produce news - and what that "news" is - around ephemeral, event-based topics.
We also examine how different roles emerge for the use of a social news site, in which mixed forms of moderation emphasize the importance of particular types of content over others.
To explain news production in /r/sandy, we must first contextualize this subreddit within the context of social news sites generally.
Social news sites, like Slashdot, Digg, and Reddit, allow users to submit hyperlinks to a feed of content, which other users can vote up or down .
As posts gain more upvotes, the popular content eventually reaches the "top" of the site based on a total score relative to up- and downvotes.
Lerman & Ghosh  find that social news sites like Digg are able to disseminate information quickly through a combination of its platform infrastructure and underlying social networks, as users continue to vote on content that had become popular through earlier votingbased moderation.
On Reddit, when a user posts a hyperlink or comment, the total score it receives is added to the user's "karma" points, a measure of reputation.
Users are also able to submit "self" posts: text posts whose total score is not added to the poster's total karma.
For Reddit in particular, rather than a core website to which users submit content, the platform is composed of subreddits: community message boards curated around a particular topic, like /r/pics for sharing pictures or /r/funny for posting jokes.
Reddit as a whole is thereby founded on a network of subcommunities, where users will post across a variety of subreddits.
Reddit's front page displays the user-submitted hyperlinks from twenty "default" subred-
Individuals use social media for a variety of information and media sharing purposes.
Personal reactions to events, sometimes called citizen journalism, have been a crucial emergent behavior on networked platforms, particularly for its role in moments of crisis or disaster .
We align with Keegan, Gergle, & Contractor  in that "tudies of peer production in sociotechnical systems... often presuppose that membership in and motivations to contribute to these communities are relatively stable and constant, yet such communities often self-organize and coordinate their activities under conditions of unstable and sudden collective action" .
However, social networking platforms and microblogs  have dominated the research of these situations .
Another genre of social media, "social news sites," provide a unique way for participants to produce and consume information through collaborative voting.
This paper looks at what kind of news participants produce and curate on one social news platform, Reddit.com, and how that collected information frames events.
It is important to note that content submitted to any subreddit goes through an automated detection process to see if the particular hyperlink already exists; if so, the user is forwarded to the existing page .
While millions of users have registered with Reddit, many more merely browse the front page as viewers, resembling a mass media platform validating Reddit's slogan, "the front page of the internet."
In December 2011 alone, Reddit served over 2 billion page views to over 34 million unique visitors; as of January 2012, the site boasts over 100,000 subreddits with more than 8,000 holding 100 subscribers .
With continued growth, Reddit now occupies the 61st most visited site in the United States and sits in the top 150 sites visited worldwide.1 While news is shared daily on subreddits like /r/news, /r/worldnews, or /r/NNNNNNNEEEEEEEEEEEEWS, users might try to situate information about particular events by sharing it to respective topic-oriented subreddits.
In other words news production is articulated through particular spaces daily on Reddit , while some instances of ephemeral newswork are fostered through alternative channels.
For example, /r/olympics and /r/halloween exist for sharing content related to each respective event, and the communities located on these boards become particularly active around their respective event dates, with limited activity on other days.
It is important to note, though, that one of the barriers for new users to participating in Reddit's subreddit network is discovering the variety of subreddits that exist.
Subreddits that are not included in the default set must recruit users through advertising, word of mouth, or happenstance; therefore, newer subreddits may take some time to grow a committed collective of contributors.
However, as we will show below, various circumstances led to a rapid adoption and viewership of the /r/sandy subreddit.
In addition to looking at what kinds of content users produce in reaction to a news event on a social news site, we also look at user attributes to see how a user's experience shapes how they participate .
While it is important to contextualize what news a social news site produces, we also aim to contextualize such analysis by looking at who produces what the larger viewer audiences sees.
Most work on social news sites has demonstrated the effects of their unique technical system on the ability for a large collective of users to curate relevant content in a democratic manner.
Such a democratic process allows for various public spheres to form .
However, little research has examined what kinds of content are shared in social news settings and how that shapes the framing of the platforms and individuals' uses of them.
Reddit as a social news site represents a particularly unique space as it combines the voting dynamics of broad social news platforms like Digg or Slashdot with the topicoriented categorization and technical implementation of message and image boards.
Unlike other social news platforms - which tend to allow only social connections between users to impact what additional content an individual may see  - Reddit provides users the opportunity to create and foster their own topical subcommunities , which vary in terms of subscribers, content dynamics, viewership , and social norms.
The dominance of the default subreddits leads users to generate a wide spectrum of subreddits  for more niche topics, though these smaller subreddits garner less visibility for their content.
When considering the case of /r/sandy, the context of its newness - namely, that it was created for a specific purpose at a very particular time period - shapes how participation developed at the onset of its use for news reporting and information sharing.
Reddit's peculiar technical system also is accompanied by a particular set of social norms.
Just as with other social media systems, as users stay on the site, they become acculturated to these norms and other practices.
For instance, Suh et al.
Scellato and Mascolo  showed an increase in account activity as account age increased on Gowalla.
Burke, Marlow, & Lento  found that newcomers to Facebook participate less than experienced users, and increased participation on the part of newcomers depends on their experiences becoming acculturated to the platform and learning social norms early on.
Similar differences in experience exist on social news sites as well .
As stated earlier, one of the barriers for newcomers to Reddit is discovering niche subreddits to join.
H1: Users that contribute to a specialized social news subcommunity will be older and more experienced compared to newer and less experienced users on the site.
Prior research on uses of social media in crisis settings has shown that certain content, in terms of both online media like video and types of content such as news articles or personal opinion, dominates what is produced and shared about crucial events and topics.
For example, Hughes & Palen  demonstrated that information broadcasting and brokerage were important facets of content shared during emergency situations and events with popular attendance.
Similarly, Chew & Eysenbach  showed that on Twitter, in reaction to the spread of the H1N1 virus, news and information were the most shared type of content, and over time content like personal experiences increased while others like humor decreased.
Bruns  also found that Twitter conversation, by looking at one coordinated hashtag, #qldfloods, during a flood situation, primarily produced information and media sharing, with much less reactions, help, and personal experience.
Schultz, Utz, & Goritz  demonstrated that newspaper reports are deemed as more reputable sources of crisis communication than online media like blogs.
Most of these studies, though, limit interpretation of content to more vague categories of "information" and "media," particularly in large datasets where computational techniques can only go so far.
We therefore expand on these studies by coding the content of /r/sandy in more detail below.
H2: The content submitted to a specialized social news subcommunity will primarily focus on mainstream reported news.
The kinds of information that are shared on a social media service around a particular topic of course frame that topic as they spread inside the platform and around the network; however, various gatekeepers will also affect the framing of that content via their editorial powers.
We can think of the framing of information on a social news site as an evolution of traditional framing in journalism ; on a social news site like Reddit, the users manage, mediate, and turn away information generated by the community through consensus with upvotes and downvotes.
Traditional gatekeeping  thus transforms into a distributed process, where information that would normally be vetted or even ob-
However, powerful figures that act as gatekeeping intermediaries remain: frequently, these are elite members of online communities that take up moderation roles within the platform, through either technical or socially-mediated roles .
Still, there are opportunities for more distributed moderation: for instance, Shaw  outlines how relational boundaries between participants in a participatory blog setting lead to a mix of centralized gatekeeping by elite users with decentralized moderation through processes like content filtering, all supported by an egalitarian ethos.
In this mixed setting, moderation pushes relevant and factual information higher.
The dynamics of mixed moderation produced by both centralized and decentralized gatekeeping impacts the framing of content in Reddit's subreddit-structured system.
While subscribers primarily shape each subreddit's content through their voting dynamics, elite moderators have power to establish rules for acceptable submissions, delete content, and even ban users.
Thus, on Reddit, information flows that eventually frame a topic or event are directed through both moderators' decisions and the voting behaviors of users collectively.
Meraz & Papacharissi  describe this mixed dynamic as "networked framing," in which "the use of conversational, social practices... symbiotically connect elite and crowd in the determination of information relevancy" .
Our study contributes to research on framing in crisis communication because the platform and purpose of a social news site remain distinct from microblogs and social networking sites, which have dominated the literature.
The latter represents a mix of egocentric information sharing with differing audience dynamics , while social news sites particularly attract users to share to an unknown mass audience.
Just as with breaking news stories on Wikipedia , for a social news site like Reddit, the contributions of submitters are moderated by other participants; therefore, only particular content becomes popular and visible, setting the frame and tone of how the crisis becomes transmitted in this particular space.
H3a: Reported news content is more likely to be relevant compared to other content.
H3b: More experienced users are more likely to share reported news content than less experienced users.
Using Python, MySQL, and the Reddit API, we collected a dataset of 2,458 threads posted to /r/sandy during the subreddit's entire lifespan .
These threads include the 1,000 highestvoted , 1,000 most recent  and 1,000 most "controversial"  posts contributed to the subreddit, resulting in some overlaps.
The dataset contains the title, user, timestamp of creation, URL of posted hyperlink , and numbers of comments, upvotes, downvotes, and total scores for each thread.
While this dataset does not represent a population sample of every thread contributed to the entire subreddit , it does illustrate the major variations in content posted to the subcommunity, namely most relevant and least popular posts.
We also aggregated 25,490 comments posted to each thread collected.
Finally, we scraped user data for the 1,895 distinct users that contributed each post, which includes each user's post and comment karma scores , account age, and user heterogeneity .
Since posting, some users deleted their accounts or removed the association between their account and the post; these few cases were excluded from the statistical models below.
From these data, we also coded the top 1,000 highest-voted threads  according to content type and content format.
For content type, we distinguished among eight categories, shaped by the literature and an initial round of exploratory coding: professional news reports ; users' perspective-centric content, such as photos, text, etc.
The content format was split among nine categories: text , images, videos, audio, maps, graphics , and infographics.
Between two coders, the interreliability rate was calculated at Cohen's kappa = 0.72 ; for those we disagreed on initially, we reached consensus in a second round of coding.
To evaluate whether or not the participants in our /r/sandy sample were unique, according to Hypothesis 1, we compared the subreddit's users to a random sample of 853 users taken from /r/worldnews, the default subreddit for sharing news-related content and the highest subscribed news subreddit .
We ran a nonparametric independent two-sample Mann-Whitney U test to see if user attributes were different along measures of "experience": user account age, total submissions and comments, total submission and comment karma, and a subreddit heterogeneity measures.
The results are summarized in Table 2 below.
Example Some subway tunnels flood - CBS My moms backyard in Hatteras.
That dock is usually about 3 feet above water  Horse Man Caught On Film During Live Sandy Coverage Tips from a Louisiana native who lived through Katrina Is there a list of places I can volunteer in NYC?
9 Viral Photos That AREN'T Hurricane Sandy Sandy from space Please consider including location in the title of images you post.
Example Al Jazeera gives /r/sandy a shoutout...
Users' account age and users' subreddit heterogeneity were higher in /r/sandy than in /r/worldnews, though users' number of submissions and comments and users' total karma scores were lower in /r/sandy than in /r/worldnews.
To account for differing information practices amongst users - namely, that posting links, posting comments, or attempting to gain karma might not reflect every users' core use of Reddit - we ran a nonparametric Kendall's taubeta correlation post-test between users' account age and heterogeneity measures for all users in both /r/sandy and /r/worldnews samples , still working under the assumption that continued use of the site will lead to increased exploration of smaller, more niche subreddits.
The test was significant for both total subreddit heterogeneity  and heterogeneity excluding default subreddits , suggesting that there is a strong positive relationship between a user's timespan on Reddit and a user's diversity of subreddits and marking these measures as representative of a user's level of experience with the site.
Hypothesis 2 proposed that the content would focus more on reported news compared to other user-generated content within /r/sandy.
To reiterate, we coded the top 1,000 highest-rated according to content type and format, the results of which are summarized below with examples in Table 3.
A cross-tabulation of the data is presented in Table 4.
As demonstrated by our coding scheme, less than one-fifth of the relevant content posted to /r/sandy was from established news reports.
To test Hypothesis 2, we ran a basic chi-square test on the differences between the observed frequencies of reported news and all other types of content.
However, this result contradicts Hypothesis 2, in which we expected, based on the literature, for news reports to be the most shared content.
The results demonstrate significant statistical support for Hypothesis 1: the differences between users of /r/sandy and /r/worldnews were significant for all user attributes.
As these results show, though, while the hypothesis was supported statistically, the significant differences between users of /r/sandy and /r/worldnews were in varying directions.
Regarding the non-news-report content, the highest content type category was perspective-based, user-generated content, which accounted for almost a full third of all the relevant content posted to the subreddit.
Also, while almost one-fifth of the relevant content shared was hyperlinks to external websites, a surprising 46.2% of content posted was images.
According to the cross-tabulation table, more than one-fourth of the relevant content was images that fell under the perspective category.
Finally, in order to assess the validity of the Hypotheses 3a and 3b, which looked at the relevance of content types, we carried out a multinomial logistic regression with content categories as the dependent variable and post attributes and user attributes as the independent variables.
These results demonstrate varying levels of support for the components of Hypothesis 3.
With regards to Hypothesis 3a, the results show that post attributes do affect the likelihood of users voting other content as relevant, compared to news reports.
Corrections, humor, human-interest, and perspective-based content were more likely to get upvotes than news, while questions were less likely to get upvotes .
This suggests that news content was seen as less relevant than most types of content, which was voted higher.
Similarly, humor, perspective, and interest stories were less likely to get downvotes compared to reported news, suggesting again that news content was less relevant than other content.
Interestingly, questions were more likely to get downvotes, while the remaining types were not significantly affected.
Finally, comments were relatively insignificant in impacting content, except for questions, which were more likely to get them .
Taken together, this model demonstrates a failure to reject the null hypothesis of 3a, suggesting that reported news content was not particularly relevant within /r/sandy.
Hypothesis 3b states that more experienced users will be more likely to post news content.
Results once again indicate a general failure to reject the null hypothesis, except in a few limited circumstances.
The likelihood of user karma scores was insignificantly related to content types across the board; subreddit heterogeneity too was largely unrelated, with the one exception being a negative relationship between corrections and commenting practices, compared to reported news content.
Users that posted perspective- or tip-related content were less likely to have contributed more comments or submissions, respectively, in their experience.
Users posting tips and corrections were more likely to have higher comment counts, compared to news report sharers.
This study analyzes the dynamics of crisis communication in a social news setting.
We show that users in /r/sandy are different from ordinary news-sharing users on Reddit, though this difference ultimately has no real impact on what kind of content is shared by these users.
Still, we show that regardless of user, particular content rises to relevancy, particularly perspective-based citizen journalism, and that voting as a marker of relevancy does vary per type of content.
Who participates in "news" on a social news site?
As a massively-popular social news site, Reddit occupies a particularly interesting space in terms of viewing and sharing content: while it boasts tens of millions of viewers, many fewer participate on the site's default subreddits, and fewer still collaborate to post and vote on content in smaller topical subcommunities.
A niche, event-based subreddit like /r/sandy epitomizes a unique case of Reddit subcommunities, in that it was created for a specific purpose at a very particular time period.
Because of the subreddit's relevancy as a potential news source, it gained an abnormal amount of subscribers and viewers in a short duration.
According to Figures 2 and 3, /r/sandy gained over 11,000 subscribers in its first week and reached over 6,800 simultaneous users at one point in its lifespan.
To attract contributors to /r/sandy, Reddit administrators posted an advertisement for the /r/sandy subreddit on the right-side column of the platform, making users aware of the new subreddit's existence.
We established that users who contributed to /r/sandy have generally been on Reddit longer and have a greater diversity of subreddit use than ordinary news-sharing users .
However, we find in Hypothesis 3's insignificant results that a user of any experience with Reddit is not likely to contribute any type of content more or less than traditional news sharing.
In other words, the users of /r/sandy, for the most part, were as likely to post perspec-
How does Reddit produce the "news"?
The nature of Reddit's technical platform and social norms allow for a unique networked gatekeeping context for the production and framing of news.
We expected to find, based on the literature, that more news content would be shared.
However, as stated above, less than one-fifth of the relevant content in /r/sandy was news reports.
We instead found that the most relevant content in terms of production was perspective-based imagery.
Additionally, we expected news reports to be more relevant in terms of voting; the most relevant content in terms of voting  was all content  except subreddit-centric meta posts.
Therefore, we found that citizenjournalism-related information - whether cell phone pictures, sharing personal advice, or just finding posts that would be of interest to others - were shared more in a social news setting than simple news reports.
It is necessary, though, to tease out how certain behaviors fit within Reddit's culture and norms to explain these differences in the context of gatekeeping.
For instance, humor is a particularly important element of the subculture of Reddit , and /r/sandy witnessed a considerable amount of this content in its first hours.
Humor grew rapidly in the early days of /r/sandy  but quickly became a point of contention.
For instance, one post's title read, "Mods, can you please stop all the jokes?
This is a serious storm and I am using /r/sandy for knowledge and safety,"2 while another said, "I love you all, but can we please try and keep the jokes at a minimum?
As one moderator told us over email:
The goal from the beginning was to keep information flowing and accurate... to remove hearsay and things we just knew to be lies or posts from previous hurricanes just re-circulating.
At one point... we were getting about 15 posts every 20 seconds posted.
It was just a massive influx of data that we had to just constantly hit refresh on and delete content not deemed to be following what our mindset was.
To illustrate this point, we can look at the top 50 all-time submissions that mention Hurricane Sandy across Reddit, which were posted to /r/pics , /r/politics , /r/sandy , /r/funny , /r/gifs , /r/AdviceAnimals , and each of nine other subreddits.
Therefore, some users might not even consider /r/sandy as a possible place to post content about the hurricane.
But, as we can see, those who did contribute framed the value of the subreddit's news as reflecting personal positions of being affected by a disaster.
Additional data analysis could help illuminate the dynamics underlying the production and framing of news on social news sites.
For example, we did not include coded content of the population of submissions posted to /r/sandy, but investigation of the spectrum of posts to an event-based topical community could further illustrate the differences between content types .
Dynamics of attention within Reddit in particular do affect content's visibility within the site, as Gilbert  has shown.
Further qualitative research could examine why social news settings - and Reddit in particular - generate particular types of content and how these types flow across different subcommunities .
In particular, studying the dynamics of gatekeeping - here, voting behaviors - can help us understand how certain social values are translated to gatekeeping norms.
For instance, Reddit's "reddiquette" emphasizes upvoting if content contributes to conversation, though some users might upvote if they like the content and downvote if they dislike it.
Overall, this study shows in detail what kinds of content emerge in critical information moments under the moderation of networked gatekeeping.
We demonstrate that "information sharing" is not a normative practice - and in fact conflicts with prevailing assumptions about the sharing of journalistic information - and future research should consider approaches that provide nuanced details about the data that is produced and shared to further understand the dynamics behind such practices.
More so, we also illustrate that various types of moderation crucially impact what content becomes relevant .
Unlike other social media platforms, Reddit's integration of networked gatekeeping into the norms of information production within subcommunities ultimately changes the way that we can think about the emergence of relevant information in sociotechnical systems.
Here, distributed gatekeeping - through upvoting individual posters' concerns, downvoting jokes, and promoting social norms that emphasize useful information resharing - helps set a particular tone for the subreddit, one which recursively helps frame the news as it is produced within the context of how rules were moderated.
From this networked framing, we can then get a sense of what kind of roles /r/sandy played for readers during its lifetime.
While at first many types of content fluctuated as users attempted to establish norms in the face of limited attention, humor rose to prominence before the hurricane reached the United States coastline, making the hurricane a victim of spectatorship.
Eventually, as the storm began to do damage, the tone and goals of the subreddit shifted to serious information sharing, and as news reports and interest-based content vied for space, users contributed personal experiences from their own perspectives.
After the storm passed, links to tips, news reports, and especially human interest content continued to rise along with the rapidly growing perspective postings.
Ultimately, after the establishment of norms and rules for sharing important information, /r/sandy framed Hurricane Sandy as a serious event and took on the role of delivering important information to readers of the subreddit.
Acar, Adam, and Yuya Muraki.
Bruns, Axel, Jean E. Burgess, Kate Crawford, and Frances Shaw.
In Brisbane QLD Australia: ARC Centre of Excellence for Creative Industries and Innovation, Queensland University of Technology.
Burke, Moira, Cameron Marlow, and Thomas Lento.
In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 945-954.
Chew, Cynthia, and Gunther Eysenbach.
Lotan, Gilad, Erhardt Graeff, Mike Ananny, Devin Gaffney, Ian Pearce, and danah boyd.
International Journal of Communication 5.
Negotiating Mobility and the Geopolitics of Foursquare" Paper presented at the annual meeting of the International Communication Association, Phoenix, AZ 5/27/2012.
Hughes, Amanda Lee, and Leysia Palen.
Java, Akshay, Xiaodan Song, Tim Finin, and Belle Tseng.
In Proceedings of the 9th WebKDD and 1st SNAKDD 2007 Workshop on Web Mining and Social Network Analysis, 56-65.
Keegan, Brian, and Darren Gergle.
In Proceedings of the 2010 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work, 131-134.
Keegan, Brian, Darren Gergle, and Noshir Contractor.
Lampe, Cliff, Nicole B. Ellison, and Charles Steinfield.
In Proceedings of the 2008 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work, 721-730.
Lampe, Cliff, and Erik Johnston.
In Proceedings of the 2005 International ACM SIGGROUP Conference on Supporting Group Work, 11-20.
Lampe, Cliff, and Paul Resnick.
In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 543-550.
New York, NY, USA: ACM.. Lerman, Kristina, and Rumi Ghosh.
Proceedings of 4th International Conference on Weblogs and Social Media .
In The Problem of Changing Food Habits Report of the Committee on Food Habits 1941-1943.
Long, J. Scott, and Jeremy Freese.
Regression Models for Categorical Dependent Variables Using Stata, Second Edition.
Marwick, Alice E., and Danah Boyd.
Palen, Leysia, Sarah Vieweg, Sophia B. Liu, and Amanda Lee Hughes.
Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication 10 .
Scellato, S., and C. Mascolo.
In 2011 IEEE Conference on Computer Communications Workshops , 918 -923.
Perceptions of and Reactions to Crisis Communication via Twitter, Blogs and Traditional Media."
Shklovski, Irina, Leysia Palen, and Jeannette Sutton.
In Proceedings of the 2008 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work, 127-136.
Suh, Bongwon, Lichan Hong, P. Pirolli, and E.H. Chi.
Large Scale Analytics on Factors Impacting Retweet in Twitter Network."
In 2010 IEEE Second International Conference on Social Computing , 177 - 184.
