We used a variant of the task-artifact fi-arnework, carrying out a participatory claims analysis during a design workshop fm a project addressing collaborative science education.
The analysis used videotaped classroom sessions as source material.
The participant-teachers were highly engaged by the analysis process and contributed significantly to the analysis results.
We conclude that the method has promise as a technique for evoking self-reflection and analysis in a participatory design setting.
We are working with a scenari~based design flamewok called the task-artifact iiztmework .
In this method, system development starts ti-om an analysis cf implicit requirements embodied in user tasks.
The TAF describes an iterative model of analysis and design: the analysis of requirements scenarios guides the development of envisionment scenarios.
In this framework, the question of direct user participation in requirements analysis becomes an investigation of users participating in the analysis of their own usage scenarios.
Can users contribute to the identification of implicit requirements embodied in their own current practices, and if so, how?
Scenario-based design generally facilitates user participation in system development: scenarios are informal, evocative, work-oriented, can be sketchy or highly detailed, and ate equally accessible to various stakeholders in a design, Perhaps most important, the scenarios belong to the users, they describe and exemplify the users' own practices.
This transforms the user from the recipient or consumer of the system development process into an expert participant.
A variety of scenario-based design techniques have emerged that allow users to participate directly in the design and formative evaluation of early prototypes.
In Kyng's  cooperative method, users and developers collaboratively speci~ and refine design details as users simulate work activities by stepping through interaction scenarios using mock-ups and prototypes, In PICTIVE , users and developers collaboratively construct informal prototypes using low-tech accessories such as markers, Post-It notes, scissors, and tape.
Little research has been directed at techniques h user participation in earlier phases of design, such as requirements analysis.
System developers employ a variety of techniques to elicit requirements from users; these include interviews, observations, and artifact analysis .
In these techniques, users typically play the role of informants, not initiators -- they provide information, but do not do the analysis.
In this sense, traditional forms of requirements analysis include but fail to empower the user during the most formative stages of sotlware development.
This can limit both the quality of the requirements analysis itself, and the effectiveness of user-developer collaboration over the entire course of a project.
We are exploring participatory analysis techniques aimed at increasing user participation fi-om the earliest stages of requirements analysis.
Our analysis approach is built on the philosophies and objectives of participatory design.
These objectives include mutual learning between user and designer, application of design tools familiar to users, envisionment of fhture work situations, and grounding of analysis in the practice of the user .
People using current technology can be directly observed to build a scenario description of the stateof-the-art and to ground a scenario analysis on what subsequent technology might be appropriate: the requirements scenarios embody the needs apparent in current work practice.
The featwe of this situation is a blinking icon; the consequence is quick notification.
This paper describes a case study that applies participatory analysis in the design of a collaborative learning environment for middle and high school students.
Thus, our central question is whether public school teachem can participate in claims analysis.
PARTICIPATORY ANALYSIS IN THE TASKARTIFACT FRAMEWORK A basic notion of the TAF is that any particular system development project takes place in a wider context cf technology development in which human artifacts and human tasks co-evolve.
The artifacts-in-use of current technology embody affodances and constraints for human activity; at the same time, the tasks people engage in embody requirements for fhrther technology development.
Understanding artifacts in terms of the scenarios of use they enable and obstruct makes it possible to more deliberately manage the co-evolution of tasks and artifacts.
The TAF is a cyclic integration of the processes of analysis and design.
Claims analysis "seeks to get at just how the artifact suggests to users that they do something one way or another, how it supports and fails to support their eff~ and how it signals progress and error ."
The products cf claims analysis  organize analysis data in a way that is conducive to interpretation and design reasoning.
Design occurs through the envisiomnent of features and new scenarios.
During design, we scrutinize our claims and reason about how to create new features or refine our original features to improve the consequences.
For integration and validation of features, the envisioned fimtures are then attached to particular instances of use as they are inserted into envisionment scenarios.
The results of the design process are envisioned fkatures and scenarios which may again undergo claims analysis.
We extend the TAF by fully involving users in the analysis and design process.
We wanted to investigate whether the TAF is accessible to persons who are not human-computer interaction  specialists.
And more generally, we wanted to investigate whether requirements analysi=working horn scenarios and claims representations-could be carried out as a participatory design activity.
To ourselves, we made the argument that TAF is just an incrementally more systematic variant of the decision processes people engage in day-to-day.
When people shop, they petiorm claims analysis as they assess the features d products: how will this automobile do in the ice scenario, are the tires wide enough for the beach?
Claims analysis merely asks that the reasons why a specific fis good or bad be explicitly elaborated.
Extending the TAF to a participatory approach had many ramifications.
We needed to codifi "raw" user practice to make it more discussible by developers and users.
Thus, we collected a substantial sample of videotaped observations of classroom situations, but made no a priori identification of artifacts and features.
We wanted to &&r the analysis of f-s and consequences in order to take fill advantage of the special expertise of those who understand the work context namely the users.
Scenario generation - A set of usage scenarios is developed.
Each scenario should exempli@ a distinctive and typical usage situation for the currentlyemployed artifact, or an especially significant usage situation, such as error and recovery.
The set d scenarios should provide reasonable coverage of all typical uses of the currently-employed artifact.
Claims analysis - Claims m causal relationships identified in scenarios.
A claim asserts that a given fof an artifxt in a situation of use can have various specific consequences for a user.
Consequences may be either positive or negative for the user.
Claims are organized into claim schemas, grouping a fwith all of its identified consequences.
Feature envisionment - New or refined features can be envisioned by hill climbing from the claim schemas d current features.
Envisioned f-s should enhance the positive consequences and mitigate the negative consequences of the current featwes.
Scenario envisionment - Once new features have been envisioned, they are incorporated into new scenarios, Envisioned fkztures will typically modulate the activities described in the original scenarios.
Our research is performed as part of a larger educational technology project funded by the National Science Foundation's Networked Infrastructure for Education  program.
The project is coordinated by Virginia Tech and Montgomery County  Public Schools, A primary objective of the project is to develop and evaluate collaborative learning tools and computer-based environments in support of middle and high school physics education.
Participants of the project include teachers and students tiom four Montgome~ County schools and computer science and education researched ffom Virginia Tech.
We decided to adopt a participatory design approach, since we knew tiom prior work that the teachers we am working with have a great amount of technical knowledge that no one else on the project team did .
The requirements analysis case study is drawn fimm a twoweek summer workshop which included all project participants.
Activities in the workshop included demonstrations and discussions of commercial and reseamh learning environments, consideration of various proposed user intert%ce metaphors, planning discussions for baseline and post-intervention evaluation of student skills and h classroom projects and activities fbr the 1996-97 school year.
Time was specifically allocated during the workshop for participatory analysis and design.
Participatory analysis and design took place over three sessions.
Participatory analysis occurred over two one-half day sessions.
In these sessions, we analyzed videotape recordings of classroom situations, gathered during the preceding semester.
Participatory design occurred for two hours in a third session.
In the following, participatory analysis includes scenario generation and claims analysis while participatory design ~fa to feature and scenario envisionment .
Also present were two students who provided videotaping and recording support and occasional contributions to the discussion; a public school administrator joined us for part of one analysis session, In general, teachers played the teacher role, system developem played the technologist role, and HCI researchers played the HCI designer role.
During the course of the analysis, however, participants sometimes changed their roles.
One of the teachem was particularly interested in computer technology, and sometimes played the technologist role.
Some of the system developers were also experienced university professors, and provided input into the analysis process as teachers.
HCI researchers were both college professors and system developers; they contributed within those additional roles during the analysis.
We considered this fluidity of role assignment to be a positive factor.
We had been concerned going into this investigation about potential inequalities among the roles: it is ofien alleged within the CHI community that HCI designers m sometimes subordinated to technologists in design contentions.
We worried that this might be even more acute in collisions between teachem and technologists.
Perhaps because many of the people on our project team played multiple roles, there was obvious deference to principal roles: the teachers were the final authority on pedagogical activities, the technologists were the final authority on technology, and the HCI researched were the final authority on user interface and design methodology.
Since our aim is to develop a collaborative learning environment for science experimentation, the focus of our observations was students We also working on experiments together in groups.
We supplemented videotaped observations with other forms of data including fieldnotes taken during observations, videotaped interviews of students and teachers, and classroom artifacts such as textbooks, lab instructions, lab assignment sheets, data worksheets, lesson plans, and In the interviews, we asked homework problem sets.
The interviewees were encouraged to elaborate their views and to take the discussion in any direction they wished.
Classroom observations, interviews, and artifacts were collected over a period of three months horn the fbur schools participating in the project.
Over the period of our data collection, we observed several From these lessons in each teacher's classroom.
The team also included four technologists, computer science reseamhers who wm responsible for the technical infi-astructure fm the project .
The technologist role contributed an understanding of and interest in computer technology and system developmen~ including new technology not previously applied in a classroom setting.
The technologist could assess what f-s of a design could realistically be developed and under what constraints.
Finally, designer The HCI interface applying.
PAPERS asked all participants to review the written scenarios in preparation for the analysis sessions.
We also prepared video presentations of the scenarios tiom our classroom videotapes.
Middle school lesson on waves An overview of activities for learning about waves is presented; these include teacher-student brainstorming, a physicaI experimen~ group presentations, roleplaying, and a teacher demonstration.
While a group of students is running an experiment, the teacher provides conceptual guidance.
Students in a group assume different roles during an experiment.
The group experiences diftlculty in coordinating among the different tasks and roles.
During group presentations, the teacher leads a hesitant group through its presentation.
Teachers and students enter into class discussion.
The discussion centers around a ball floating on the ocean.
Student roleplay as particles in a liquid and a solid.
The teacher demonstrates the speed of sound through different media using a musical tuning forks.
Members of a group coordinate to assemble the lab equipment prior to the execution of the experiment.
Through trial and error, a group makes several attempts at running the experiment before achieving a successfid run.
Collectively, a group diagnoses a mechanical problem it encounters during a run of the experiment.
A largely uninvolved group member forcefully raises an issue regarding the experiment with the rest of the group.
In the midst of the experimen~ group members vie for control over the direction of the experiment.
We had several motivations for using the video scenarios.
First, we wanted to provide a concise record of the scenarios to jog participants' memories.
Second, in the  event that a participant did not review the textual scenarios, the video excerpts would quickly familiarize the participant with the scenarios so that s/he would be able to contribute to the discussion.
Third, we wished to remind teachers that scenarios were simply the activities of their everyday lives--not something foreign, analytically derived for the purpose of design.
When scenarios are transcribed tim videotapes or tlom notes, they become abstractions of the raw data.
The transcriber cannot capture all the details present in the setting.
As a result, written scenarios seem more abstract and symbolic, and less real than video scenarios.
When teachers are presented with a video scenario, they see the scenario in the same form in which they experienced the scenario in their working lives.
The scenario becomes more tangible and more vivid.
There, the lesson phases were geared towards the stages of an experiment such as equipment assembly and execution, data collection and analysis, and lab reports.
We used these lesson phases as genres.
For each geme, we searched for rich episodes of interaction among the teacher and students.
We also examined the videotaped interviews to find topics and themes that were important to teachers and students, and then tried to find occurrences of these themes in the classroom videotapes.
For example, one teacher expressed a strong commitment to discovery learning: we looked for and found evidence of this teaching style in the videos and selected the relevant episodes.
There were also episodes that we simply found interesting and worthy of analysis.
For example, during a high school experiment, a confrontation occurred between two male lab partners vying for control over the same piece of apparatus.
A female lab partner resolved the conflict by suggesting and enforcing a turn-taking policy.
We felt that this episode was rich in the issues of gender, leadership, and conflict, and would incite good discussion and analysis.
Once a set of episodes was selected for participatory analysis, we transcribed the selected episodes.
We nf&md to our collected artifacts to fill in the details of the scenarios such as the specific instructions that students were given fbr an experiment, the homework and lab problems that students were to address, and the worksheets students used to organize their experiments.
Ultimately, we prepared two classroom scenario sets.
One set described activities smounding a middle school experiment on waves .
The other described activities from a high school experiment on inelastic collisions .
Each scenario set consisted of one overview scenario and several more focused scenarios.
The overview scenario described the chronological teaching activities of the lesson as well as its pedagogical context and goals.
Focused scenarios narrated specific interactions, collaborations, and events occurring during the lesson.
A typical concern of designers using any scenario-based design approach is whether selected scenarios provide reasonable coverage of the tasks and artif%cts that occur within a system or situation.
In these initial sessions, coverage was not a major concern.
Our goal was to get the teachers interested and involved in the analysis by selecting scenarios that were motivating and revealing.
We selected scenarios that contained interactions and activities, that were interesting, and that would serve as a good source d discussion among the teachers and technologists.
We will evaluate scenario coverage in future analysis sessions.
At the beginning of the participatory analysis sessions, we gave participants a brief introduction on how to perform claims analysis.
We asked the participants to identifi any features of the classroom scenarios they found interesting.
We described `feature' as something that captures the observer's attention or something that afilcts the way a person teaches or learns.
For each feahue, we fiut.her asked participants to elaborate both what is good or desirable  and bad or undesirable  about that fmture.
Finally, we asked participants to extrapolate beyond the context of the particular scenario when brainstorming about the pros and cons of a feature.
During the introduction and throughout the participatory analysis sessions, we used terminology that was fiuniliar to all participants.
For instance, we diained from using technical terms such as "claims analysis:' "claims," and "consequences" and instead used more generic terms such as "features" and "pros and cons."
We urged two ground rules to the participants.
First, we asked that the teachers "take center stage" in identifying the features and the pros and cons from the classroom scenarios.
Since the scenarios essentially recorded activities of the teachers and their students, the teachers were in the best position to understand and to reflect on the scenarios.
Second, we asked that participants limit critiquing of ideas contributed by others.
We wanted the analysis to be a brainstorming session with a fkee-flowing exchange of iderrs and opinions.
We wanted participants to think broadly and divergently about their activities and requirements.
Issues of feasibility, criticali~, and tradeofTs were to be addressed during the envisionment stage later in the design process.
By fostering an open environment where all ideas wtxw equally valuable, we hoped to encourage high engagement and involvement from all, but especially from the teachers.
As f-s and consequences were generated during the analysis, they were transcribed onto large paper sheets.
Each claim schema was transcribed onto a separate sheet d paper.
When the discussion of a claim schema was seemingly complete, the paper sheet containing the schema was taped to a wall of the room.
ORen, the group would return to a claim schema to modi~ or extend it based on discussions evoked by other claims.
Sometimes, the group developed several related claim schemas simultaneously if the issue under discussion was sufficiently complex or broad.
By the end of the analysis, the walls of the room were covered with paper sheets listing claim schemas.
From the onset of the participatory analysis session, the teachers were immediately able to generate claims.
They naturally and openly spoke about the feature and consequences that captured their attention in the classroom scenarios.
In some cases, the teachem explicitly identified the features and consequences.
In other cases, the teachers would enter into discussion about pedagogical issues such as whether discovery learning is a valuable approach fir science or how groups should be formed to best support individual and group learning.
The HCI designers  allowed such discussion to take place, but tried to structure the discussion in the direction of generating claims.
Lengthy, open discussions of this kind stimulated the creation of many related claims and claim schemas.
We illustrate the participatory analysis process through an example taken directly tiom the analysis sessions.
Participants were shown a video scenario of a group of students collecting equipment and organizing themselves at a workbench.
In the scenario, three of six students collaborated to assemble the equipment while the other three casually conversed amongst themselves.
A f&iture we extracted from the scenario was labele~ "large group size" .
Eight of thirteen participants attending the first analysis session contributed to this claim schema.
The cons listed for the large group size feature were directly identified tlom studying the video scenario.
The pros, however, were not evident in the video scenario, but rather were developed by extrapolating beyond the scenario.
Pros:  may provide greater input and knowledge than smaller groups  may handle more challenging and complex experiments  requires fewer workstations and equipment  requires less grading by teacher if group is graded as whole  may allow teacher to grade in greater depth since there are less groups  is easier for teacher to provide guidance to each group since there are less groups Cons:  not everyone in the group maybe engaged   is easier for the dominant personalities to simply take control of the experiment  demands greater accessibility to the equipment since the equipment must be shared among a larger number of students  tends to produce subgroups - one subgroup may simply take control of the experiment while the others idly stand by Figure 3.
Claims for large group size.
The two participatory analysis sessions produced 32 claim schemas, 12 for the middle school scenarios, 20 fm the high school scenarios.
The schemas fell into the general categories of science, lessons, experiments, physical setting, groups, student roles, learning styles, and student personalities.
Discussion of one feature or claim often lead to the discovery of others.
We videotaped the participatory analysis sessions.
From the videotape, we associated each claim and consequence with the participant who originally identified it.
Relative contributions to generation of claims and consequences by teachers, technologists and HCI designers .
We noticed that teachers we~ likely to contribute in the discussion of a claim schema even if a teacher did not originate the claim.
We examined the videotape to see fdr which f-s and consequences teachem had "significant input."
We considered a participant to have significant input if slhe originates, modifies, extends, or elaborates a feature or consequence.
In the discussion of a lab notebook feature, for example, each teacher provided significant input into the discussion by describing how students use lab notebooks in his/her class.
General discussions would often lead to a more rich and comprehensive view of the feature or consequence.
From our evaluation, we found that teachers provided significant input to 88% of the fand 680/0of the consequences.
We asked the participants to envision two types of fixtures: technology and pedagogy.
Technology features comprise those associated with a computer or user interfiwe.
Pedagogy features comprise those associated with teaching.
When designing systems, we must consider the implications that the system has on the activities it The activity and the system should not be supports.
The teachers understood this dependency between activity and system.
During a discussion on student roles during participatory analysis, one teacher told the group that his students typically fell into one of four roles during an experiment-a doer, an equipment manager, a leader, and a recorder.
Later, during participatory design, a "defined role" technology fwas suggested.
This feature was intended to fix roles or tasks that students perform during a science simulation.
The teacher who originally described the four student roles realized that the roles were less applicable for experiments run on computers.
After some thought, the teacher came up with three new student roles, "keyboarder," "mouser," and "observer."
The new roles related to the sharing of the input devices to a computer.
Referring back to Figure 4, we may demonstrate how reasoning about the "large group size" claim contributed to a feature envisioned during participatory design.
Based on other claims concerning group organization, a participant suggested a new featmre, a "group selection iiamework."
This technology feature was described as a computermediated grouping tool that would allow students to organize into groups with some teacher control.
By examining the pros and cons of the "large group size" feature, the group began to elaborate the capabilities or functions of the proposed feature.
For example, to mitigat~ the con that a large group size  may encourage dominant personalities to take over, a participant suggested that one function of the group selection tiamework might be an ability to form groups based on student personality profiles.
This way, the teacher could define groups such that a dominant personality is never paired with a weak personality.
Details of all proposed f-s were discussed and elaborated in this way.
Figure 5 summarizes the results rf envisioning the group selection feature.
Seven of the thirteen team members present fbr the design session contributed to this envisionment.
We were pleased with the degree of participation in the analysis sessions.
However, it was also important to us to assess how usefid these sessions had been.
We wanted to know first whether the resuit of the analysis-the claims schemas-would be usefid in driving design reasoning .
We also wanted to determine whether teachers would remain engaged and involved when we shifted the group's focus tiom their current classroom activities to the design of new activities.
The ensuing envisionment session allowed us to evaluate these questions.
PAPERS A total of 17 feature and 24 elaborations were envisioned during the two hour design session.
Of all new features, 4 l% were proposed by teachers .
Of the feature elaborations, 71 YOoriginated from the teachers.
Feature : Group Selection Framework That is based on the individual's skills  and personalities That allows for anonymous selection of or negotiation for group members That allows students some flexibility in selecting group members That may be student-controlled That allows students fiwn remote locations to collaborate  That is teacher-configurable Figure 5.
Envisionment of group selection fi-amework.
One contributing factor may have been changes in group composition from analysis to design.
One of the teachers who was relatively "vocal" was not present on the fwst d?
However, it seems clear that teachers participated in design envisionment at least as effiively as they had in analysis of their own classroom context.
The users must feel engaged they must have a stake.
They must have effective access to relevant information.
They must have status, power, and scope of action sufficient to allow them to take positions and contribute to decisions .
And of course much about the context of technology development militates against any of this.
The principal insight  in our investigation is the demonstration that the teachers were able to participate fully in the initial requirements analysis -- not as informants, or subjects of analysis, but as analysts.
We believe that several factors contributed to this t%vorable The teachers quality of participatory interaction.
The videotaped scenarios we used as raw material fm our requirements analysis were collected fimm the teachem' classrooms.
This meant that team members had already spent much time in an ethnographer's role, observing and recording classroom activities, interviewing teachers and Thus the students about class goals and experiences.
Effective participatory design requires a common environment-shared media of analysis and design as well as shared terminology-in which the user and the developer For our method the shared media equally participate.
The shared terminology that emerges in participatory analysis often relies extensively on the language of the user, because S/he is most able to identifi, label and confirm features and consequences extracted fbm usage scenarios.
For example, recall the four student roles of a doer, an equipment manager, a leader, and a recorder.
The names d these roles became elements in our analysis.
Today these terms have become part of the project's shared vocabulary.
As designers, we also contribute to the shared terminology, when we introduce concepts associated with our analysis As part of our participatory and design methodologies.
Relative contributions to fixttm Figure 6. teachem, by elaboration envisionment and technologists, and HCI designers .
The average time spent on the envisionment of a fwas approximately 6 minutes.
As for the claims analysis, we examined the videotapes to count the number offdiscussions in which one or more teachers participated we found that teachers provided significant input to 90?40of the features and 88'% of the elaborations.
Four of the thirteen participants attending the participatory design session were teachers.
Again, we n encouraged by the amount of teacher participation in the design activities.
The level of participation demonstrates that teachers are quite capable of envisioning new features horn claims.
In fiwt we were surprised to see an apparent increase in teacher participation from analysis to design.
We expected lower teacher participation during the design phase because the other participants had greater experience in both using and designing technology, which we assumed would aid them in the envisionment of new technology.
PAPERS analysis and design would impact and modifi their own work.
Grounding the analysis and design on classroom scenarios motivated the teachers to participate in the software design process.
Establishing the teachem as the owners of the classroom scenarios gave them the power and right to participate.
Thus far, we have carried out a single phase of participatory analysis followed by fmture envisionment, to develop an initial set of requirements fm the collaborative learning situation.
Subsequent work will build in more detail on the claims analyses produced, generating new scenarios that exercise the f-es envisioned.
Continuing within the TAF, these scenarios will be subjected to participatory analysis and tier envisionment, as part of the ongoing evolution of the teachers' classroom activities.
Despite our caution, we now find that the teachers use words such as "scenarios" and "envisionment" in normal conversation, In a conversation toward the end of the workshop, when a developer raised a question about an as-yet-undiscussed feature, a teacher quickly responded, "I don't know about that I'll have to see if I can come up with a scenario."
Teachers equated scenarios to classroom activities.
This definition was easy fbr teachers to apply as they talked naturally about the activities that occur in their work.
As we moved from analysis to design, the teachers' view cf scenarios evolved to include envisioned classroom activities as well.
Laughton described the problems of achieving symmetry in collaboration between the designer and the user .
We believe that our method successfully shifted power in the direction of the user.
Classroom scenarios established the classroom context as the fires of analysis and design, and teachem were explicitly recognized as the owners of the classroom activities.
Because introducing new technology necessarily modifies the underlying teaching activity, the developers were placed in the position of "seeking permission" from the teachers to make these changes.
During the analysis sessions, the developers sometimes seemed to respond to this shift in power by focusing first on the possible consequences of a technology feature tf interest.
For example, one developer repeatedly stressed a particular negative consequence that specific teaching activities require the teacher and students to be co-located.
The technology feature that the developer had in mind was video teleconferencing.
As a participant in our analysis flamework, however, the developer did not propose this simply as an interesting feature, but rather emphasized the rationale in the current situation that motivated it.
In this sense the role of the developer seemed to change somewhat, to that of a salesman who wanted to persuade the teachers that his/her new and improved feature would make the teachers' lives easier or better.
Participatory analysis relies on usage scenarios describing the natural setting.
This enables the users to immediately connect the scenarios to their own image of their own work.
Users develop a greater sense of ownership of the analysis and design because the activities are grounded in authentic activities occurring in the user's world .
As expert participants cf the work setting, the users naturally own the real-world From this initial sense of ownership of the activities.
Early on in the project, the teachers thought of requirements analysis and system design as processes that computer scientists performed in developing computer systems.
We tried to induce a more user-centered view by comecting analysis and design to the classroom activities that teachers conduct and perform.
Introduction: The Scenario Perspective on System Development.
Getting around the task-artifact cycle: How to make claims and design by scenario.
ACM Transactions on Information Systems, 10, pp.
In Greenbaum, J. and Kyng M.
