Although smartphones and tablets become increasingly popular, pen and paper continues to play an important role in mobile practices, such as note taking or creative discussions.
Applications designed to combine the benefits of both worlds in a mobile paper-digital ensemble require a theoretical understanding of interaction, to inform the design of adequate interaction techniques.
To fill this void, we propose a theory based on the results of a stimulus driven exploratory study.
Thereby, media transitions between components while interacting with the ensemble form a central problem.
Currently, interaction design for hybrid ensembles lacks theoretical understanding that could inform the design of interaction techniques and outline specific characteristics to be considered.
Toward this goal, we contribute an initial, empirically grounded theory based on data generated by an exploratory study using a set of stimulus applications.
This theory explains the main concepts to be considered when designing interaction in hybrid ensembles.
Our theory focuses on the problem of media transitions.
It therefore grounds on the sub-portion of the design space where media transitions occur unmitigated.
Strategies to ease the problem of media transitions per se such as overlayed information, e.g., projection based interfaces as in , or unified interaction devices, e.g., using the same pen to interact with paper and a mobile device, are not included for now.
Mobile devices, such as smartphones and tablets, have become increasingly popular.
However, paper remains one of the most influential tools in mobile contexts due to being robust, light-weight and very flexible.
Imagine a creative discussion in the cafeteria with colleagues about a challenging design issue: Chances are high that somebody suddenly takes out a sheet of paper to quickly jot down a sketch of relevant ideas - the only problem later on is, this sketch has to be transferred to a digital representation to email it.
Instead of replacing paper, several approaches therefore rather focus on connecting paper and the digital world .
In the context of connecting tools in mobile settings, device ensembles have recently gained some attention .
Here we consider a special variant of these: hybrid ensembles.
Hybrid ensembles comprise digital devices, paper documents and digital pens.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Numerous approaches have successfully employed hybrid ensembles in applications ranging from mobile note-taking support, e.g., ButterflyNet , to accessing multi media content via links on paper documents , or publishing sketches to a social network .
Several approaches thereby aim to mitigate media transitions by overlaying information via projection  or using unified interaction .
Despite exemplifying the potential of hybrid ensembles and providing novel interaction techniques, these approaches offer little theoretical insights into the domain.
Reference This application resembles ButterflyNet , where written text in labbooks was combined with digital photos.
We chose scrap book framing to help participants grasp the idea more quickly In this task, the interaction is comparable to the one in .
Although the sketch in our setting was not posted to an online social networking site, this had no effect on the interaction.
This tasks draws from the cross media links between digital and physical documents as described in .
They presented design considerations, which also apply to hybrid ensembles.
However, the mobile setting and the physical properties of mobile device and paper introduce additional aspects: the  physical placement and the limited input / output capabilities of the encompassed components, as well as switching between a physical medium  and a digital medium  during interaction.
Steimle emphasized the lack of theory for interaction regarding combinations of pen, paper and digital devices and developed a set of frequently occurring core interactions .
However, the considered stationary setting with a tabletop also does not take the specific characteristics of mobile settings into account.
The same feedback as in A2 was used.
The direction of the media transition stimulated is "from paper to phone".
Draw  While drawing on paper, stroke width and color are controlled with a printed palette.
In setting B1 no feedback was provided.
In setting B2 a facsimile of the drawing was shown on the phone.
In the hybrid interaction technique the user draws with the pen on paper and selects stroke width and color using a palette on the phone via touch.
A facsimile and the selected stroke-width and color was provided as feedback .
Finally, a combination of B2 and B3 was implemented.
Here the user selects stroke width and color using a palette on the mobile, as well as a palette printed on paper  with the same feedback as in B3.
The direction of the media transition stimulated by this application is "from phone to paper".
Link  To create a link, the user draws a vertical stroke on paper and a stroke on a Web page displayed on the phone .
The stroke on the phone had, however, to be performed via touch .
A successfully established link is then visualized by a smooth slide of the web site "out of the phone".
This stimulus fostered bi-directional media transitions.
The stimulus consisted of three applications modeled after examples from literature, as shown in Tab.
We selected these applications because they stimulate all possible directions of media transitions in hybrid ensembles: paper to phone, phone to paper and bi-directional.
For each application we ported interaction techniques described in the literature as a baseline.
In addition, we implemented novel interaction techniques that used the characteristics of hybrid ensembles.
Interaction techniques were implemented using Anoto digital pen technology1 with Letras  and ran on a Motorola Milestone Android phone.
The settings in our study were as follows: Photo  In order to place a photo on paper, the user draws a gesture consisting of two corners of an imagined image frame, e.g., upper left and lower right corner as described in ButterflyNet .
Two variations of this technique were examined, one with feedback of the written content including the photo on the mobile phone , one without such feedback .
In the hybrid interaction technique the mobile phone's camera is controlled using the pen instead of pressing the trigger on the mobile phone.
We chose a within-subject design.
Twelve test subjects  participated in our study.
We selected participants using a snowball sampling technique.
Participants had widely varying levels of expertise using digital pens.
While 3 had worked with the technology before, even as developers, the others were completely novice.
Participants were application-wise exposed to all 9 settings and given small tasks.
Their actions were recorded on camera.
The order of applications and the order of the interaction techniques within the applications was randomized using a latin-square-like design.
After each application participants were engaged in a semi-structured interview.
In order to enable better triangulation, we additionally recorded retrospec-
Most important, the type of feedback must match the user's needs.
E.g., in the drawing application, participants explicitly requested feedback on the mode during drawing .
Focus plays a distinctive role in hybrid ensembles.
By focus we mean the area of visual attention .
Participants explicitly dealt with focus by rearranging the phone close to paper or even hovering it on top of paper thereby creating a joint focus zone.
We observed pen, paper and mobile device to be constantly rearranged during interaction .
As devices can unintentionally get out of focus, focus must be carefully guided, taking into account the main focus and the peripheral area.
Connectors describe the influencing factors with respect to the relations between the four pillars.
Metaphors play a strong inter-connecting role in hybrid ensembles.
Since users build mental models expressed by metaphors, it becomes important that they build the right models .
Common metaphors mentioned by participants referred either to connection between components, or their usage.
Expressed metaphors resembled tools or practices in the physical world, e.g., connecting the mobile device with paper using a stroke was described by several participants as using the "mobile device as a ruler"; one participant described pen mode selection on the mobile device as using an "ink pot".
Handling refers to how the user manipulates the ensemble: relative spatial positioning of ensemble components as well as the grip in which components are held.
Regarding the employed grip, phone and pen are either held in an active grip, allowing for direct interaction, or in a passive grip.
If holding components in a passive grip, participants would sometimes execute another action with the same hand, a situation we refer to as multi-use, e.g., one participant executed a pinch gesture to manipulate the view on the mobile device while holding the pen in the same hand.
Interestingly, multi-use was combined with bi-manual interaction by several participants.
Each session lasted about 120 minutes.
As a result of the study we obtained 9h video footage.
The data was coded by two independent coders using an iterative open, axial and selective coding approach inspired by Grounded Theory.
Media Transitions are a distinguishing concept of hybrid ensembles.
The user switches back and forth between looking at the mobile device and paper, and between using the pen and her finger as an input device.
Despite our original idea of media transitions as being always disruptive, some did not disrupt participants and even went unnoticed.
The transition performed within the zip technique in C2  was done very casually and reported to be "exactly as if the devices belonged together" by one participant.
On the other hand, several participants tried to minimize the number of media transitions in the photo application.
They explained this with the perceived costs of media transitions.
Hence, media transitions need to be designed carefully, otherwise problems such as an interaction device slip can occur: users will accidentally use the pen on the phone or touch with their fingers on paper, which was observed for 10 out of 12 participants during B3 .
Tasks describe repeated groups of actions in hybrid ensembles, which are perceived as a meaningful unit by users.
During interview and retrospective thinking aloud, participants mostly referred to their actions in the hybrid ensemble using tasks as descriptive units, e.g.
Whereby taking a photo, placing it on paper and describing the contents are the tasks, which require multiple operations with pen, paper and mobile phone for their execution.
Feedback is important in interaction.
In hybrid ensembles it specifically has to deal with distribution, e.g.
Pillars and connectors form the basic concepts of the theory.
Here, we show how connectors influence their relations, as shown by connecting lines in Fig.
Media Transitions in Tasks If media transitions occur as part of a task, e.g.
Metaphors, such as sliding the Web page from the phone to paper, as applied in C2  can explain that media boundaries are transcended.
This transition was thus perceived as less disruptive by our participants as revealed by their commentary in the retrospective thinking aloud sessions.
Feedback follows Focus The perception of feedback follows its spatial position relative to the current main focus area.
However, the relative spatial position  determines whether high resolution feedback can be shown  or lower resolution feedback is required , or whether feedback is perceived at all.
Feedback with Media Transitions If feedback is presented on another medium, its perception is influenced by metaphors and the spatial placement.
The same holds for feedback for media transitions.
If the metaphor provided by the feedback corresponds to the direction of transition, e.g.
Otherwise it will simply confuse users.
Focus for Tasks The focus during a task is induced by the spatial position  and the salient metaphors.
Users will naturally place relevant components into the focus if they understand that these are relevant.
On the other hand, focus could be enforced by introducing interactions that will place relevant components into focus: if the user has to draw a stroke on the side of the mobile device  in order to get access to required functionality, than this will remain inside the focus automatically.
We presented an empirically grounded theory of interaction in hybrid ensembles.
In this theory, the four pillars of interaction Tasks, Media Transitions, Focus and Feedback are related via the connectors Metaphors and Handling.
This can improve a designer's understanding of interaction when developing solutions combining the most common mobile tools: pen, paper and mobile devices.
Furthermore, exemplary design considerations derived from this theory, as guiding media transitions in tasks and adapting the presented feedback to focus, can inform concrete solutions for re-occurring interaction design challenges in hybrid ensembles.
Future research is needed, however, as the explanatory power of the theory needs to be examined in the light of mitigation strategies for media transitions, e.g., overlayed information and unified interaction devices.
However, if the user does not understand why to transcend media, or worse, the usage metaphor does not account for changing media at all, the media transition can lead to phenomena as the interaction device slip reported above.
Therefore designers should make sure to explain why to switch media within a task or reduce these switches.
Using this, our theory is able to explain why established interaction techniques work, e.g.
Here the user positions a physical document overlapping a digital document  and issues a stitching gesture  in order to link the documents .
Bringing the right feedback to the right place is key in hybrid ensembles.
Feedback on the phone is useless if it is not perceived by the user because she focuses on paper.
An example of feedback on the mobile phone is the modus in the draw application in our study.
The metaphor applied by most users was that of a "palette" - the phone was placed next to the paper.
Here, the metaphor suggests that the phone will be in the peripheral view, but not in the center of attention.
Hence, the feedback needs to be low-bandwidth, so it can be digested without focusing on the phone.
Accordingly, participants preferred the low-bandwidth feedback over the combined feedback of mode and current drawing.
