Watching video online is becoming increasingly popular, and new video streaming technologies have the potential to transform video watching from a passive, isolating experience into an active, socially engaging experience.
However, the viability of an active social experience is unclear: both chatting and watching video require attention, and may interfere with one another and detract from the experience.
In this paper, we empirically examine the activity of chatting while watching video online.
We examine how groups of friends and strangers interact, and find that chat has a positive influence on social relationships, and people chat despite being distracted.
We discuss the benefits and opportunities provided by mixing chat and video, uncover some of the attentional and social challenges inherent in this combination of media, and provide guidance for structuring the viewing experience.
However, despite the growing popularity of online video, and especially video-centered interactions, to our knowledge there is no research that examines how people experience video broadcasts with real-time chat.
Conversation is one of life's most enjoyable experiences, but it also consumes considerable attentional resources.
Anyone who has attempted to watch a movie while others are talking knows of the effort in, and distraction that results from, trying to listen to the dialogue, follow the story line, and listen to  the chatter of others.
In this paper, we report our studies of people's experience of watching videos online, while simultaneously chatting with others using a text chat feature.
We asked if user experience and relationships would be enhanced or harmed by this activity.
If interactions are interwoven with watching video, will viewers be able to submerge themselves in the video?
Will social interaction be fun because of the shared viewing experience, or will it just be annoying?
How might the video experience be structured to leverage both watching and chatting?
We find these questions important to HCI for several reasons.
Second, the effect of shared video watching on relationships has direct implications on the potential to use this computer-mediated communications tool to build social capital .
Finally, the nature of our study yields design implications for those who have already deployed chat with video systems.
We conducted two studies to investigate watching and chatting.
The first was an exploratory study designed to answer some preliminary questions about live video and chat.
Would people chat during a movie?
Do they enjoy the experience, or find it too distracting?
From this study, we learned that people do chat, and chat is distracting while watching a movie.
Our second study evaluated two methods of reducing distraction: inserting intermissions in between video content, or reserving a period for discussion after the video.
Watching video online is becoming an extremely popular activity.
Google Video and YouTube allow people to watch hundreds of thousands of user-contributed videos, as well as rate them and leave comments.
Movies are moving online as well, with Lycos Cinema allowing users to watch movies and chat with other users in their screening rooms .
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
We found that chat had a positive influence on the relationships of friends and strangers, the presence of the media was a large influence on conversations, and intermissions did reduce feelings of distraction without affecting the amount of chat that occurred.
Live streaming video online extends the reach of conventional television broadcasting, by enabling people who are not co-located to participate in a shared viewing experience.
For instance, members of an online political group could watch their candidate as part of a community event, and discuss the event on community forums.
Friends separated by distance can chat and "hang out" online while watching their favorite shows together.
Families can use streaming video to keep in touch with one another, sharing important events such as birthday parties and weddings.
Real-time communication may enhance these experiences even further, because it contains a level of intimacy unlike asynchronous forms of communication .
In coming together for interaction around a shared experience, people signal their mutual interest and trust with one another, which in turn creates a sense of unity in the group .
Further, interaction drives liking of others , and in online communities, interaction with others is a major determinant of the extent to which people build relationships with one another .
Attachment increases if members have a sense of virtual co-presence, or a subjective feeling of being together with others  and synchronous interaction fosters the formation of relationships between strangers .
Hence, the combination of live streaming video with social interaction promises a wide range of benefits for the creation and maintenance of ties between people online.
Until recently, publishing live streaming video on the Internet has been costly.
Server-based video solutions have required significant server and network capacity, are rather expensive, and are feasible only for large companies and organizations.
Peer-to-peer video streaming technologies  can provide high-quality streaming video at a lower cost, by taking advantage of the network resources available among viewers.
Thus, it is now possible for online communities to cost-effectively provide live video and chat events for their members.
We believe that these technologies will change how people experience video, transforming a passive viewing experience on a TV into an active one on the computer, watching online with a community of other viewers.
It might be argued that video is not meant to be a social, or at least, an interactive experience.
Previous work suggests that people who are alone greatly enjoy media content from television, movies, and music sources, and that doing so is often used as an escape from everyday cares .
However, for others, sharing video experiences could enhance their enjoyment of both the video content and one another.
Brown and Barkhuus  studied people's television-watching behaviors and found that one motivation for downloading TV shows was to keep up with Internet discussion forums.
In the Social TV project , researchers investigated interaction patterns among people watching TV together.
They found that viewers are adept at both following the video content, and communicating with each other during the show.
Therefore, socializing around media is perhaps just as important as the media itself, and supporting social interactions during media consumption can significantly affect, and we hope enhance, the viewing experience.
Previous work in Interactive Television has focused on creating systems that allow people to communicate during live television broadcasts.
AmigoTV  combines voice chat with an overlay display on the TV showing avatars of other viewers, and allows users to see what their friends are watching.
Media Center Buddies  allows viewers to send instant messages and chat with one another while watching.
Telebuddies  encourages social interaction both through text chat and by allowing content producers to add quiz games and trivia contests to their broadcast.
Reality IM  combines social interaction with additional contextual information about a TV program, such as advertisements and sports statistics.
However, although each of these systems enables people to chat with one another while watching, their creators have not performed systematic evaluations of the effects of chat on the viewing experience.
Considerable research shows that people cannot pay close attention to verbal information from two sources simultaneously, and they cannot fully process material from an auditory and a visual source, such as conversation with a partner and onscreen dialogue .
Further, if people watch videos or TV as an escape , conversing with others might interfere with their immersion in the content.
Geerts  compared computer-mediated text and audio chat while watching television, and concluded that Interactive TV systems need to carefully balance the activities of watching and communicating to minimize distraction from the television program.
Thus, watching live video online while chatting with others could end in frustration, rather than a positive experience.
To explore the issue of chat and video, we conducted an initial exploratory study in the MovieLens movie recommendation community .
We showed MovieLens members a series of feature films using the End System Multicast  software .
ESM also provided an IRC-based chat feature, allowing people to chat while watching the movies.
We recruited fifteen MovieLens members to participate in our preliminary study, through a series of email invitations and website advertising.
Five films were shown, and participants tuned into two movies on average.
Multiple chat groups were formed per showing, and the ten assembled chat groups had an average of four people each.
These comments about distraction speak directly to the research on attentional resources cited above, as well as Geerts' study on chat and distraction in Interactive Television .
Thus, our preliminary data reinforces the existence of this tradeoff -- the fun of sharing and discussing a video with others, versus the potentially negative impact of distraction on perceiving and processing the video content.
To understand this tradeoff better, and to investigate whether it could be mitigated, we carried out a controlled experiment.
Our primary question in this study was whether or not our participants, who were strangers to one another, would chat while watching the movie.
On one hand, we felt that they might talk with one another because they were in a study together; on the other, they might become so engrossed in the movie that chat would be ignored altogether.
We found that participants did in fact chat, and the chat groups each produced an average of about 190 lines of chat over the course of a 2.5 to 3 hour movie.
This corresponds to about 1.1 lines of chat each minute.
Thus, while chat occurred at a very relaxed pace, participants nonetheless chatted.
At the end of the study, participants were asked to rate their enjoyment of the chat on a 7-point Likert scale.
As suggested by the large standard deviation, some participants greatly enjoyed the chat, and felt that it helped their understanding of the video content.
If the chat hadn't been there, I think I could just as well watch a movie on the TV, or downloaded a movie in advance."
If I'm watching a movie, I don't want/need other stimuli."
Based on our observations in the MovieLens study, we formulated three main research questions about the shared video experience.
First, would chat enhance the media experience?
Prior research suggests that people love interacting when they are engaged in a mutually entertaining activity , but does this interaction enhance the value of the entertainment?
Thus, does chat with video increase peoples' liking for one another?
Second, how would chat affect relationships with strangers versus friends?
We raised this question out of curiosity about video with chat as a way to introduce newcomers to one another in online communities.
Would watching together be an effective mechanism for breaking the ice?
Third, we wondered if structuring the video experience might reduce distraction.
Both the video and the chat require mental processing of verbal material: one must attend to the video to see and hear what goes on, and one must attend to the chat to keep track of what others have said and to formulate responses.
We reasoned that perhaps the information lost in multitasking occurs mainly in one direction at a time.
Processing chat may cause one to miss what occurs in the video, but processing video only causes one to miss what people are saying when they say it.
Because text chat has a history log , viewers can catch up with the conversation when the complexity of the video is low .
Alternatively, viewers can wait for periods of low complexity or a break, and resume chat during those periods.
If all viewers are watching at the same time, coordinating periods of chat with viewing is not impossible.
Nonetheless, we speculated that a structured experience with break periods designated for conversation might aid the coordination of viewing and chat, and reduce distraction.
Our idea is akin to intermissions in a play, or breaks in a sporting event.
From these arguments, we made the following predictions.
Chat will enhance the media experience.
That is, in comparison to watching with others without chat, viewers with chat will have more fun; they will rate the content better; they will enjoy talking; and they will like the other people watching with them better.
As chatting during the video is distracting, viewers will take advantage of intermissions as a time to chat without being distracted.
Intermissions will reduce feelings of distraction.
We used cartoons in this study because they represent the kinds of videos seen on YouTube and Google Video, they are a few minutes long, it is easy to insert intermissions between them, and we could pick a diverse enough set of content to appeal to all of our participants.
We studied shared viewing and chat in a controlled laboratory experiment in which small groups assembled to watch a series of cartoons.
Participants sat at separate computers to simulate the experience of watching videos remotely on the Internet.
The order of the cartoons was randomized between groups.
The average age of the participants was 24.3 years ; approximately half were female.
Seventy-five percent of participants were students, five percent were faculty or staff, and the rest were alumni, retired or did not list their affiliation.
Participants were paid $15 each for their participation, which took approximately one hour.
Overall, watching video was a popular activity for our participants.
Fifty-six percent of participants reported watching videos on YouTube or Google Video, and 61% reported watching movies or television more than once a week in the past month.
Thirty-nine percent of participants reported renting movies from vendors like NetFlix and Blockbuster.
To test the effect of chat on user experience , we compared groups where people were able to chat with one another  with a control condition where groups watched the cartoons without the chance to chat with one another .
To test the impact of chat on groups of strangers , we assembled groups of strangers and groups of friends for the study.
To test the effects of structuring the video experience , we compared two forms of chat.
In the Intermission condition, each cartoon was separated by a brief intermission, to give participants a period of silence where they could chat without a video distraction.
In the End Break condition, participants were given extra time to converse after all of the cartoons had played.
In both cases, our structuring was entirely voluntary and suggestive; participants could chat whenever they wanted.
This experiment used a 3 X 2 between-groups factorial design with Video Structure  and Group Composition  as the independent variables .
Participants were informed that they would watch a series of cartoons on the computer, and take a survey at the end.
Participants were seated in an arrangement such that they were visually separated from one another.
While participants remained in audio range to one another, they wore headphones to hear audio from the computer.
No group chatted aloud to one another, although several participants did laugh out loud during the study.
As this study was conducted using laboratory machines on a LAN, we used Windows Media Player to play streaming video from a server on the LAN.
Everyone watched the same content at the same time.
We also used the mIRC IRC client  for chat, and collected chat logs using an open-source IRC server, instrumented to log timestamps, message senders and the contents of each line of chat.
A picture of the typical arrangement of a participant's screen is shown in Figure 1.
Participants were allowed to rearrange the window positions and sizes to their liking, and about one-third of participants did this.
We showed participants seven cartoons.
The cartoons came from Channel Frederator, a popular online video podcast.
The cartoons followed themes of education, humor, love, character struggles, and a music video.
The podcast encourages its members to rate their cartoons on a 5-point Likert scale, and we chose cartoons that were well liked by the community .
None of our participants had previously seen these cartoons before.
The sample was 85 participants in 30 groups.
Participants were recruited in groups of two to four people  from the psychology experiment directory at CMU.
To recruit groups of friends, we asked that people interested in the experiment find two friends to participate with them.
To recruit strangers, participants simply signed up in one of the time slots we offered.
Each cartoon lasted between three and six minutes.
In the Intermission condition, one-minute intermissions were placed in between each cartoon.
In the End Break condition, participants were given a six-minute period for discussion at the end of the cartoons, keeping the break time the same for these conditions.
In both chat conditions, participants were told that they could chat with the other participants at any time during the study , about any topic.
Participants were only told of the availability of the chat feature, not that it was a mandatory requirement of their participation.
In the No Chat condition, participants did not have the chat feature and did not receive the breaks.
All participants rated each cartoon immediately after it had finished, to avoid difficulties in recall.
These ratings were made on 5-point Likert scales, representing how much they liked each cartoon.
All participants also completed a final survey consisting of 10 questions about chat, the watching experience, and the other people in their group .
Exploratory factor analysis revealed that four factors accounted for most of the item variance and thus four scales were constructed .
Our first hypothesis  was that chat would enhance the media experience; people would have more fun watching the cartoons together with chat, they would rate the content higher, they would enjoy using the chat feature, and they would like the other people in their group better.
To test this hypothesis, we examined cartoon ratings, and the scales measuring fun and enjoyment, chat enjoyment, liking, and closeness.
Because each group had multiple members, we included group as a random effect.
In some cases, we perform contrasts between groups with chat  and groups without chat.
On average, cartoons received a rating of 3.3 out of 5 .
The correlation of our participants' ratings and the ratings from Channel Frederator was .62.
To account for these differences, and because cartoon ratings were correlated with other aspects of the experience , we included a factor of cartoon quality, with three levels, in the ANOVA as a control variable.
We found a marginally significant interaction between Video Structure and cartoon ratings  on the cartoon ratings .
A contrast between the groups with and without chat indicates that groups with chat enjoyed poor cartoons more than groups without chat .
Thus, chat can supplement poor material by making the experience of watching it more enjoyable.
Fun was significantly correlated with participants' average cartoon ratings .
As mentioned earlier, introducing intermissions into a sequence of cartoon videos is analogous to introducing commercials in sports programming during breaks in play.
While they take advantage of the natural breaks in the game, they can fragment the experience, and may frustrate viewers who wish the breaks were shorter or nonexistent.
We asked participants about their opinions of the break periods, and which type of break they would prefer.
The results were overwhelming: 100% of participants with intermissions reported preferring intermissions, and 52% of participants with an end break reported wanting an intermission.
Further, there was no difference in break preferences between friends and strangers .
On the other hand, participants also wanted flexibility for when they chatted.
Of the 57 participants with chat, the majority reported that they preferred to chat throughout the entire experience , rather confining their chat to just the break periods , just the cartoons , or not chatting at all .
This finding suggests that people would not like enforced chat periods, and their behavior confirms it .
As in the MovieLens study, participants in this study mentioned being distracted by the chat.
Intermissions and the end break were added to this study in order to give people an opportunity to chat without missing video content.
Participants took advantage of these breaks, conducting roughly 33% of their chat during the breaks, even through the breaks only accounted for about 10% of the time spent in the experiment.
However, the majority of chat  occurred during the cartoons, which accounted for about 70% of the time in the experiment.
The remaining 5% of chat was spoken either before the cartoons began, or after they ended.
Although the structure of the breaks did not influence when participants chatted, it did influence how distracted they felt.
Participants were asked how distracted they felt from the chat feature, on a 7-point Likert scale .
This difference is marginally significant, F  = 3.7, p = .06, suggesting that intermissions tended to reduce feelings of distraction from the chat.
Further, the average distraction of End Break groups was significantly correlated with the amount of chat that occurred during the cartoons , whereas the average distraction of Intermission groups was not correlated with the amount of chat that occurred during the cartoons .
One explanation for the difference in distraction is that groups with intermissions simply chatted less than groups with an end break, and thus felt less distracted.
For both friend and stranger groups, the cartoons were a major topic of conversation.
Participants also made jokes and talked about their lives.
For example: "We discussed some stuff about our professors by comparing them to the characters.
One was related to  professors who are a couple and that was hilarious."
It may appear that we don't like each other, but there is so much love between the three of us that it is hard for a stranger to imagine."
To follow up on these informal impressions, we conducted a detailed coding of the chat logs to understand how much participants spoke about different topics.
We used the "line of chat" as our unit of coding, but as the content in a single line was not always enough to determine an adequate code, we considered each line of chat in its context.
Example chat  "the colors are pale looks like a bad chinese cartoon of the late 80's"  "i thought the penguin one had really good music too"  "the dots are supposed to represent human activity and thier choas + beauty"  " music is awesome"  "hmm so far i actually like the pengiun one the best"  "That was a bit gross although it was a bit funny"  "im doing sociology and urban studies"  "it is supposed to rain this evening?"
We developed our coding scheme iteratively, developing codes by reading through the chat logs, coding a subset of the chat, and then resolving discrepancies by clarifying the definition of the category, or adding or removing categories.
The reliability check was performed by the first author and an independent coder on 12% of the chat lines.
We achieved a good inter-rater reliability after four iterations .
The categories were: the cartoons, evaluations and ratings of the cartoons, personal topics, laughter, study chat, and greetings & partings.
Each line of chat was coded under only one of these categories, except for laughter, which frequently co-occurred with other chat, and thus was coded separately.
A breakdown of the amount of chat in each coding category is shown in Table 4.
We coded laughter by looking for "lol", "haha", etc.
In total, 7.4% of the lines of chat solely consisted of laughter, and 9.4% of the lines of chat contained some form of laughter.
A large majority of the lines of chat, 41.6%, were about the cartoons, as well as relations of the cartoons to people's lives.
For example, participant C59 said, "this is my husband at work on our house," and participant C2 said, "we must ask lisa if this is  happened to her home today" while watching the cartoon about a plumber.
Participants also spoke about their personal lives during the chats without reference to the cartoons, talking about their course of study, the weather, sporting events, roommates, and even marriage.
About 23% of chat was personal and unrelated to the video.
We performed ANOVAs on the percentages of chat in these categories, controlling for the duration of the chat.
In the survey, participants were asked what they liked and disliked about the chat feature, and several themes emerged.
Fifty-four participants listed reasons for why they liked chat, including: chat was entertaining, it made the experience more fun, and enabled them to make jokes ; chat promoted sharing and discussion, and learning other people's opinions ; and chat made boring material more fun .
Fifty-two participants listed reasons for not liking the chat: chat was distracting ; it was hard to think about chat topics, they felt forced to chat, or they were unsure of what to say to strangers , or complaints about the user interface .
Nineteen participants simply wrote "nothing", suggesting they were satisfied with the chat.
We set out to learn about the activity of watching video together and to understand the role of communication while watching a video.
Our first study, in the MovieLens online community, showed that strangers would watch video and engage in chat with others.
For some, chat added a sense of community and awareness of others.
For others, chat was a burden; another source of information to be monitored in addition to the video.
Understanding this tradeoff and how to mitigate it was the focus of our second study.
For the cartoon study, we made several predictions based on our experience with the MovieLens study.
The first was that chat would enhance the experience of watching together : people would have more fun, they would rate the content higher, they would enjoy using the chat, and they would like the other people watching with them better.
In turn, we found that while people did enjoy using the chat, chat did not have a significant effect on fun; participants with and without chat both had fun in the study.
One possible explanation for this null result is a ceiling effect.
Because we selected highly rated cartoons from Channel Frederator, watching the cartoons was already fun for most participants.
We also found that chat made poor content better , perhaps best described by a comment made in one of the chat groups, "I feel bad....I really am paying more attention to the chat than the cartoons...primarily because we are so much more entertaining" .
Some participants also described this effect when they listed benefits of chat.
We predicted chat would have positive effects on social outcomes, primarily among strangers .
With chat, both friends and strangers increased their liking and closeness to one another with chat.
However, our results are from between-groups comparisons; thus, we cannot know exactly how much chat improved liking and closeness, nor can we estimate the duration of these effects.
Our research is an initial investigation into the social effects of Interactive TV.
Overall, our results suggest that chatting while watching videos is a fun, engaging activity, enjoyed both by friends and strangers.
For friends, shared activities are often used as a way to cement friendships, because they provide something to talk about .
For strangers, chatting while watching provides an opportunity to form new relationships, as the videos provided common ground .
However, the videos alone may not be enough to sustain conversation, as some people reported running out of things to say and feeling awkward.
We speculate that moderated discussions may be beneficial for strangers, especially when coupled with an end break to reduce distraction.
Finally, we learned that structuring the video experience with intermissions during natural break periods reduces feelings of distraction.
Many questions are raised by our studies.
First, although we have found one approach to reducing feelings of distraction from integrating chat and video, there are many others.
Clutter and other human factors issues would need to be addressed.
Genre seems to play an important role in the shared video experience, and it is important to understand how techniques for reducing distraction interact with genre.
We found that intermissions worked well for short cartoons.
However, many television programs place commercials in the midst of the drama, and it is unclear if they would have the same effect at reducing distraction, and if interaction during these periods would help or harm the experience.
Finally, our results pertaining to strangers must be taken with care.
We brought strangers to the laboratory for purposes of chatting while watching cartoons, and they did just that.
Participants in the MovieLens study were also strangers to one another, and in that study it was clear that for some people, chatting while watching was not an activity in which they were interested.
Thus, understanding their reasons for disinterest, as compared to the enjoyment of strangers in the cartoon experiment, are of importance to media producers and online community leaders, so they can appeal to and engage a wider audience.
Our second hypothesis  predicted that people would be distracted while chatting and watching a video, and we found that this was the case.
However, participants did not confine their chat to solely the break periods , and the amount of laughter chat shows that chatting in real-time had some benefits.
Social laughter is known to increase people's enjoyment and evaluations of material  and many participants enjoyed making jokes in the chat.
Intermissions did reduce feelings of distraction , even though they did not influence the extent to which people chatted during the cartoons.
Overall, intermissions did not have a negative impact on participants' enjoyment of chat, and participants overwhelmingly preferred intermissions; all participants with intermissions preferred them to an end break, and over half of the participants with an end break would have preferred intermissions.
New peer-to-peer video streaming technologies promise to fundamentally change how we experience media.
No longer will the experience be passive, or confined to the social boundaries imposed by the physical world.
Attention is a limited resource, and we have shown that while chatting and watching simultaneously is fun, and has social benefits, it is also distracting.
Intermissions can help reduce this distraction, although they may not be appropriate for all types of content.
Therefore, future research is needed to gain a better understanding of the viewing experience, and understand what factors contribute to a successful experience and successful interactions.
Arkin, R. M., and Burger, J. M. Effects of unit relation tendencies on interpersonal attraction.
Brown, B., Barkhuus, L. The television will be revolutionized: effects of PVRs and filesharing on television watching.
Cartwright, D., and Zander, A.
Coppens, T., Trappeniers, L., Godon, M. AmigoTV: towards a social TV experience.
Chu, Y., Ganjam, A., Ng, T. S. E., Rao, S., Sripanidkulchai, K., Zhan, J., Zhang, H. Early experience with an Internet broadcast system based on overlay multicast.
In USENIX Annual Technical Conference, 2004.
Chuah, M. Reality instant messaging: injecting a dose of reality into online chat.
In CHI 2003 Extended Abstracts.
Czerwinski, M., Cutrell, E., & Horvitz, E. Instant messaging and interruption: Influence of task type on performance.
Putting gender into context: An interactive model of gender-related behavior.
Social isolation and social support as correlates of television viewing motivation.
Fuller, R. and Sheehy-Skeffington, A.
Effects of group laughter on responses to humorous material: A replication and extension.
