The bias in the news media is an inherent flaw of the news production process.
The bias often causes a sharp increase in political polarization and in the cost of conflict on social issues such as Iraq war.
It is very difficult, if not impossible, for readers to have penetrating views on realities against such bias.
This paper presents NewsCube, a novel Internet news service aiming at mitigating the effect of media bias.
NewsCube automatically creates and promptly provides readers with multiple classified viewpoints on a news event of interest.
As such, it effectively helps readers understand a fact from a plural of viewpoints and formulate their own, more balanced viewpoints.
While media bias problem has been studied extensively in mass communication, this work is the first attempt to develop a computational framework towards the problem.
We evaluate and discuss the effectiveness of NewsCube through various performance studies.
In this paper, we present NewsCube, a novel Internet news service that mitigates the effects of media bias.
NewsCube automatically creates and promptly provides readers with multiple classified viewpoints on a news event of interest.
It helps readers easily discover rich facts and compare diverse biased views of the event.
As such, it effectively helps readers understand news events from a plural of viewpoints and formulate their own, more balanced viewpoints free from specific biased views.
Dealing with the media bias problem from the consumers' perspective has clear advantages over doing it from the producers' perspective.
News producers have made considerable efforts to reduce bias.
They established and observed journalism ethics and standards2.
The format attempts to give readers a balanced perspective by incorporating multiple viewpoints and opinions on a news event.
However, such efforts have not succeeded in fully resolving the problem; media bias is still widespread .
They do not address the underlying structural factors  of media production.
Moreover, they cannot ensure that the inherent bias of producers does not affect the framing of articles or roundtable discussions.
Addressing the structural factors of media bias is a difficult, large-scale problem.
It requires significant changes in the complex relationships between government, business and media over a long term.
NewsCube, however, offers a practical means of mitigating media bias that can be applied immediately.
NewsCube effectively achieves its goal by classifying aspects, presenting them fairly, and recommending articles with contrasting aspects.
The core of NewsCube is aspect-level browsing, a new method to provide readers with a classified view of a set of articles with different aspects.
News producers frame news events by covering different aspects at different depths depending on their viewpoints .
Thus, to provide readers with diverse viewpoints on a news event, we need to compare and contrast news articles published by multiple producers in terms of aspects.
NewsCube collects different news articles reporting on a given event from various sources.
It identifies the salient aspects of articles, and presents readers with articles grouped together by the similarity of their aspects.
We believe that the proposed service using aspect-level browsing provides a firm basis with which to mitigate the media bias problem using computational techniques.
Bias of the news media is an inherent flaw of the news production process, spanning news gathering, writing, and editing stages.
At every single stage, news is probably never free from the producer's subjective valuation and external forces such as owners and advertisers.
Such valuation and forces often lead to totally different framing 1 of realities.
Producers select different aspects of reality; they cover these aspects in different tones; they present them in different styles.
The resulting bias causes a sharp increase in political polarization , misunderstanding of critical issues such as the Iraq war , and a significant impact upon elections .
It is very difficult for readers to have a balanced view on realities.
They mostly receive news from restricted channels, often times through a single channel.
For the problem, we develop two novel methods, namely, news structure-based extraction  and framing cycle-aware clustering .
News structure-based extraction exploits wellknown news writing rules to automatically abstract the aspects of an article.
Taking such rules into consideration, we observe that a news article is usually written to fit an inverted pyramid structure , and the most important contents are covered early in the article.
As this rule is generally applied in news writing, news structure-based extraction can broadly be applied to many articles regardless of their topics and languages.
Framing cycle-aware clustering effectively reveals the diversity of different aspects of a news event.
Clustering articles in aspect level requires more delicate analysis on similarity than plain comparison of overlapping keywords and their weights.
By examining the framing cycle of news events, we observe an important characteristic, namely head-tail characteristic; similar aspects are commonly covered by many articles at the head of the framing cycle and diverse uncommon aspects abound over time by the rest.
The method increases the sensitivity of classification by identifying and selectively applying the common keywords reflecting the common, head-side aspects and the uncommon keywords reflecting the uncommon, tail-side aspects.
Especially, it acknowledges the importance of the uncommon keywords and delicately captures the diversity of the uncommon aspects, which is the source of the richness in the viewpoints.
We conduct in-depth user studies to evaluate the effectiveness of NewsCube in terms of media bias mitigation.
Through a clickstream analysis and a questionnaire, we demonstrate that the service effectively helps people read diverse aspects.
We also discuss the potential impact on formulating users' own, more balanced viewpoints.
Based on a focus group interview, we also discuss how acknowledged aspects influence the viewpoints of interviewees.
We conduct experiments on aspect-level classification.
We first show that aspect-level classification is feasible, i.e., commonly agreeable results can be made for the classification.
We then study the performance of the developed aspect-level classification method.
For the study, we develop a new corpus.
As the existing corpora organize the articles in event level, they are used to evaluate event level classification, but not for aspect-level classification.
The new corpus, consisting of 460 articles on 30 events, classifies the articles in aspect level.
The performance of the method is compared with widely used clustering methods such as k-means, hierarchical clustering, etc.
The contribution of this paper is in introducing an important problem to the WWW community, namely, the media bias problem, establishing a framework for discussion, and providing a meaningful first-round solution to the problem.
While media bias has been studied extensively in mass communication, this work is the first attempt to develop such a framework and elaborate a computational approach towards the problem.
We design and develop a NewsCube service as a solution and study its effects.
As the problem is new and highly complicated, the provided solution leaves much room for improvement.
Many studies have shown the inherency of bias of news companies .
They argue that media bias is rather an inevitable structural problem of the news industry than a temporary phenomenon.
A survey by the American Society of Newspaper Editors  revealed that 78 percent of the public believed that there was bias in news reporting.
The impact of media bias on distorting social awareness on critical public issues and collective decision making process such as elections have also been reported.
Baker  has studied the different forms of embodiment of such biases in news articles.
We map the forms of bias embodiments along the news production stages.
Detailed facts may be committed4 or omitted as well.
In addition, information sources, e.g., stakeholders, experts, or think tanks may be subjectively selected.
The biases are articulated in the writing stage through labeling, word choice and tone, etc.
Positive or negative words, words with a particular connotation, or extreme labels such as "far left", "far right" can be chosen.
In the editing stage, biased views are further embodied indirectly in allocating the spaces for articles and their locations, and selecting photos.
Certain news articles get more space and are located in more important places, e.g., front page, relative to other articles.
The media bias problem is highly complicated; it seems very hard to develop a clear solution.
We speculate on the potential directions of solution approaches and review the existing research efforts.
The potential approaches to the media bias problem can be viewed at two different points, i.e., production vs. post-production stage.
While the production stage approaches try to avoid the creation of bias, the post-production stage approaches deal with the created biases of produced contents.
The previously mentioned journalism ethics and standards can be understood as an example self-control mechanism.
However, the included ideas such as `objectiveness' and `fairness' are rather abstract and ambiguous.
In addition, there is no justifiable means to enforce such control mechanisms to news producers.
Different formats of reporting such as the adversarial format are being developed but they do not address the structural factors of news production and are not adopted widely.
For example, the adversarial format can be adopted for only a few news events since it takes much time and efforts to report a single event in such a format; it requires careful, right and fair preparation in choosing representatives, preparing agendas and questions, and arbitrating and editing their comments.
We classify the post-production stage approaches into bias diagnosis, bias measurement, bias correction, and bias mitigation.
Bias diagnosis is an attempt to identify and analyze the bias of produced news articles.
A number of researches in mass communication  and watchdog groups 5 have tried to analyze bias in specific news events.
They select a certain important public issue, e.g.
These efforts heavily rely on manual analysis and can only cover few news events.
The goal of bias measurement is to quantitatively model the degree of bias.
Developing an objective measure is very controversial due to the subjective nature of bias.
A few works can be considered as a limited trial to approximate the degree under strong assumptions.
Groseclose et al  attempted to mark the position of news providers by comparing political orientation of referring think tanks.
Similarly, Gamon et al  tried to approximate the degree for news articles by considering the political orientation of blogs linking to the articles.
Both works are based on the assumption that the political orientation of think tanks or blogs is static and known apriori.
Correction of bias seems far more difficult than mitigation.
It is hard or impossible even to clearly define what an unbiased news is.
The approaches used by collective authoring communities such as Wikipedia seem somewhat useful.
They collect evaluations on produced contents from the public and revise biased contents.
Skewz.com6 and NewsTrust7  also utilize mass collaboration by collecting users' evaluations on news articles.
Nonetheless, such approaches are often impractical to be applied considering immediacy of news articles and their fast production cycle.
Raising timely and prompt participation for evaluations and reviews and reflecting the multitudes of opinions in a short period of time are challenging tasks.
Bias mitigation takes a practical approach while admitting the prevalence of biases.
The approach attempts to reduce the effect of the biases rather than to clearly prove or correct them.
As described, it is intrinsically difficult to objectively define what bias is and so is to measure or correct them.
Bias could be diagnosed to some extent based on in-depth analysis; however, such analysis takes too much time and effort to catch up the news production cycle.
Importantly, the delivery process is automated to quickly handle recently published news and keep up the news production cycle.
The proposed NewsCube service providing aspect-level browsing has high potential to reveal and mitigate bias.
Entman  and Rhee  indicate that selection of aspects is central in the development of news frames.
Also, many of the previously mentioned forms of bias embodiment such as commission, omission, story selection, and source selection are expressed by selecting and emphasizing certain aspects while deemphasizing other aspects .
Classifying and contrasting the aspects in news articles can successfully expose these types of bias and mitigate their effects.
Much research effort has been made on news articles in various topics; news clustering , topic detection and tracking on news stories , news summarization , news categorization , etc.
They have mainly targeted at helping users efficiently browse a vast quantity of news articles and easily acquire the intended information.
Hence, these researches mostly saw the relation between news documents and readers, and did not look deeply into how the problems occurring in the news production process are propagated to the readers.
The goal of news categorization  is to help readers search for articles by creating and maintaining a topic directory, and then classifying a volume of news articles into the proper categories.
These works sort news articles into a set of pre-defined categories at different levels of granularity.
For example, coarse-grained categorizes such as politics, business, sports, and technology may be used while the business category may be further divided into fine-grained categories such as world business, markets, and company research.
However, articles on a common news event are included in the same category regardless of their viewpoints and readers can hardly find the different views on the event.
Researches on news summarization  focus on automatic generation of a summary of an article or multiple articles related to a news event.
Summaries help readers identify whether articles are relevant to their interests or understand the overall story.
The summaries are created by selecting and organizing important sentences, phrases, or words of the articles.
The sentences, phrases, or words that commonly appear in many articles are usually considered important and selected for the summaries.
The resulting summaries may show the commonly covered aspects of the articles but will not reveal the different aspects.
In spite of this difference, they can be complementary to our work if a summarization technique is applied to sum up articles within an aspect group after aspect-level classification.
News clustering has been studied as a specific domain of document clustering .
Various news clustering techniques have been investigated especially in the context of news event detection  , which is a part of the topic detection and tracking  program .
News clustering has also been explored in multi-document summarization  research .
In NED, clustering techniques are used to identify or track news events from a stream of news.
Similarly, in MDS, clustering techniques are used to collect news articles relevant to a given event before creating a summary.
Such clustering techniques group articles mainly based on news events.
Thus, they cannot effectively capture and reveal multiple aspects of an event.
GoogleNews8 provides users with a flat list of articles associated with an event.
Users need to look through the list and read a number of articles to understand multiple aspects of the event.
As a domain of document clustering, Web search results clustering has also been studied by many researchers .
Their main concern is to provide search results for user queries in an efficient way; users can easily browse a large collection of search results and locate an interesting one.
They handle general Web documents rather than news articles, and do not consider aspect-level classification of the documents.
It is impractical to encode and update such broad semantic knowledge.
Syntactic analysis of news texts can be considered as a potential approach for aspect extraction.
Without semantic knowledge, the syntactic structure of news texts can give hints on the main agent and related descriptions.
For example, the subjects and corresponding modifiers of sentences may be mapped to agents and descriptions, respectively.
However, it is also hard to implement an accurate syntactic parser which can handle complex sentences of news.
It requires sophisticated syntactic rules which can cover diverse sentence structures and disambiguation rules to resolve structural ambiguity.
To be more practical, we approximate the aspects of articles by using a keyword-weight model.
We note that the aspects of news articles are usually reflected in keywords in the articles.
For example, in the above two articles, core keywords such as "police, soldiers" and "violent shutdown, protesting groups" directly reveal the main aspect of each article respectively.
Therefore, we try to approximate aspects by selecting keywords and carefully calculating their importance.
Although this may not fully capture the semantic meaning of texts, it is possible to distinguish difference of covered aspects by sorting out important keywords and comparing them.
Our evaluation supports that the model can distinguish aspects of articles.
Reporters inevitably select stories and facts since it is impossible for them to report everything.
Based on Entman's  work, we understand `framing' as an activity of selecting aspects of a news event for organization of a storyline.
We conceptualize `aspect' to be Rhee's  "thematic proposition", composed of the elements of news storyline in Figure 2.
A thematic proposition has the element `agent' as its subject, and the other elements as its predicate.
For example, an article reporting a presidential debate may mainly articulate the aspect "Obama has proposed a tax cut plan", where Obama becomes the agent and the tax cut proposal becomes the action.
An article may articulate multiple aspects.
The article on the debate may further include another aspect "McCain criticized its efficacy" in the later part.
Title: Police, Soldiers Evict Protesters from U.S. Base Site "Thousands of South Korean police and soldiers on Thursday evicted the remaining occupants and anti-U.S. civic activists from an area designated for expanded U.S. military facilities south of Seoul.
Title: More Violence Looms in Planned Rally at U.S. Base Site "Another violent showdown looms as groups protesting against the relocation of U.S. military bases to Pyeongtaek, Gyeonggi Province are gearing up for a massive 10,000-strong protest this weekend..."
Example articles Selecting and articulating different aspects can lead to totally different news storylines.
Figure 3 shows two news articles reporting the same event but choosing different aspects in their storyline.
In the example, the first article selects the police as a main agent, and describes their stern actions evicting the protesters.
However, the second article selects the protesters as a main agent, and describes their plan for a violent protest.
Extracting such semantic information, i.e., aspects, becomes very challenging when it has to be performed computationally.
To abstract the aspects of articles correctly, the main agent has to be recognized and the meaning of the related descriptions have to be understood.
It requires knowledge on news events which is much more complex semantic knowledge than just the meaning of words, e.g., characteristics of agents, related news events in the past, etc.
NewsCube Architecture NewsCube is a novel online news service framework enabling users to easily discover and experience diversity of existing biased views on a news event.
It supports users themselves to develop their own balanced views.
NewsCube automates its service process by collecting news articles from various sources, structuring and presenting them in aspect level.
Note that the NewsCube service is different from existing news aggregation services.
NewsCube interface to utilize the limited space effectively, e.g., hiding, filtering, and We have developed and deployed NewsCube and it is under a ranking of articles with similar or redundant aspects.
At present, the system is working on Korean news sources and news events in politics, business, and The aspect-level browsing interface of NewsCube helps users local sections are covered.
Automating the NewsCube service view diverse aspects at a glance.
For a selected news event, users raises a number of challenges throughout the entire process of the can easily find different aspects in article groups as in Figure 5. service: collection, classification, and presentation.
We first To distribute users' attention evenly, each group is allocated with present the overall architecture of NewsCube and discuss the similar amount of space and is positioned in a 2-column grid challenges and approaches of each stage.
Figure 4 shows the architecture of NewsCube in high-level.
It consists of three major parts, i.e., collection, classification, and presentation.
The collection part is responsible for news page crawling and news article extraction.
News Page Crawler retrieves news web pages from diverse news providers.
From the collected news pages, Article Extractor identifies and extracts pure news text, filtering out irrelevant contents such as advertisements, reader's comments, and meta-data.
Lastly, Article Type Filter detects and forwards straight news articles to Aspect Analyzer, which is currently the type of main interest in NewsCube service.
Aspect-level classification of the articles is performed by the three components: Article Preprocessor, Aspect Analyzer, and Cluster Generator.
Then, Aspect Analyzer conducts textual as well as structural analysis on the annotated texts and performs news structure-based extraction.
Cluster Generator groups the articles with the extracted aspects.
Results are forwarded to Aspect Presenter, which prepares aspectlevel presentation.
Users access the NewsCube service through the Service Interface.
The Browsing Pattern Monitor monitors users' browsing behaviors.
Users can grasp aspects of each group through titles, snippet of news articles, and a few keywords which mainly reflect the aspects.
The interfaces of existing news aggregation services such as Google News and Yahoo News are different.
As these services mainly target eventlevel browsing, their interfaces do not provide a structured view to different aspects of an event, but list the articles of an event regardless of the covered aspects.
NewsCube further provides an aspect traversal cue to awaken and guide users for unbiased reading at every page they visit.
The aspect traversal cue is a compact representation of different aspects of an event superimposed with users' traversal history .
It traces and grey outs the read aspects.
It helps users easily be conscious of the unread aspects and encourage them to read different aspects.
Classification of aspects is central to support aspect-level browsing.
NewsCube approaches this problem with an unsupervised classification method, i.e., clustering.
It is hard to develop and train a supervised classification method since it is impossible to predict and construct a pre-defined category of aspects for a news event.
To realize aspect-level classification, aspects of news articles have to be extracted and articles have to be grouped regarding the similarity among the extracted aspects.
Aspect-level classification is more challenging to develop than event-based or topic-based classification methods since aspects are more detailed and subtle information than topics or covered news events.
In this section, we detail News Structure-based Extraction and Framing cycleaware clustering each developed for aspect extraction and aspectbased clustering, respectively.
For mitigation of bias, presentations should actually lead users to read diverse aspects of a news event.
Users have to perceive the existence of different aspects of the event and be motivated to click different articles.
Not to skew users' visual attention, articles with different aspects should be presented fairly in terms of placement and amount of allocated space.
Creating such presentations becomes complex since it is impractical to allocate space equally to dozens of articles and locate them in eyecatching places in a limited space.
An aspect extraction method has to be able to analyze and extract aspects covered in news articles.
Discussed events or topics could be extracted with existing methods such as TF-IDF.
However, the methods are not sufficient to capture the different aspects of the articles reporting a common event.
We develop an aspect extraction method named news structure-based extraction, applying news writing rules widely adopted by mainstream news providers.
The method is currently customized to effectively handle straight news, the most common type of news.
A keyword is considered to be important if the followings hold.
First, the keyword is covered in the front part of the main text.
Second, the keyword appears repeatedly.
Third, the keyword appears in a long sentence or a long paragraph.
It indicates that more text is allocated to elaborate the keyword.
The notations and equations for the weight calculation are summarized in Table 1 and Equations -, respectively.
For each appearance, the weight of a keyword wn is given based on the length of a paragraph Lp, and a sentence Ls relative to the length of the article La.
In order to differentiate weights according to the locations in the structure, a diminishing factor dPj is multiplied to Lp, and dSk to Ls.
The values of the two factors decrease as the keywords appear at the latter parts.
News structure-based extraction exploits one of the most famous news writing rules, called the `inverted pyramid style of news writing'.
The rule guides journalists to arrange information and facts in the descending order of importance within an article.
From this rule, we can get conclusive hints for aspect extraction; where the semantically meaningful keywords are located and how importantly they are addressed.
The inverted pyramid style of writing has been considered as an implicit standard for more than a century.
Readers will still understand the most important parts of the stories without reading to the end.
The style also enables sub-editors and other news staffs to quickly create space for unexpected events.
For events such as advertising and latebreaking news, the staffs can create space simply by cutting paragraphs from the bottom.
Journalists are highly trained to follow this style regardless of nations or companies.
Thus, most news articles, especially straight news, are frequently written in this style except informal types of articles such as columns, editorials or interviews.
The inverted pyramid structure is composed of head, subhead, lead and main text.
The head and the sub-head are decisive factors in deciding whether or not to read an article.
Therefore, they usually contains core terms which reflect the aspects being focused in the article.
The lead is usually the first sentence of the article, or the first two sentences in some cases.
To quickly inform readers, the information ordering principle is especially applied to the lead and guides reporters to reveal the most interesting facts.
In addition, the lead covers the selected aspects clearly and concisely to avoid the unreadability of long sentences.
Thus, we believe the lead will contain crucial terms which reflect salient aspects.
The main text is organized with collected information which supports the lead in the order of diminishing importance.
We exploit the structure of news articles in both keyword selection and weight calculation.
For keyword selection, we basically extract keywords from the core parts of an article, i.e., head, sub-head and lead.
The weight of each keyword is calculated based on the main text.
While calculating weights, we not only consider the number of occurrences of keywords, but also consider the locations of occurrences.
We also take into account the amount of texts used to describe the keywords at each occurrence.
Beyond utilizing the news structure, the method is further tailored to capture the elements of aspects such as agent or action.
The method attempts to recognize keywords and phrases which represent the elements.
By performing a morphological analysis, the method selects only the keywords which have the potential to act as an agent or a description of an aspect.
For example, proper nouns and non-descriptive nouns are selected since they have a chance to act as agents.
Similarly, verbs and descriptive nouns are also selected to reflect descriptions of agents.
Such careful selection of keywords is important.
Naive extraction produces a large number of dummy keywords.
As aspects are detailed and subtle, inclusion of such irrelevant terms seriously degrades the accuracy of extraction.
In order to better capture the agents of aspects, a sequence of keywords forming a noun phrase are also identified and treated as a single semantic entity.
Agents are often represented as noun phrases, e.g.
The keywords in the phrases represent and share a single semantic meaning together.
To reflect such semantic relationships, the phrases are identified by performing syntactic parsing on lead sentences.
For this, we encode syntactic rules of noun phrases and parse the sentences based on the rules in a bottom-up manner.
Individual words in a phrase are considered as the same word and share a single weight value.
To make the similarity measure to be robust to article length differences, variations in the number of keywords and weight scales among articles are normalized.
Likewise, the weight scales may vary depending on the length of the articles.
The variation can distort similarity calculation and cause erroneous clustering results.
For the normalization, we have sampled more than a hundred of articles and measured the distribution of the numbers of extracted keywords.
The number of keywords is controlled either by lengthening the lead or filtering out a few keywords whose weight is low.
Weight values in each article are also normalized to follow a normal distribution with the average of 0.5 and the standard deviation of 0.25.
In the example event of Figure 7, some articles covered the assertions of the accuser, Kim, while some other articles covered the response of Samsung Corp, etc.
As a result of the framing cycle, the set of articles on an event shows head-tail characteristic: a good many articles at the headside of the framing cycle cover common aspects and the rest of the articles at the tail-side cover diverse uncommon aspects.
Figure 7 shows the size of the article groups classified by the covered aspects for the example event.
The largest group includes more than 35 articles which report `the filing of the complaint'.
The other groups include a small number of articles which report other aspects.
Such characteristic is also found in other article sets.
We have collected 58 article sets of 1122 articles in total from politics, business, and local sections.
Each set showed the similar pattern, i.e., head-tail characteristic.
In 53 sets , the largest group included more than 50% of the articles.
From the head-tail characteristic, we develop Head-Tail model for the news articles of an event.
Let A be a set of news articles for an event.
Then, A can be partitioned into a Head group, Hg, and multiple Tail groups, Tgi.
It is another challenge to perform aspect-based clustering with news articles on a common event.
We applied and evaluated widely used clustering methods such as k-means, hierarchical clustering, etc.
However, aspect-based clustering requires more delicate analysis on similarity than plain comparison of overlapping keywords and their weights.
We newly develop a method called framing cycle-aware clustering , customized to aspect-based clustering of news articles.
To better understand the similarity of aspects among news articles, we examine the framing cycle of news events through an extensive data analysis.
That is, we observe the changes over time in the selection of aspects in news articles to frame an event.
Our analysis shows that the same aspects are commonly covered at an early stage of news reporting and the covered aspects diverge over time.
Figure 7 shows an example with the event "complaint against Samsung Corp.".
It shows the number of articles and their covering aspects over time.
Until 1 PM, all news articles reported the filing of the complaint done by the civic and lawyers' groups.
After then, some articles started to deliver different aspects of the event such as Samsung's response or Prosecutor's investigation plan.
Framing cycle-aware clustering utilizes the head-tail characteristic in the process of aspect-based clustering and improves the accuracy.
Knowing the characteristic, we identify and separate the common keywords, the keywords reflecting the common, head-side aspects, and the uncommon keywords, the keywords reflecting the uncommon, tail-side aspects.
Based on the distinction, the clustering is performed in two stages; head-tail partitioning and tail-side clustering.
Head-Tail partitioning separates the Head group, the articles with the common aspects, and the non-Head group, the articles covering uncommon aspects.
Tail-side clustering classifies the articles in the non-Head group to different Tail groups according to the covered aspects, delicately capturing the differences in uncommon keywords.
As it is sensitive to the head-tail characteristic, this approach is advantageous to support aspect-level browsing of news articles, i.e., it reveals more effectively the diversity of different aspects of a news event.
For example, it prevents the articles in the Head group from being scattered to different aspect groups.
Even if articles share only a small number of keywords, they can be grouped together if the keywords are common keywords.
Conventional clustering methods easily classify such articles into different groups as their keyword-weight vectors will show low similarity.
It also increases the sensitivity of classification of the uncommon aspects.
It acknowledges the importance of the uncommon keywords and better recognizes the uncommon tail-
Aspect coverage analysis for the event "complaint against Samsung Corp." The framing cycle is closely related with the news gathering behaviors of reporters.
News reporters often rely on identical news sources such as press release, news agency reports, or public relations departments .
According to our observation, identical sources are used to collect basic facts of an event especially at the early stage of the event.
Later, some reporters reach out for different news sources, e.g., stakeholders or related experts.
The diversity of the uncommon aspects is the source of the richness in the viewpoints and is crucial for bias mitigation.
The Head group includes the most articles.
A poor partitioning of the Head group is likely to result in many redundant groups with the common aspects.
It may also induce noise into tail-side aspect groups.
For the partitioning, we develop two metrics, Commonness and Uncommonness, to denote the degree of inclination of each article to the Head group and the non-Head group, respectively.
An article which includes many common keywords with high weight values will have a high Cn value.
An article including many uncommon keywords with high weight values will have a high Un value.
To carefully separate out only the articles which belong to the non-Head group, the method selects the articles which show a high Un value as well as a low Cn value.
The Cn and Un values of an article is computed in two steps.
First, the Cn or Un values are computed for each keyword .
Then, the Cn and Un values of the article are computed to be the weighted sum of the Cn and Un values of its keywords .
To calculate the Cn and Un values of keywords, the keywords of an article set are first divided into two sets, i.e., the common keyword set cK and the uncommon keyword set uK.
They are divided based on their appearance ratio over the article set and the Head group proportion HgP.
If a keyword appears in the article set with a ratio greater than or equal to HgP, it is classified as a common keyword.
Otherwise, it is an uncommon keyword.
For each common keyword, a Cn value is computed and for each uncommon keyword, a Un value is computed.
The values are computed using the appearance ratio of the keywords and their average weight over the appearing articles .
The Cn value of a common keyword cKi increases with its appearance ratio, i.e., as the keyword appears frequently in the article set.
On the contrary, the Un value of an uncommon keyword, uKi, increases as its appearance ratio decreases, i.e., as it does not appear frequently.
A keyword with high weights gains more Cn or Un value.
The Head group is identified by selecting out articles which show a high Un value relative to their Cn value.
The articles are selected out in the decreasing order of Un/Cn rate until the number of remaining articles corresponds to the Head group proportion, HgP.
Figure 8 shows the Un and Cn values of an example article set with 16 articles.
In the example, the HgP value is set to 0.25, thus, the articles a, b, c, d are selected out.
Framing cycle-aware clustering example z Dynamic HgP determination HgP is importantly used in Head-Tail partitioning.
It divides the common keyword set and uncommon keyword set and decides the number of articles to separate out to form the Head group.
We select the HgP value which can most clearly separate the two groups, the Head group and the non-Head group.
The degree of separation is measured by the difference of Un/Cn rates between the Head group and non-Head group.
To be more precise, the difference is measured between the lowest Un/Cn rate of the nonHead group and the highest Un/Cn rate of the Head group.
In the example in Figure 8, the degree of separation is  between the article d and e. To select HgP value, the degree of separation is computed iteratively.
For each iteration, the keyword sets cK and uK are divided and the Cn and Un values are computed.
The HgP value which maximizes the degree of separation is selected.
Thus, tail-side clustering is the key to reveal those diverse aspects.
It should delicately capture the differences in covered aspects and partition different Tail groups.
However, the Tail groups are usually composed of a small number of articles and a few errors in the partitioning process can easily hide different aspects.
Tail-side clustering focuses on capturing the subtle differences among the uncommon aspects.
It uses only uncommon keywords in similarity analysis.
The uncommon keywords appear only in a few articles.
Articles which cover different aspects have little chance to share such keywords.
Thus, the method can avoid combining articles which belong to different Tail groups.
On the other hand, articles covering the same uncommon aspects are highly likely to share several uncommon keywords and thus can be grouped together.
For clustering, we employ a similarity graph-based clustering technique.
Cosine measure is used as the similarity metric.
Each article becomes a vertex, and the cosine similarity value between a pair of articles is considered as the weight of an edge.
We use the average of non-zero similarity values as the threshold.
Figure 8 shows a graph made with five articles, a, b, c, d, and e. The edges which have a non-zero weight value are shown in the graph.
The vertices that form a complete sub-graph are identified as a Tail group.
If a vertex belongs to multiple complete sub-graphs, the vertex selects a sub-graph which connects itself with the highest weight.
In the example, five articles are partitioned into three Tail groups, {a,b,c}, {d}, and {e}.
To cover aspects of news events broadly, the NewsCube system collects articles from a number of news providers.
Various issues arise as the system has to continuously gather up-to-date articles from many different providers.
We discuss the issues and our approaches below.
Just in Korea, more than five hundred news providers produce a huge number of articles every day.
This number soars when non-traditional news sources such as blogs are included.
The sources should be carefully selected considering their credibility, ideological characteristics, etc.
For the careful source selection of NewsCube, we investigated the publishing rates of officially-registered news providers per day.
We observed that the amount of published articles was dominated by a few major news outlets which show high publishing rates.
Currently, NewsCube covers the top twenty most publishing sources and collect about 70% of news articles published in GoogleNews.
Another consideration is the different page formats of the news articles.
As the formats differ between different providers, it is fairly complicated to recognize and extract pure news texts from the pages.
By developing customized extraction rules for each source, pure news text can be retrieved.
This is important since generalized extraction techniques such as block-detection-based extraction  frequently lead to poor extraction results.
They may not effectively filter irrelevant contents such as advertisements and seriously degrade the performance of article classification as a result.
For example, it is more implicit in straight news than in editorials.
In the latter, opinions are explicitly expressed while bias is formed by filtering or emphasizing certain facts in the former.
Thus, identifying types of articles is another issue to enable separate handling of each type with customized processing methods.
NewsCube currently focuses on straight news, the most common type of news articles.
Other types of articles such as interviews and editorials are filtered out since our classification method is customized to straight news articles at present.
We analyzed the article length distribution with more than a hundred of articles and observed that the length of articles can be a simple but effective criterion to sort out straight news articles.
In the analysis, for example, articles which were longer than 2000 bytes were mostly interviews and which were shorter than 500 bytes were brief news, respectively.
To additionally sort out editorials which have length similar to straight news, other features are also used, e.g.
The obsoleteness of news articles was also considered in ranking of news articles in .
Users may misunderstand news events if such obsolete articles are presented together with up-to-date articles.
We traced the publishing pattern of news articles over time and observed that, as expected, the publication shows a periodic behavior in a daily basis .
The system collects only the up-to-date articles which are published on the same date.
In this section, we present the evaluation results of the NewsCube service, which consists of two parts.
First, the effectiveness of NewsCube service is examined through various user studies.
Second, we study the feasibility of aspect-level classification of news articles and the performance of various clustering methods to realize the aspect-level classification.
To evaluate the effectiveness, we have designed and conducted three types of user studies: a clickstream analysis, a questionnaire, and a focus group interview.
First, a clickstream analysis is conducted to quantitatively measure the diversity of articles read by users.
Second, a questionnaire is used to study users' evaluations on the effects of NewsCube service in terms of aspect delivery and balanced view development.
Third, a focus group interview is conducted to gain deeper understanding on the effect of NewsCube in users' opinion development process.
They were invited via the bulletin board of our university and were chosen randomly.
We inquired their ordinary news reading habits for a fair study; they were asked how many and how often they read news articles on a news event.
The effect of the NewsCube service is compared with those of two other services.
For the purpose, the participants were divided into three groups, each of which had 25 participants.
The groups had comparable number of participants with similar news reading habits.
Each group was provided with the same set of news articles.
The article set included 19 articles about the increase of real estate tax.
They were categorized to four aspect groups.
None of the participants was aware of the event in detail beforehand.
The first group used NewsCube and the second group used GoogleNews.
Not to influence browsing behaviors, we neither explained about the goal nor the interface of the NewsCube service.
They were mostly students but a few administrative staff and researchers were also included: ages ranged from 24 to 36, averaged 28; 16 males and 17 females.
Participants had majors in diverse disciplines, and the news categories of their interest were also diverse including politics, business, local, science, and technology, etc.
Nearly all participants used the Internet as their primary news source.
The participants first went through a short instruction session.
Different from the clickstream analysis, the participants were explained about the goal and the interface of NewsCube.
They were asked to evaluate the service while regarding the goal of the service after they used the service for 15 minutes.
In addition, we had a short interview with open-ended questions to gain deeper understanding on their answers and gather feedbacks.
The selected event was `a protest against the expansion of a U.S military base' .
Each group had two participants; two who considered the protest negatively , two who defended the position of protesters , and two who did not have a predetermined opinion .
One participant in each group read news through NewsCube and the other read through GoogleNews.
Again, the goal and the interface of NewsCube service was not explained not to influence their browsing behaviors.
After a news reading session, we interviewed about their opinions on the event in detail.
They were also asked to point out the articles which helped them develop their views.
However, NewsCube users still read more articles and aspect groups in spite of the identical interface.
79% of the participants answered that `they  felt that it is necessary to compare multiple articles' in the past, .
In addition, 70 % answered that they `actually compared articles once  before'.
They also mentioned that they did so by putting additional efforts; typically, they visit different news providers' website or web search engines, and search related articles for comparison.
Despite the participants consider that it is important to compare and contrast multiple aspects, they did so much less often than expected.
Just 30% of the participants responded that they compared multiple articles more than once a week.
Moreover, only four people did so every day.
To the majority of the participants, the additional efforts required for article comparison seem burdensome.
More importantly, the next two questions asked if the service motivates users to read more articles.
72 % of the participants ` felt like to read various articles with different aspects' while using the service.
70 % answered that `they did actually read various articles'.
Interestingly, the service motivated the users, who had not been interested in doing so, to compare and contrast multiple news articles.
There were three participants who replied that `it is not necessary to compare multiple articles'.
However, all of them answered that they ` felt like to read various articles' while using the service.
There were also ten participants  who said that they `hardly compared multiple articles'.
Among them, nine said that they ` felt like to read various articles' as well.
In the open-ended questions to the 70% who said that they actually read various articles, many confirmed the effectiveness of the aspect traversal cue.
They said that they could notice which articles are left to read through the cue.
It made them feel that they did not complete their reading and led them to read more articles.
Among the other 30%, many participants mainly pointed out two reasons why they did not read various articles.
Some indicated that they were simply not interested in the news events and they did not want to read articles at all.
Others commented that, in some news events, they could not easily understand the difference among the classified articles and hence lost the motivation to read the articles.
As for the potential of NewsCube to help users build their own balanced view, 16 participants  answered  positively that `they could formulate a more balanced view on the news events' through the short test.
Only two answered negatively to this question.
Note that news articles were classified into groups according to their covered aspects only in NewsCube.
We traced the articles each participant read and counted the number of the articles.
We also counted and compared the diversity of read articles in terms of aspects.
For this, we counted the number of article groups, i.e., the number of the groups according to the NewsCube classification from which each user read at least one article.
As shown in Table 2, users of NewsCube read more articles and aspect groups.
The effect of NewsCube is statistically significant according to the independent sample t-test.
In case of RandomCube, the number of read articles slightly increased compared to GoogleNews.
We observed how opinions of the participants in each group diverged depending on the service they used.
As shown in Table 3, the two participants in each group read different sets of articles.
We first examine whether commonly agreeable results can be made for aspect-level classification.
Aspect-level classification would not be feasible if different people interpret aspects of articles differently and classify them in different ways.
In this experiment, we have had participants classify a set of articles in their own ways.
We then analyzed the similarity among the manually created results.
Each participant performed classification without knowing the results that were made by others.
To the best of our knowledge, this experiment is the first to study the feasibility of organizing news articles in aspect level.
A number of high quality news text corpora such as Reuters-21578 have been developed.
However, they were designed to study the feasibility of topic-based classification and are not adequate to study that of aspect-level classification.
The articles in these corpora cover a wide range of topics .
In addition, the published dates of the articles vary widely, up to several months.
Most importantly, the differences in the covered aspects are not identified for the articles covering a common topic.
For our experiment, we sampled 30 test article sets via GoogleNews.
Unlike the above mentioned corpora, each test set consists of topically related articles published on the same date.
They are collected from the politics, business, and local sections: ten sets from the politics, nine from business, and eleven from local.
The article sets cover many important events such as the 2007 presidential campaign, the special prosecutor's investigation of Samsung corp., and the railroad strike on Nov. 2007, just to name a few.
As described, we gathered the articles of the sets from the twenty most publishing news providers.
Five participants performed aspect-level classification manually on the 30 article sets.
Table 4 shows the characteristics of the sets.
The GoogleNews users read the articles covering the aspects in favor of their original view points and did not read those with opposing viewpoints.
For example, the one in the Negative group read the articles in article group 3, but not those in group 1.
On the contrary, the NewsCube users read more diverse articles even with opposing viewpoints.
After the news reading session, the two participants with the same opinion in the Neutral and the Negative groups began to reveal differences in their opinions.
The two participants in the Neutral group developed different views towards all three key actors.
The GoogleNews user formulated a negative opinion against the protesters and emphasized the violence of the protesters.
The user referred an article which discussed the violence of the protesters, which belongs to the article group 3.
However, the NewsCube user defended the protesters and criticized the prosecutor for issuing the arrest warrants imprudently.
Her opinion was influenced more by the articles discussing the actions of the prosecution  although she also read the same articles on the protesters' violence.
Interestingly, unlike the GoogleNews user, she started to criticize the articles rather than just to passively accept the information in the articles after using NewsCube.
She said, "The articles in group 3 seem to intentionally exaggerate the story to formulate a negative view towards the protesters".
In the Negative group, the participants' original opinions on the protest did not change.
However, they developed different views on the court and the prosecution.
The GoogleNews user criticized the court for restraining the prosecution by rejecting a number of arrest warrants.
The NewsCube user, however, acknowledged the position of the court and accepted the actions of the court.
No difference was made in the opinions of the Positive group although the two participants read different sets of articles.
After the readings, both still defended the court and the protesters, and criticized the prosecution.
The NewsCube user read the articles with the opposing view point discussing the violence of the protesters ; however, he raised questions on the credibility of the articles and considered the articles to be biased.
The result of the experiment shows that there is a high level of similarity among the manual classification results.
We demonstrate the similarity using the weighted average F-measure defined in Section 5.2.2.
Table 5 shows the distribution of the weighted average F-measures, F between two classification results Ci and Cj.
Avr F is the average of such F for all pairs of classification results, C1, ..., C5, i.e.,
In Table 7, we compare our method with six different extractionclustering methods.
For each method, we compute the mean value 30 of F over all 30 article sets, i.e., mean F = 1 F  ,  30 k =1 where Ck denotes the clustering result for the article set Ak generated by each method.
Then, for each extraction-clustering method, the number of the winning article sets is counted.
The table shows that our method has the highest mean F value, i.e., NSE-FCAC generates the clustering results which are closer to the ground truths than others.
The method also generates the best clustering results for 21 article sets.
While not shown in the table, we further observed that for the cases with the rest 9 article sets, the differences in F with the winning methods were relatively small.
As the manual classification results developed by different participants show high similarity, we create ground truth classification results G for each test set based on those results.
For the ground truth, we group articles together if four or more subjects agree on grouping the articles together.
Table 6 shows that thus created ground truth is very similar to each manual classification result.
Aspect-level classification methods are evaluated by comparing their results to the ground truths.
We use the widely used Fmeasure as the evaluation metric.
The F-measure is the harmonic mean of the precision and the recall.
It is calculated for each cluster of a ground truth as follows.
In this paper, we have presented NewsCube, a novel Internet news service designed to mitigate the effect of media bias.
To enable readers to deal with media bias, NewsCube automatically provides readers with articles of a given news event classified based on their aspects.
Users can read articles written from different viewpoints at a glance.
We demonstrate the performance of the developed aspect-level classification method, NSE combined with FCAC, using the 30 test article sets, A1, ..., A30, and the developed ground truths, G1, ..., G30.
We compare the method with three representative clustering methods; Hierarchical Agglomerative Clustering , K-means clustering, and Spectral clustering.
Topic Detection and Tracking Pilot Study: Final Report.
In Proceedings of DARPA Broadcast News Transcription and Understanding Workshop, 1998.
How to Identify, Expose and Correct Liberal Media Bias.
Political Polarization and the Electoral Effects of Media Bias.
CESifo Working Paper Series No.
Detecting Web Page Structure for Adaptive Viewing on Small Form Factor Devices, In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on World Wide Web.
Curtin, P. A. Reevaluating public relations information subsidies: Market driven journalism and agenda-building theory and practice.
Ranking a Stream of News.
In Proceedings of 14th International conference on World Wide Web.
Framing: Toward Clarification of a Fractured Paradigm.
BLEWS: Using Blogs to Provide Context for News Articles.
In Proceedings of the International Conference on Weblogs and Social Media.
A Hierarchical Monothetic Document Clustering Algorithm for Summarization and Browsing Search Results.
In Proceedings of 13th International Conference on World Wide Web.
NewsInEssence: Summarizing Online News Topics.
In Proceedings of DARPA Broadcast News Workshop.
Gandy, O. H. Beyond agenda setting: Information subsidies and public policy.
A Field Experiment Measuring the Effect of Newspapers on Voting Behavior and Political Opinions.
Yale Economic Applications and Policy Discussion Paper No.
