This paper investigates the uses of social networking site Facebook, and the gratifications users derive from those uses.
In the first study, 137 users generated words or phrases to describe how they used Facebook, and what they enjoyed about their use.
These phrases were coded into 46 items which were completed by 241 Facebook users in Study 2.
Factor analysis identified seven unique uses and gratifications: social connection, shared identities, content, social investigation, social network surfing and status updating.
User demographics, site visit patterns and the use of privacy settings were associated with different uses and gratifications.
These connections  are the core functionality of a social network site  although most also provide opportunities for communication, the forming of groups, hosting of content and small applications.
Given the growth of social networking sites, it is perhaps unsurprising that their use has garnered media attention, including the seemingly now obligatory scare stories involving predatory child sex offenders , identity theft , workplace usage levels  and even addiction .
In many recent cases, this coverage has focused on Facebook.com, which was originally restricted to users with an `.edu' e-mail address.
In September 2006, Facebook opened registration to non-college based users.
This change led to rapid growth in the number of users, as well as almost viral growth within non-educational organizations.
For instance, the British Broadcasting Corporation  network  has circa 10,000 members, approximately 50% of employees .
Since May 2007, Facebook has also allowed the development and implementation of third-party applications .
Termed `networks' by the site , this reflection of the offline community in the online environment may have led to unique forms of use amongst users .
Social networking sites such as MySpace, LinkedIn and Facebook have become hugely popular in the last few years.
In July 2007, social networking sites occupied five of the top fifteen visited websites according to Alexa.com.
On July 10, 2007, Facebook.com reported signing up its 30 millionth user, with a year on year increase in unique users of 89% .
MySpace is reported  to have over 100 million users .
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
In both cases, an online social network may provide users with social capital .
Online social networking sites may also serve a number of other purposes .
A survey of over 2,000 students, found evidence that the primary use of Facebook was for `social searching' - that is, using Facebook to find out more about people who they have met offline, or who they attend class or share a dormitory with .
The use of Facebook for `social browsing', for instance, to meet someone via the site with the intention of a later offline meeting, or to attend an event organized online, scored relatively low amongst their sample.
The main use reported by the sample studied by Lampe et al.
This suggests that messaging is used to maintain and build social ties across distances.
In comparison, `pokes'  were primarily exchanged within a network / school .
According to Lampe et al.
The surveillance and `social search' functions of Facebook may, in part, explain why so many Facebook users leave their privacy settings relatively open .
If `social searching' is a public good, then reciprocity rules would dictate that by enabling a degree of surveillance of oneself, one would should also be able to engage in reciprocal surveillance of others.
For instance, Gross and Acquisti  report that only 1.2% of users changed the default `search' privacy setting, and less than 1/2% of users changed the default `profile visibility' privacy settings.
Enabling Facebook users who are not currently linked as friends to view personal aspects of one's profile may also be a strategy to increase the size of one's social network.
As noted earlier, Facebook.com has undergone radical change over the last twelve months.
By moving outside of the US-academic environment and embracing users globally and outside of academia, it has not only changed the profile of its users, but also the potential motivations for their use.
While tightly controlled, geographically bounded networks based on university affiliation still exist, they are dwarfed by networks based outside of academia - for instance, as of September 2007, the `London' network has over 1 million members, New York over 355,000 and Toronto over 800,000.
The present paper examines the motivations of Facebook users using a `uses and gratifications' framework.
Uses and gratifications refer to the `how and why' of media use .
Specifically, `uses and gratifications' refer to the motivations of specific uses, and the satisfaction people gain from such use.
These gratifications can be divided into those based on the content of the media  and those based on the actual experience of using the media .
Typically, content gratifications are held to be related to the repeated use of a media  which for the designers of such systems relates to a site's `stickiness'.
This led Stafford et al.
In the present study, the usual two stage approach to studying uses and gratification is adopted .
In Study 1, Facebook users are asked to generate lists of words or phrases that describe their uses and gratifications in an exploratory way.
In Study 2, these terms are subjected to factor analysis in order to form grouped profiles of specific uses and gratifications.
Participants were 137 Facebook users who responded to a request to complete a short online study.
Participants were recruited through a number of different methods: postings to the `wall' of three network homepages on Facebook , a paid flyer shown 10,000 times across all networks, and links on academic survey websites.
The survey was open during the first two weeks of July 2007.
Following this, participants were asked to respond to the following questions adapted from  using free text entry: * What is the first thing that comes to mind when you think about what you enjoy most when using Facebook?
What other words describe what you enjoy about using Facebook?
Using single, easy-to-understand terms, what do you use Facebook for?
What uses of Facebook are most important to you?
Two raters clustered the descriptive items and phrases developed by Facebook users in response to the first question.
The raters worked collaboratively to develop the clusters, and were instructed to `identify responses that are related'.
The author then discussed the themes with the raters, and named them accordingly.
The main themes identified are outlined in Table 1.
Theme  `Keeping in touch' Contacting friends who are away from home Chatting to people I otherwise would have lost contact with Passive contact, social surveillance Virtual people-watching.
A sample of items from each use and gratification proposed by users was extracted from the exploratory list developed in Study 1.
Participants' responses to items 2-4 were examined, and any occurrences of other uses or gratifications not mentioned in response to the first item were added to the list.
This led to a total of 46 items.
Where possible, the item was taken word for word from participant responses to Study 1.
Participants were 241 Facebook users recruited using the same methods outlined in Study 1.
The study was open during the final week in July, and throughout August.
The same demographic and Facebook use measures described in Study 1 were used in Study 2.
Participants also completed an item related to their use of Facebook privacy settings, specifically if they had changed the default settings, and if so, the degree to which they had made them more private or more open.
Participants were finally asked to rate, using a 7-point Likert scale, the 46 uses and gratifications derived from Study 1 using the metric, "How important are the following uses of Facebook to you personally?'
The scale was anchored at 1  and 7 .
Around half of the participants had been registered on the site for less than six months .
The remaining participants had been signed up for between six months and a year , more than one year, but less than two  or for more than two years .
The majority of participants visited the site either daily  or more than once a day .
Almost a quarter visited Facebook several times a week , with 6.7% visiting once a week on average, and 4.2% visiting less than once a week.
Amongst all respondents, the most common responses for the time spent on the site each week were between 1 and 2 hours  and between 2 and 5 hours .
A relatively small proportion of users claimed to spend either less than 1 hour a week  or between 5 and 10 hours  on the site.
The proportion of users claiming more than 10 hours Facebook use per week was small .
Unlike previous research , the majority of users claimed to have changed the default privacy settings in Facebook, with 25.6%  reporting making their profile `somewhat' more private, 21%  `much more' private and 10.9%  making it `as private as possible.
The number of people making no changes to their profile  was substantially lower than that reported in previous studies .
The most important uses of Facebook tended to be related to the `social searching' and surveillance functions , identified by .
Specifically, the use of the site to learn about old friends and maintain or re-connect relations scored consistently highly.
This pattern repeats previous findings from student samples .
To investigate the nature of the various uses and gratifications of Facebook in more depth, exploratory factor analysis was conducted.
The initial factor analysis  yielded 9 components with eigenvalues over 1, explaining 64.8% of the variance.
Examination of the scree plot and unique loadings suggested that seven components  should be retained for further analysis.
Only four items did not load on any of the factors: one was related to privacy settings, two about use of the `poke' facility and one about leaving messages on the `wall'.
Some of the items loading on this factor also clearly relate to the `surveillance' function identified by , for instance, `Finding out what old friends are doing now".
Because of the combination of surveillance and social capital functions, this factor and related scale is labeled `social connection'.
To aid further analysis, scales were developed from each factor.
As a preliminary check, score distributions on each item were examined to ensure that none suffered from restricted range .
This was the case for all items.
Items were identified as markers of each factor based on the commonly used benchmark of a loading greater than .5.
Items that had significant loadings on other factors were discounted as marker items .
Application of these criteria led to identification of eight marker items for Factor 1, three for Factors 2, four for Factor 3, four each for Factor 4 and 5, and three each for Factor 6 and 7.
Factor 1  contains items predominantly concerned with `keeping in touch' .
The second factor is comprised of three items related to the joining of groups, organization of events and meeting of `like-minded people' .
These activities are akin to `social browsing' identified by Lampe et al.
It also contains related to the discovery of new music and new groups via friends.
As such, it seems to represent a `shared identities' function.
Two items  loaded on the factor, but did not meet the factor purity criteria.
The third factor is related to the posting and viewing of photographs , although many of the items also had loadings in the .3 region on the first factor.
This suggests that these activities within Facebook may fulfill a number of gratifications.
However, by forming a unique factor, they may also be a content gratification in their own right.
One item  loaded on the factor but did not meet the purity criteria.
The items do share a targeted investigation of others, however.
As such, the factor is termed `social investigation'.
Factor six comprises items related to a unique affordance of social networking sites - the ability to view other people's social networks and friends .
This ability to find out more about one's acquaintances through their social networks forms another important surveillance function, and may also be a method for increasing the size of one's own social network.
This specific use is termed `Social network surfing' here to signify the ability of users to move from one person to another via friend links, although it may also relate closely to a `process gratification'.
Factor four contains items related to content within Facebook - for instance, applications and quizzes .
This relates to the usual `content gratification' identified in previous media research.
It is worthwhile noting that while these items form a unique factor, the mean scores are relatively low.
A single item  loaded on the factor, but did not meet factor purity criteria.
The final factor comprises items related to the newsfeed and status updates within Facebook.
Given the outcry when the newsfeed was introduced , the relative high scores for this use suggest an increasing degree of acceptance.
Interestingly, a gratification  also loaded on this factor , suggesting a clear motivation for viewing the newsfeed.
Factor five contains items akin to both social searching and social browsing identified by Lampe et al .
The items comprising this factor cover both the use of Facebook to meet or view new people and to find out more about people who are met offline .
In all cases, a younger user was associated with higher usage levels, and a greater number of `friends'.
Age was also negatively correlated with the use of privacy settings  = -.17, p<.01, such that younger users report that they were more likely to have increased the privacy of their profile.
In part this may be due to the higher number of friends amongst younger users.
A number of earlier researchers have predicted that certain uses and gratifications of Facebook may be associated with greater use of the site.
To examine possible motivators for use of Facebook, a series of multiple regression equations were calculated using scores on the seven factor-based scales to predict both the frequency of visits to the site and the time spent on Facebook during an average week.
Age, occupation and gender were also entered as covariates .
The results of the regression analyses to predict the frequency of site use are shown in Table 10.
A final regression equation was calculated to predict the number of `friends' users reported on Facebook .
Given that the number of friends should be related to the length of time users had been registered on Facebook, and the intensity of their use, the usage measures  were entered alongside the remaining variables.
As might be expected, age was associated with the number of `friends' , as was the amount of time users had been registered on the site and the frequency of their site visits .
Scores on the `social investigation' scale were positively associated with the number of friends, while scores on the `photographs' scale were marginally significantly associated with an increased number of friends.
Table 10: Predicting frequency of visits to Facebook The regression equations show a differential pattern of uses and gratifications motivating frequency of visits to the site, and the time spent on the site.
Gender  and scores on the `photographs' and `status updates' factors predict the frequency of visits to the site.
Higher scores on both scales predicted more frequent visits.
There was a marginally significant effect of `social investigation' .
However, participants age  and scores on the content gratification scale predict the actual number of hours spent online.
This suggests that surveillance gratifications motivate repeat visits, but that content gratifications motivate people to spend longer on the site when they do visit.
In the main, privacy settings in Facebook allow users to hide their profile from people who are neither listed as `friends' or members of the user's own network.
However, if the motive for using Facebook is to meet new people, then such privacy settings would be somewhat counter productive.
To test this proposition, a MANOVA was conducted with privacy settings as the independent variable, and the responses to items related to meeting new people set as the dependent variables.
The results showed a significant link between privacy settings and the responses to the items  = 2.11, p < .05.
Analysis of the between subjects effects found no difference in responses to the `joining groups' or `joining events' items and privacy settings , but a significant effect of reported privacy settings on responses to the item `meeting new people'  = 4.16, p < .02, and a marginally significant effect on the item `using advanced search to look for specific types of people'  = 2.48, p = .08.
The means for the `meeting new people' item across the three privacy groups are shown in Figure 1.
However, the results of the present research support many of the conclusions of earlier research conducted on student populations.
For instance, the distinction previously drawn between `social searching' and `social browsing' uses of Facebook  was similarly evident in the present research.
However, the adoption of a uses and gratifications approach enables us to begin to probe in more depth the exact nature of `keeping in touch' as both a use and a gratification.
The results of the present study suggest that `keeping in touch' comprises two main functions.
The first is a surveillance function as identified by Lampe and colleagues .
Facebook is used to see what old contacts and friends are `up to', how they look and how they behave.
In keeping with this use, there is evidence that Facebook profiles serve an important self-presentation tool .
Associated with this use is the social capital building gratification, where Facebook is used to build, invest in and maintain ties with distant friends and contacts .
The `social search' and `social browsing' uses of Facebook identified by Lampe and colleagues  were closely related in the present study.
The use of Facebook to search for new people loaded on the same factor as the use of Facebook to research offline contacts.
This `virtual people watching' was represented in both Factors 5 and 6, with the important distinction that Factor 6 relied primarily on `friend of friend' connections, while Factor 5 represented targeted investigation of people met offline, or searched for.
Symptomatic of this distinction is the difference between `looking up'  and `looking at'  people.
In the present study, only social investigation was associated with a higher number of `friends', not social network browsing.
Interestingly, an increased score on the content gratification scale was negatively related to the number of `friends' reported to be linked to one's profile.
This perhaps suggests a sub-set of users gain gratification through the use of applications within Facebook, rather than through the accrual of `friends'.
But, at present these applications tend to rely on existing contacts, rather than the accrual of new `friends'.
As such, they may serve to strengthen social ties, rather than acting to increase the overall size of a social network.
Thus, investment of time and effort in social applications within Facebook may be akin to messaging between friends  - it solidifies ties, rather than creating new links.
Users responses on the scales created from the factors also predicted their pattern of use of the site.
Figure 1: Scores on `meeting new people' by privacy settings These results suggest that for users wishing to use Facebook to meet new people, the privacy settings may be set at too stringent a level.
Further analyses confirmed no links between the social connection scales and privacy settings, suggesting that a primary motivation for making one's profile less private is the desire to meet new people.
Social networking sites pose a number of challenges for HCI researchers and practitioners.
First, the actual uses and gratifications of such sites are not well understood.
The present paper presents the first study of a social networking site using a `uses and gratifications' framework, and also provides an empirically developed measurement tool for future research.
However, the use of the site for social investigation, viewing and posting photographs and viewing status updates predicted the frequency of visits.
It would seem from the present data that `keeping in touch' may in actuality refer to `checking up on regularly', while the `stickiness' of the site  depends on use of the content and applications.
This insight is clearly important for designers of social networking sites and associated content.
If repeat visits are motivated by different uses and gratifications than the amount of time spent on the site, it is important to design content gratification alongside the ability to build and maintain social connections.
It also suggests that the furor caused by the introduction of the newsfeed  has subsided, and been replaced by its new role as a `killer app', at least in terms of repeat visits to the site.
In many ways, this use of Facebook reflects the desire for `perpetual contact' , and previously supplied by standalone services like Twitter .
While the social implications of this interest in perpetual contact and updates on `friends' are beyond the remit of the present paper, it is worth noting that an increased awareness of others' actions has potentially important implications for how we relate to others, and understand ourselves.
The present research is a `snap shot' of Facebook users, and further work should consider the possibility of researching the development of use over time.
In particular, it would be of interest to see how people's uses and gratifications of Facebook develop, and if the frequency of visit is motivated by `perpetual contact' over time.
There is, for instance, considerable research in the field of habit formation that could inform the study of social network site use.
HCI research should also consider ways in which the desire to meet new people, and to allow oneself to be viewed by strangers, can be accommodated in a privacy-protecting manner .
At present, Facebook has reasonably nuanced privacy controls.
From the results of the present research, it would seem that users are changing the default privacy settings in a motivated manner.
However, the present study only collected reported privacy settings.
It should also be noted that the nature of the sampling method, and the self-selection of respondents, may have influenced the pattern of responses and overall levels of activity.
The designers of social networking sites should consider the varied uses and gratifications reported by users, and need to recognize that not all users have the same uses of a social networking site, nor derive the same gratifications from their use.
For instance, there are clear distinctions between the use of Facebook to maintain and re-create connections with friends, its use as a surveillance tool and for content delivery.
There were also differences in reported uses by age, gender and occupational status.
It may be that different demographic groups are motivated to use social networking sites for different purposes, with social connectivity and perpetual contact motivating younger  users more than older  users.
The differing goals for the use of Facebook are reflected not only in usage patterns, but also in users' privacy settings.
People who have made their privacy settings more permissive are more likely to want to meet new people .
This is a designed aspect of the system - in both cases, to fulfill one's goal often requires a more permissive approach to profile privacy.
Similarly, if the goal is to meet new people, making one's profile more open than by default allows others pursuing the same gratification to view your profile, and presumably increases the chances of an interaction.
For these users, the profile within Facebook is likely to become a key self-
Users derive a variety of uses and gratifications from social networking sites, including traditional content gratification alongside building social capital, communication, surveillance and social networking surfing.
The different uses and gratifications relate differentially to patterns of usage, with social connection gratifications tending to lead to increased frequency of use, and content gratifications to increased time spent on the site.
The variety of uses to which Facebook is put by its users identifies particular challenges for the designers of such sites.
For instance, a default privacy setting may be too restrictive for users seeking to meet new people, or who wish to allow new people to discover them.
Since user's desire to engage in surveillance of their peers also motivates the frequency of site visit, this also poses a unique challenge in balancing user's privacy concerns and controls with a key raison d'etre of social networking sites like Facebook.
At present, Facebook allows users to manage their `feed', removing `stories' as they wish.
This solution not only provides a degree of privacy control to users, but it also enables users to engage with the site as a self-presentation tool  at numerous levels - not only via their profile and network, but also through their activity .
Gross, R. and Acquisti, A.
Information Revelation and Privacy in Online Social Networks.
In Workshop on Privacy in the Electronic Society, ACM Press .
Self-Disclosure, Privacy and the Internet.
Perpetual contact: mobile communication, private talk, public performance.
Lampe, C., Ellison, N. and Steinfield, C. A Face in the Crowd: Social Searching vs. Social Browsing.
In proceedings of ACM Special Interest Group on Computer-Supported Cooperative Work, ACM Press , 167 - 170.
Lampe, C., Ellison, N. and Steinfield, C. A Familiar Face: Profile Elements as Signals in an Online Social Network.
Facebook and Bebo: The assault on MySpace.
Rawstorne, T. How paedophiles prey on MySpace children.
Saucier, G. Mini-markers: A brief version of Goldberg's unipolar big-five markers.
Determining uses and gratifications for the internet.
Wellman B and Gulia M. The network basis of social support: A network is more than the sum of its ties, in Wellman B : `Networks in the Global Village', Boulder, CO, Westview Press .
The role of friends' appearance and behavior on evaluations of individuals on Facebook: Are we known by the company we keep?
Web Networkers at risk of fraud.
Boyd, D. Facebook's Privacy Trainwreck: Exposure, Invasion, and Social Convergence.
Churchill, G. A paradigm for development of better measures of marketing constructs.
Cashmore, P. MySpace hits 100 Million Accounts.
Donath, J. and Boyd, D. Public displays of connection".
Managing Impressions Online: Self-Presentation Processes in the Online Dating Environment.
Ellison, N., Steinfield, C. and Lampe, C. Spatially Bounded Online Social Networks and Social Capital: The Role of Facebook.
Paper presented at the annual meeting of the International Communication Association, Dresden, June 2006.
Flavelle, D. Worries follow rise of Facebook: Employers not happy with time spent on site.
Debunking the MySpace Myth of 100 Million Users.
Rhythms of Social Interaction: Messaging within a Massive Online Network 3rd International Conference on Communities and Technologies, .
Gonzalez, N. Facebook users up 89% over last year; Demographic shift .
