The Carnegie Mellon Spoken Language Shell  attempts to provide use of speaker-independent nition, natural language ment ary "conversational A good interface decomposition mentation and design allows such flexibility through the continuous-speech recogprocessing, as well as rudiskill" heuristics.
1: Components of the spoken language interMANAGER component speech.
Attention The signal processing utterance-sized from this stream and routes these utterances to the recognition The AM implements a range of strategies.
Ideally, the AM should be capable of determining not only the bounds of a true utterance but also know to reject unintentional utterances  and be able to determine whether the user is actually ad-
The Office Manager  domain is interesting for the following reasons: It provides a range of interaction requirements, from tight-loop  to open-ended ; it supports meaningful problem-solving activity ; and since the applications are diof actual rectly usable in real-life settings, the activity users can be studied over extended periods.
In its present implementation, the RE functions as a dedicated server and allows multiple clients to share the same recognition facilities.
Recognition imposes a high computational load and it is often impractical on a computer selves potentially active.
Ideally, on which requiring to have this process reside several applications be implemented 
Currently, we use a separate computer for this purpose.
A critical attribute of a recognition engine is its ability to decode speech in real-time.
Real-time response  TASK maintains MANAGER the rhythm  systems are often built as monoof interaction.
While this approach is adequate for a computer that runs a single speech application, it is inefficient for a computer that is meant to support a variety of speech-enabled applications.
In the latter case it becomes more efficient to centralize speech resources and to allocate them dynamically to individual applications.
The purpose of the Task Manager is to supervise, in the context of multiple voice-addressable speech channel plementation, applications, to the proper the actual the assignment application.
All components of the system, with the exception of the Recognition Engine are implemented on a NeXT computer, using Objective-C and the Nextstep interface.
CONCLUSION Our future work includes the development of techniques for structuring recognition and parsing knowledge bases along "object" lines, to permit individual applications their nents.
In terms of human communication, the CM performs the error repair necessitated by breakdowns in the communication channel .
It does not concern itself with the consequences of errors due to some misunderstanding on the part of the user .
SYSTEM has been used to im-
Meaningful study of spoken language interaction requires a system that will be used on a daily basis and whose utility will persist past the initial stages of play and exploration.
We believe that the Office Manager is such a system, Systems that do not have this persistence of utility will ultimately have little to tell us about spoken communication with computers.
