In the context of a penoperated note taking application, we demonstrate interaction techniques that support a fluid division of labor for tasks and information across the two displays while minimizing disruption to the primary experienceofauthoringnotes.
The folding formfactor offers an inconspicuous, highly mobile kit similar to a small day planner.
Novel interaction techniques support a fluid division of labor betweenthescreensfortaskssuchasnotetakingcombined with gathering content from reference documents , navigational structure plus content, private plus public views of information, and other partitions of interfaceelementsandtasksacrossscreens.
Reading occurs in conjunction with writing, with frequent crossreferences between informationsources.Userspartitiontheirworkbetween multiple monitors  and devices .
Finding, gathering, and using information encountered on the web should not interrupt the user's primary task .
Our goal here is to research physical affordances and interactive techniques for penoperated dualdisplay devices.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Alan Kay and his DynaBook vision inspired a dualscreen mockup for the AppleKnowledgeNavigatorconceptvideoin1987.
Severalpaperssuggest arolefor multiscreendevices,but few designs appear in the literature .
MarshallandBlydiscusshowpeopleclipinformation, and conclude "interfaces need to support secondary interactions like clipping without interrupting primary activities like reading."
Users can browse through a text using explicit gestures suchasfanningthepagesorflippingthebookover.Users likeddetachingthe screens, whichmotivatedustoinclude this capability in the Codex.
But the gestures did not fare well, so the Codex instead uses implicit background sensing  to adapt to the current physical posture.
Rather than two screens in support of linear texts, the Codexemphasizesa partitionofroles,suchas huntingfor information  in conjunction with writing notes and gathering hyperlinked digital clippings.
Although only one screen has input, game designers have used the screens in many creative ways.
For example, one program shows a full screenviewofapaintingonthetopscreen,andazoomed in view for brushing details on the bottom screen .OnestudyoftheDSfindsthat it creates private individual gaming contexts within larger social gaming contexts .
Grudin  studies how desktop users employ multiple monitors.
Why have two divided screens rather than one largeone?Grudinobservesthat"asinglelargespace isnot always preferable" because multiple monitors support partitions of "space with a dedicated purpose, always accessible with a glance."
References to related work show devices  that have considered each posture.
We can immediately discern that few prior devices have supported collaborative postures, with FacetoFace and CornertoCorner unique to the Codex.
The Codex is the only device that automatically sensestransitionsbetweenthefullsetofpostures.
Our design space is primarily organized by the angle between screens.
Concave postures have inwardfacing screens that lend themselves to individual use scenarios.
Convex postures have outwardfacing screens that afford two users with different viewpoints.
Neutral postures, wherethedeviceslieflatonatable,lieinbetweenandcan be suitable for either single user or collaborative tasks, depending on how the screens are oriented.
Codex, transitioning to Flat always maintains the mode fromthepreviousposture.
Forexample,settingthe Codex flat from the Battleship posture produces a Flat posture withthe screensfacinginoppositedirectionsinlandscape format, while keeping the collaboration features active.
Setting the Codex flat from the Laptop posture instead keeps the screens facing in the same direction.
Setting the Codex flat from CornertoCorner supports collaboration sidebysidewithanotheruser.
Detached.Ourtaxonomydoesnot showdetachedscreens, because the user can position them arbitrarily.
The participants were excited about the notion of a dual screen"notebook.
This device would be perfect because I can take notes and have the slides to write on too."
Alluserscarriedalaptopandacellphonepapernotebooks were carried by 6 of the users.
One user stated "Paper notebooksareforunorganizedthoughtsandideas...Icarry it because by laptop is too big and I can't input notes quicklyonmyphone."
None of the users preferring the large size users consistently expressed doubts about its portability , its similarity to laptops , and its lack of rapidinhandmobility.
Users consistently ranked the book and laptop postures as the most useful.
For example, one user commented "I like that I can pass this aroundorjustsetituponthe table.
Our hinge is lasercut from 1/8" delrin, a strong and flexible selflubricating plastic.
At the joints, two strips of delrinarejoined,withanoctagonalnutjammedintoacut outinoneofthedelrinpieces.Whentheuser rotates the pieces, the octagonal nut forces the cutout to expand slightly as it rotates.
The delrin provides a strong spring force that holds the resulting detents at 45 increments.
Weanticipateafutureofthinandlightinteractivedisplays with a wide viewing angle and low power consumption.
Rapid progress on technologies such as bistable "eink" displayssuggeststhese willsoonexist.We focusedon thesmallersizebecauseusersexpressedinterestinboththe small and medium sizes, and because we desired to make theprototypeasmobileaspossible.Also,themarketlacks a suitable mediumsized slate Tablet PC with an active digitizer.
We chose the penoperated OQO Model 02 computerasanofftheshelfprototypingvehicleforasmall dualscreen device.
The OQO Tablet PC is 8.4 x 14.2 x 2.5cm thick and runs Windows Vista.
We constructed a sensor module based on the Arduino prototyping board.
We use a threeaxis accelerometer  to determine the orientationofeachfacerelativetogravity,andaflexsensor  to determine the angle between faces.
A microswitch senses screen detachment.
The Arduino samples the sensors at 20Hz and exports the sensordataviaaBluetoothconnection.TheOQOalsohas an internal twoaxis accelerometer, which we use to sense orientationwhenascreenisdetached.
Movement is determined by a simple sumofsquares function between samples that decays over time.
When the user repositions the Codex to a new posture, the software provides feedback via a "splash" animation showing the sensedposture.Itthenrotatesthescreensifnecessary.
Theautomaticsensingoffersaconvenientwayfortheuser to implicitly specify the role of the screens.
We also provide a Posture Settings dialog because there may be cases where the user wants to explicitly override the Codex's defaultmappingoffunctionalityforeachposture.
Each screen has independent page controls in the form of Next Page and Previous Page icons.
These only turn the page shown on the current screen they do not affect the pageshownontheotherscreen.Thismakesiteasyforthe user to view separate notebooks, or separate pages from within the same notebook, without tedious interactions.
If theuserwishestosynchronizetheviewsofthescreens,we provide a Send Page to Other Screen icon.
The Codex implements a number of general dualscreen capabilities that can be used in both individual use and collaborative postures.
Sensing of the Codex posture is used to tailor the functionality of each technique so as to allow a single user to sprawl out their work across two screens, while a collaborating pair of users has more compartmentalized interactions so as to avoid unintended disruptionofoneanother'sscreens.
The clipboards of each screen's notebook application are synchronizedbydefault,sothattheusercancopyandpaste objects across screens.
The pen's barrel button can be used as a shortcut for the lasso mode.
Pagelinksenableuserstoauthornavigationalstructureon one screen, while viewing linked content on the other screen.
With two screens a Back feature is not needed to return from a single level of hyperlinking, because the original page with the navigationalstructureremainsvisible.Withasinglescreen, navigating to the content occludes the navigational structure, leading to tedious window management tasks suchastabbedbrowsingoropeninglinksinnewwindows.
In existing web browsers one can open pages in other windows or tabs to avoid interrupting one's browsing stream, but this is not quite the same as having the content open in a separate secondary screen.
It wouldbeveryinterestingtoexploresuchnuancesinfuture quantitative studies to better understand how physically separate screens differ from single screens, and how existing techniques for multimonitor systems can best be leveragedinamobiledualscreenformfactor.
Codex Sidebar objects take inspiration from this.
Sidebar objects use the other screen to show the auxiliary information, while scaling it to the maximum aspectratio preserving size.
To expand a Sidebar onto the other screen, the user tap selects it.
The user steps through the storyboard by tap selecting the thumbnails in sequence.
Notethatthereexistsaninitialambiguityastowhichofthe two screens should be mirrored to both sides.
Synchronous mode immediately echoes ink strokes drawn on one screen to the other screen.
Since a user can no longer see the other screen, after each stroke an "explode and fade" animation of a radar pulse plays to emphasize thattheinkstrokesarebeingsenttotheotherscreen.Each user's cursor is surrounded by a spotlight, which can be used to direct the other user's attention to an area of the screenwhilegesturingwiththepeninthehoverstate.Each userhasadifferentcoloredspotlight.
The Codex also supports asynchronous collaboration.
The user is then free to flip through his notebook pages without mirroring those pages to the other device.
The user can also send notes to the other screen by lasso selecting them and then stroking the projectoriconfromtheselection'smenuoptions.
The Codex can act as a sensemaking tool for informal or impromptu collaboration, which frequently involves small groups.ThefoldingformfactoroftheCodex enables each screen to be viewed by a separate user.
The Battleship, FacetoFace, and CornertoCorner postures are the three primary collaborative postures of the Codex.
The Codex offers a few simple collaborative tools.
The innovation is not the particular collaboration features, but rather the selective activation of appropriate collaborative functionality, and the tailoring of other features to suit collaborativeuseofthe dualscreens, basedonthe context givenbythepostureofthedevice.
For example, by default hyperlinks to web pages open up on the same screen, rather than the opposite screen, when users are engaged in a collaborative posture.
If the user pulls a screen out of the Codex, the screen retains the properties of the posture it was detached from.
Upondetachment,theCodexactivatesthedevice'sinternal accelerometer, but this is only used for automatic rotation of the screen between portrait and landscape formats.
Detaching screens has compelling uses in both individual and collaborative task scenarios.
By default, the Codex offers a synchronous whiteboard when a user places it in one of the collaborative postures.
Duringcollaborativework,detachmentofferstheabilityto simply hand a screen to another user to mitigate issues of social distance or ergonomics.
Note that this operation carriesaverydifferentsemanticofsharingthan sendinga file to another user's personal device.
The user also does not have to worry about figuring out howtoconnecttoapotentiallyuntrusteddevice.
Users were excited about the dual screens, the automatic sensing of postures, and the ability to detach the displays.
Users also appreciated the concept of postures.
For example, one user commented "configurable postures is a good idea" and another stated that "it definitely makes sensetotaketheandchangetheposture."
First, the Standing Book posture acts as an ambientdisplay.
Meanwhile, the primary screen of the Codex displays a slideshow of the user's note pages, so that the usercanmaintainperipheralawarenessofpreviousideas.
When the user employs the tool ring to take a screen clipping from thedesktop,theclipping appears in his Codex on the most recently used notebook page.
This enables the Codex to act as a "Web scrapbook"  for collecting ideas and inspiration while the user primarily works with a desktop computer, similartothewaythatsomepeopleusepapernotebooksto jotdownideasandreminders.
Collaboration was seen as a desirable capability .
Users only envisioned using the Codex for smallgroup collaborations, where it would be "intuitive but  only for oneonone discussion".
After choosing a posture, detaching the displays was important to make collaboration work well.
One user explained that "it definitely makes sense to change the posture  take them out of the case when I'm workingwithsomeone.Icansetthemsothatwearemost comfortableandit'sautomaticallyreadyforcollaboration."
Many users commented that they would otherwise feel physicallyconfinedorstuckinanawkwardposition.
Several users liked changing the posture of the hinge to control the mode of detached devices.
However, someusersindicatedtheywouldprefertheexplicitposture dialog in this case: "I would use the automatic sensors whenusingthedeviceasonepackage,butoncethescreens were taken out I would rather use the dialog box."
Users alsoseemedtoappreciatethedifferentsemanticsofsharing that detaching the screens affords: "I can just hand one display to someone to show them my notes."
Two users also suggested detaching both screens and giving them to familymembers.
The ability to hyperlink to pages, and open or preview thoselinksonthe oppositescreen, was very wellreceived "for quickly checking my notes or grabbing bits of content."
One user explained that page links would be "excellent in any sort of scenario where related topics are discussed  It's good that I can see what the pages say withoutgoingtothem."
ManyusersalsolikedtheconceptofSidebars,whichwere "useful in that it provided a way to group and `store' items."
However, the Sidebar concept was sometimes unclear to users at first: "The name `sidebar' didn't make sense to me... once I saw what it did I understood it, and thinkitwouldbeuseful.
This would be an interesting capability to add.
Some users felt that sidebars would be lessusefulonalargerscreen.
The ability to grab screen captures from the desktop and have them appear in the Codex was very popular: "I like that I can grab  from my desktop on the fly."
DesktoptoCodex capture seemed particularly useful for quick and lightweight transactions such as getting a phonenumberorreminderontoanotespage.
Echoing the findings of Chen et al.
As a pragmatic issue, it may be difficult to realize fully detachable screens in a commercialdevicewithoutincreasingtheweight,technical complexity, and costofgoods.
On the other hand, since detachment appears to have significant value to users, approachingthedesignoffuturedualscreendeviceswitha modularapproachthatenablestwoormoreidenticalslates to be physically interconnected may offer increased economy of scale.
Another way to play this tradeoff may be to consider asymmetric designs where only one of the screensisdetachable.
Software Relationship between the Screens:  The Codexillustratesamixofmanyofdifferentstrategies, but more are possible.
For example, relationships include: screen 1 mirrors screen 2, screen 1 acts as a second half of screen 2, screen 1 and screen 2 are independent, screen 1 shows zoomed in details of screen2,andsoforth.
Many users felt that the screen was a little bit too small, makingitdifficulttointeractwithattimes.Thisechoesour paper prototyping study, where a majority of the users favored the mediumsized screen, but the OQO's offered thebestcompromiseonthemarkettoquicklybuildadual screendevice.Usersalsodesiredathinnerformfactor.
One particular postural transition, from the FacetoFace posture to the Flat posture, did not test well because our current implementation places the two screens in portrait, but facing in opposite directions.
Users felt it would be more intuitive to leave the screens facing the same way, and detach one of the devices to flip the screen around if desired.
However, this was not the case for the transition from Battleship to Flat, which places the screens in landscape with the screens facing in opposite directions.
A longitudinal study that collects log data of actual Codex usage, or interviews thatprobeshiftsinuserbehaviorwiththedeviceovertime, wouldbeparticularlyintriguing.
Dualdisplay devices appear to have a wellmotivated role to play in the ecosystem of mobile devices.
The related research that we have discussed on how people approach sensemaking tasks such as reading in conjunction with writing, our own contributions of new techniques and automatically sensed postures for dualscreen devices, and the comments from users in our paper prototyping and usability studies together make a good case that dual displaydeviceshaveapromisingfuture.Thetwoscreensof theCodexaffordaseparationofconcernsinreadingversus writing, public versus private, and other partitions of task roles and views.
By supporting facile transitions between usage contexts, the Codex enables such a future without constantly encumbering the user with complex window managementandmodeswitchingtasks.
