One consequence of rapid advances in computer technology is the obsolescence of hundreds of millions of computers each year.
This paper explores strategies for increasing the reuse of outdated computers through an investigation of an 8-bit home computer that is still popular in developing countries.
We observed the use of the computers in 16 households in Ahmedabad and Bangalore, India in order to gain insight into the contextual factors that support the continued popularity of the device.
While most computers become obsolete in less than a decade, this 30-year-old computer technology remains useful because it provides exciting, multi-user family entertainment.
While having minimal processing power and virtually no connectivity, the 8-bit computer supports input and output channels that are especially suited for co-located social game play.
In contrast, PCs are primarily designed for individual use.
Therefore, we offer low-cost design recommendations that would enable outdated PCs to support greater shared use and increased utility within the constrained material context of low-income households.
These simple interventions, if adopted by computer refurbishment industries, have the potential to significantly extend the useful lifespan of PCs.
In subsequent household interviews, the children avidly described how they played video games together nearly every day during the summer .
One parent explained that they prefer their children to play indoors during the summer to avoid the sun.
Like many parents we talked to, they forbid playing games on school nights.
July 30, 2010: Our research team walked into a municipal schoolyard shortly after school ended.
Several children noticed the TV-Computer we were carrying and shouted "video games!"
Nearly half raised their hands when we asked if they owned one of these 8-bit devices, despite household incomes ranging between US$80-200 per month.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
This vignette from a lower-middle class village in India illustrates the existence of a 30-year-old microprocessor technology that is still widely used in developing countries.
Our research investigates this device and derives design lessons that may prolong the lifespan of both antiquated and contemporary computers.
Our contextual study of low-cost computers in developing regions contributes a rich qualitative view of social and material factors that govern technology adoption in low-income households.
Based on our findings, we generate recommendations that may be useful for extending the lifespan of the hundreds of millions of functional computers that are abandoned each year .
Our research team has observed the sale of 8-bit TVComputers  in multiple Indian cities and have photographic documentation of their sale in many other countries, including China, Pakistan, Thailand, Brazil and Nicaragua.
This suggests that the 8-bit gaming culture we observed in Dhokhala village is relatively widespread.
A typical price for these computers is Rs400 or US$10; this includes a low-quality keyboard, a mouse, and several game controllers .
Also included are two cartridges, one containing a set of video games and one containing the GBASIC programming language and a set of educational games.
The cartridges plug directly into the keyboard, which contains the CPU, two input jacks for game controllers and an RCA output for connection to a TV set.
The TVC is based on the 8-bit 6502 microprocessor technology, which was originally released in the late 1970s.
The 6502 powered a wave of TV-connected home computers, including the Apple II and BBC Micro, as well as the Atari 2600 and the Nintendo Entertainment System.
In fact, the TVC is compatible with the cartridge-based software of the 8-bit Nintendo Family Computer, or Famicom.
The Famicom  sold over 60 million units between 1983-1995 .
While most of the patents have expired on the Famicom, clones of this product  occupy a legally ambiguous greymarket.
As such, there are no official sales figures for the TVC.
Nevertheless, we believe this 8-bit computer is prevalent enough to warrant an investigation of its implications for the use of outdated computers by lowincome families.
The price of a new computer is out of reach for India's large lower-middle class, which is comprised of the 80 million households  that earn between $80-$170 per month .
Given the dramatic price differential between new computers and used computers, there is a substantial demand for used computers in developing contexts.
This demand has created a vibrant computer resale economy in India and other regions, which employ thousands of semi-skilled employees in the upgrading, refurbishment and sale of the computers .
Nevertheless, even in developing contexts, the lifespan of computers is 5-9 years after their manufacture .
The extension of the lifespan of obsolete computers has direct relevance to researchers investigating sustainability in HCI.
Additionally, because low-cost computers have particular appeal to low-income consumers in developing countries, extending computer lifespans can also contribute to research in HCI for development .
While reuse has been an important theme in sustainability discusions in HCI , a recent review of the HCI sustinability literature by DiSalvo et al.
The importance of this challenge is corroborated by environmental research on the disposal of end-of-life computers, which are classified as electronic waste .
The environmental benefits of reusing computers often far outweighs the benefits of recycling them, though both options are preferable to disposal in landfills .
The greatest environmental and human health dangers result from informal recycling in developing contexts .
The informal recycling of discarded computers, driven by a desire to recover precious metals , can result in the leaching of heavy metals into local water systems and the release of dioxins and other carncinogins into the air .
Most of the hundreds of millions of discarded computers are still functional .
For this reason, researchers identify short computer lifespans as a primary factor influencing the production of e-waste .
One researcher concludes that an extension of a computer's lifespan through reuse is "one of the simplest ways of preventing an uncontrolled increase in environmentally hazardous emissions" .
While some researchers disagree that reuse saves electricity , arguing that modern computers are highly energy efficient, it would follow that outdated computers will also be very energy efficient in just a few years, as contemporary computers are abandoned.
Economists Antonopoulos and Sakellaris define computer obsolscence as "the inability of a computer to be compatible with modern equipment, hardware and software" .
As used computers approach obsolescence, their resale price falls precipitously: Antononpoulos found that, on average, a six-year-old desktop costs just 3.5% of the original price.
This depreciation is not due to mechanical wear, as with an automobile, but is almost entirely due to obsolscence .
The reuse of computers is believed to generate substantial social and economic benefits, both from the employment of workers in the refurbishment industry and from the increase in social access to computational resources, particularly in education .
Yet, despite a strong focus on low-cost computing in the information and communication technologies for development  literature, there is very little discussion about the merits of using outdated computers.
For instance, a recent review of low-cost computing approaches in ICT4D  did not mention second-hand computers as a cost-control strategy and also assumed a maximum five-year lifespan per computer.
More generally, it has been noted that there is a surprising lack of discussion of obsolescence within the larger computer science community .
The work reported in this paper combines the results of 40 home interviews with field trials of the TVC in 16 households.
This data was collected over a total of 11 weeks in Ahmedabad and Bangalore in the summer months of 2010.
The bulk of the data was collected by two groups of field researchers, a mix of undergraduate engineering students from Ahmedabad and graduate design students from Bangalore.
Field researchers received over 20 hours of training by a professional ethnographer with prior experience running similar studies .
Given the potential social, economic, and environmental benefits of extending computer lifespans, this research seeks to identify design recommendations that could enhance the reusability of computers, particularly in lowermiddle class households in emerging economies.
As these households are the most likely candidates for adopting lowcost outdated computers, we seek to contribute a rich qualitative depiction of key social and material factors within this context.
We believe these depictions can be generally useful for designers interested in the usage and adoption of computers, new or old, within this large and increasingly influential demographic sector.
The 8-bit TVC serves as a basis for our study because it is an example of an extremely outdated computer technology that is still popular among low-income consumers.
This study began as an evaluation of whether the TVC could serve as a viable low-cost platform for enhancing computer literacy and other skills, which resulted in the fieldtesting of three new 8-bit learning games .
However, during our analysis of the design factors that enabled a 30-year-old computer technology to maintain relevance and utility within contemporary households, we instead focused our analysis on a more generalized understanding of how outdated computers can provide value to re-users.
Our two primary research questions are: 1.
What factors promote the adoption of the outdated TVC among lowincome families?
What are design lessons that could extend the lifespan of the hundreds of millions of functional computers  that are abandoned each year?
As a caveat, we recognize that outdated computer use in developing contexts is strongly linked to the dangers of informal e-waste processing.
Therefore, it is important to clarify that we do not advocate increasing the flow of outdated computers to developing regions, but rather seek to address obsolescence as a regional issue .
To understand baseline technology use, we selected 40 families across Ahmedabad  and Bangalore  according to the following criteria: we required that all families had at least one child of primary school age , live in a dwelling representative of low-income families, and own a television.
Televisions are very common among low-income families in India and are required for the use of the TVC.
Knowledge of TVC was not a criterion for recruitment.
We sought to maximize diversity in our selection by sampling families across a range of neighborhoods , religions, and professions.
To select these neighborhoods, we used the recommendations of the field researchers, who were familiar with various low-income settlements across the city.
In several cases, we used Google Maps satellite view to select other low-income neighborhoods, which are easily identified based on visual markers like density and the use of corrugated steel roofing.
The recruitment process for individual families often involved visiting a target neighborhood and approaching individuals, where we described our interest in conducting interviews about their household technology use.
In several cases, we also recruited low-income families with whom our researchers had a pre-existing relationship.
Finally, we recruited several families based on the recommendations of previously interviewed families.
The procedure for interviews involved a survey of technologies in the home and their use.
For instance, we documented the cost, model and number of mobile phones in each household while also asking about the use of particular features like texting, music or Bluetooth.
In addition to mobile phones, we asked similar questions about televisions, radios, books, and computer access inside and outside of the home.
Researchers documented the family structures of participating households and asked open-ended questions about how the family members interacted with the various technologies.
When permitted, we photographed the context of the technologies in the homes, including family members.
In accordance with local expectations and the preferences of our lead ethnographer, no compensation was provided for participating in these interviews.
Our selection criteria was the maximization of diversity in the sample.
In the first week of the field trial, we distributed the TVC  to 16 families .
Families were told that the TVC could be kept as compensation for their time in the remainder of the study.
Within the first few days, two families in Ahmedabad demanded that we take back the device, since it was causing their children to fight.
As a result, we passed the device on to another two families from Phase 1.
During this deployment, researchers avoided helping families install the devices in order to observe the barriers affecting the successful installation.
Over the next two weeks, families participated in one 60 minute semi-structured interview in which they responded to questions pertaining to the usage of the device, such as where the console was kept in the household's living space, challenges or problems that occurred during its use, attitudes towards the device, and how the presence of the device impacted the family's social routines.
In the last three weeks of Phase 2, we visited the households to observe the use of the platform.
We sought to understand how well each family member had learned to use the device and play the games available for it.
During the observations, we asked participants to set up the device and sit where they normally sit when they play.
We asked them to play their favorite game or games during the first ten minutes, then asked them to play the educational cartridge for ten minutes.
In the remaining time, we asked them to play a new game that they had not played before .
During the observations, we closely observed the physical and affective reactions of the player, the player's performance activities within the game, and the reactions and social interactions among the other people in the room.
Each game observation took an average of 1.5 hours, for a total of 24 hours.
During the course of this study, we encountered by chance several families that had voluntarily adopted the TVC .
In planning this study, we considered focusing on families voluntarily adopting the TVC, however this posed too great a risk to the successful execution of the study within the constraints of our time and resources.
Nevertheless, these families contributed important insights and provided validity to our broader findings and observations.
The first step of our analysis was to aggregate the diverse set of information about each family.
All families had survey responses and synthesis reports from the initial contextual interview, and a smaller set of families had interview reports, photographs and video from the deployments and game-play observation sessions.
All written materials were printed and aggregated by family.
We used a line-by-line open coding process  to identify relevant concepts that seemed to enhance our understanding of the family observations and interviews.
We then aggregated these codes into themes that appeared to govern the adoption of the TVC by the family.
These included Hedonic Utility, Social Learning, Experimental Play, Social Computer Interactions, Age and Gender Hierarchies, Space Constraints, and TVC Design Factors.
In this paper, we focus on the connection between hedonic utility, social learning, space constraints, and Social Computer Interactions.
To illustrate the key themes identified in our analysis, we constructed three detailed household scenarios .
A discussion of the key themes follows each scenario.
By presenting our results in a rich context, we seek to convey the complexity of the cultural and material factors that govern the adoption of technologies in our chosen setting.
Dhokala village, Ahmedabad, India: During our encounter in Dhokala village , we visited the home of 10-year-old Mohan to see his TVC.
We discovered that his family also owns a PC, a Pentium III model that his father bought two years ago for US$75.
The Windows 98 desktop displays the Hindu god Shiva and is connected to four large speakers in each corner of their one-room house.
Mohan's father, an electronics repairman with an income of US$200/month, said that he bought the computer for "Mohan's studies" but also to listen to the MP3s that he collects from his friend's phones.
Mohan mostly uses the computer for music but sometimes draws in Microsoft Paint or practices typing.
Mohan used to play Flash games obtained from a friend's USB stick, but Mohan's father was worried that his gameplay might damage the computer and so he deleted the games.
Mohan privately explained to us that he had undeleted the games and hid them in the "System" folder because he knew his father wouldn't look there.
Still, he prefers playing the 8-bit TVC games over his collection of Flash games.
Mohan received the TVC from his father, who occasionally repairs them.
While observing Mohan play Super Mario Brothers, we saw that he knew lots of game secrets.
Mohan said that he had learned some secrets from other children and some just by playing around and experimenting.
Household 1 demonstrates a crucial theme in our study: the importance of non-instrumental  applications of computers in low-income households.
While computers in developing contexts are often portrayed as tools to serve social-economic utility , there is increasingly a recognition that computers also serve to provide hedonic utility .
For instance, Smythe et al.
However, more contemporary technology adoption models do account for enjoyment as a form of utility.
Van der Heijden  clearly distinguishes productivity-oriented  versus pleasure-oriented  information systems: "Hedonic information systems aim to provide self-fulfilling rather than instrumental value to the user, are strongly connected to home and leisure activities, focus on the fun-aspect of using information systems, and encourage prolonged rather than productive use."
Whereas perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use are primary factors in the adoption of productive information systems, perceived enjoyment is essential to the adoption of hedonic systems.
This model suggests that Mohan's father may been less likely to have purchased the computer for Mohan's studies  if the computer did not also support playing MP3s .
When the game stopped responding , Ali jiggled the cartridge, adjusted the AV wires, and reset the computer.
It worked fine after that.
We also brought a typing game for him to play.
He kept looking up at the screen to see the next letter and looking down at the keyboard to find the corresponding key.
His youngest sister Naazneen started helping him by saying each letter aloud .
Household 2 illustrates how game learning was highly influenced by exchanges within a child's social network.
Just as Ali learned the word game from Imran, in many of our households, a sibling, neighbor or even parent was able to help players learn how to play particular games.
Naazneen tried to help her brother play by saying the letters aloud, a form of social scaffolding that we observed in many families.
We further descibe this particular collaborative activity in a separate paper .
MS Paliya, Bangalore, India: This peri-urban Muslim family has an income of about US$400/month.
The father, a truck driver, wants his 12-year-old son Ali to be educated, so he can be a policeman.
According to his mother, Ali plays games on the TVC almost every day there is electricity.
Sometimes his four cousins come over and he shows them how to play.
Ali has some prior experience playing video games: he owns a $5 handheld LCD game and also likes to play Grand Theft Auto at the local internet cafe.
Since we also gave a TVC to Ali's friend Imran, they have been visiting each other and sharing know-how.
For instance, Ali showed Imran some secrets in Mario and Imran showed Ali how to set up the mouse to play a word game on the educational cartridge.
When we visited for the game observation, Ali told us that he disliked the 8-bit game Soccer since he didn't understand how to play.
Vialikavel, Bangalore, India: This very small urban home was located on a dirt road in a poor enclave of a wealthy neighborhood in Bangalore.
When we arrived, the mother hardly had time to greet us, as she was busy making the flower garlands that supplement her housemaid income.
The father works as a cobbler, but he seemed unable to provide enough support for their five children: three girls , and two boys .
Despite making less than US$80/month, all the children are being educated and the eldest daughters have good English skills.
In the first visit, the father made a comment that he does not play with his children, because that is his wife's responsibility.
But after we gave them a TVC, the girls showed their father how to use it.
He enjoyed playing Galaxian and Duck Hunt after he got home from work, usually with his son and eldest daughter.
They compete for high scores and, so far, the father is the record holder.
While the father and son get to play first, they pass the controller around so their daughter gets to play.
In general, the family didn't find the educational cartridge very interesting, though the mother had used the ABC activity to practice the alphabet with her cousin's daughter.
Because age and gender hierarchies were important in all of the families we encountered, we were surprised by the number of young girls who had become proficient users of the TVC and masterful game players.
While it is possible that the families were simply influenced by the research itself, we have three additional hypotheses that could explain the successful adoption of the TVC by young girls.
First, because the TVC was low-cost and was not generally considered to be a high status item, it may have resulted in less hierarchical competition.
Second, more powerful members of the household themselves enjoyed sharing gameplay with other family members.
Our third hypothesis is that the television itself induced greater gender equity than might have occurred with a laptop or desktop computer.
Because mothers and daughters often watched more television than fathers and brothers , it may be that the existing gender dynamics around the television influenced the relatively equitable adoption of the TVC by boys and girls.
In small households, the TVC has to directly compete with TV programming.
This is no small accomplishment.
One supporting factor comes from the fact that non-playing family members can actively participate in the gameplay.
While games played individually on a personal gaming device are likely to only bring hedonic utility to the individual playing, co-located social gameplay multiplies hedonic utility by making the games fun for multiple family members.
To describe how hedonic utility spreads through the family, we organized our observations according to a model of social participation in gameplay .
Space constraints greatly affected the use and adoption of the TVC.
One of the greatest difficulties players encountered was finding a space for the device itself.
Many families improvised, such as household 3, which used an opened drawer to hold the keyboard .
Families with the least amount of space had the hardest time using the mouse, which requires free desk space.
The game controllers, in contrast, were much easier to use and share.
It was common for family members to watch other family members play games on the TV.
We classify this behavior as Passive Participation.
Figure 5 illustrates the structure of this behavior by depicting a two-way flow of information between the TVC and player, but in only one direction from the TV to the attentive audience.
A passively participating audience member responds to gameplay much as they might to a TV show, provided that they have a basic understanding of the game and its goals.
For instance, parents and siblings often become emotionally invested in the performance of the player.
Because the games are always challenging players by presenting various obstacles and dangers, observers often express their emotional anticipation through changes in posture, facial expressions, or verbalizations.
Small households appeared to help support the large range of social computer interactions that we observed by increasing the overall density of social activity around the TVC .
Because the TVC uses a television as a screen, it embeds computer interactions into an existing focus of social attention.
The co-located social use of the TVC can be contrasted with the relatively isolated interaction spaces created by Personal Computers .
Indeed, PC input devices are designed to be used by a single user, while the TVC allows for multiple game controllers.
Passive Participation often shifts to Active Participation when the player encounters difficulties and the audience is motivated to offer guidance.
For instance, in one household we observed a more experienced older sister watching her younger brother play Super Mario Brothers, when she shouted "Hit it, hit it, star will come.
In addition to providing instruction, active participation appeared to be enhancing her own enjoyment as an audience member, as though she were "playing" the game through her brother's actions.
This vicarious enjoyment also seemed to be present in the group of boys playing Super Contra in Household 1.
Why do families in developing contexts still use the TVC?
The key reason appears to be that the devices offer substantial hedonic utility to multiple family members.
The large number of preloaded video games on the TVC increase its perceived enjoyment, a key factor in current models of household technology adoption .
Why is it that Super Mario Brothers and Duck Hunt remain fun today, after nearly 30 years, even while Visicalc's oncevaunted utility has faded?
Video games appear to be resistant to the forces of obsolescence that rapidly outdate productive/instrumental software.
This is because the use of instrumental software requires an external benefit , which may be dependent upon contemporary business processes or compatibility with widely used software.
In contrast, playing games is an end to itself.
Performance modeling is a common approach to teaching through demonstration.
Here, a player communicates skills or techniques to an observer through an explicit demonstration of interaction with the computer.
For instance, Ali described how he showed Imran how to get a secret extra life in the first level of Super Mario Brothers.
Multi-player coordination describes the complex set of interactions that occur when multiple people are interacting directly with the game.
The TVC contains several twoplayer games, which can be classified by whether they are collaborative or competitive and whether they are synchronous or turn-based.
For instance, Super Contra is a synchronous collaborative game where two players coordinate to attack common enemies.
Super Mario Brothers, in contrast, is an turn-based collaborative game.
Track and Field  includes 200 Meters, a synchronous and competitive racing game and Long Jump, a competitive turn-based game.
A multitude of multi-player coordination structures are likely to exist outside the official rules of the game, such as the comparison of high scores in Household 3.
A number of other researchers have reported on the important role of social computer interactions in a developing context.
For instance, Pal et al.
Our research shows how nonusers can also achieve hedonic utility through intermediated computer use.
Other researchers have described the interaction between social structures and videogame play.
Some of the earliest work was done by Mitchell, who, in the early 1980s, investigated family dynamics around 8-bit video games .
She found that parents were important mediators of video game access and that video game play was, primarily, a social experience.
More recently, Stevens et al.
In 2009, HCI researchers studied the motivations around the group use of the Nintendo Wii .
They found that the social interactions around gameplay were a primary motivation for playing games.
As these researchers lamented the "dearth of research on collocated group console gaming", we hope that our descriptions of the structures of social participation in gameplay in a non-western setting may serve as a useful point of comparison.
We anticipate that game designs that support social participation are likely to increase family adoption, since they increase the total hedonic utility of a game to the family, relative to a game played in isolation.
Interpersonal struggles to play games are considered Player Negotiation.
It was common that a person playing a game would deny, encourage or allow TVC access to their siblings or friends.
Player negotiation often occurred within the context of hierarchies of age, gender and family relations.
For instance, older children often prevented their younger siblings from playing, while less dominant siblings often fought for access to the device.
This category describes behaviors where a non-player controls the interactions and access to the device.
Parents played a powerful role in regulating when, how and if their children played.
In Mohan's home, for instance, his parents encouraged game use, because they prefered that he stay inside during the summer.
The situation was different in other households, however, due to negative perceptions around the value of non-educational games.
For instance, one mother said "I like Nitin playing typing game only.
I think he should play other games less.
When I am not at home, he plays other games instead of playing typing game.
Our analysis of the present-day utility of the TVC indicates several design lessons for extending the useful lifespan of other outdated computers.
Even in developing countries, computers are typically discarded/recycled after 5-9 years .
So, if a 30 year-old computer technology has value, why aren't 10-15 year-old computers being used?
We propose that a key barrier to the reusability of PCs in developing contexts is the lack of perceived hedonic utility.
While there is substantial entertainment content that is potentially available for use on outdated PCs, it is not easily accessible.
Furthermore, a PC is designed to support individual gameplay, but does not easily afford the colocated social gameplay seen with the TVC.
This may prevent the hedonic utility of the PC from being multiplied over multiple individuals in a family.
We hypothesize that increasing the hedonic utility of outdated PCs will extend their lifespan and promote reuse.
Therefore, we propose three low-cost recommendations that are targeted at the PC refurbishment industry, as this market sector is best positioned to redesign existing computers to extend their useful lifespan.
While these recommendations are primarily aimed at desktop PCs, they also have relevance to laptops and other computing devices.
Preloaded Content, Especially Abandonware: Just as the TVC was bundled with a great deal of old 8-bit content, we believe other outdated computers would benefit from a collection of preinstalled software.
Bundling content on outdated computers is especially important as outdated software is difficult or impossible to find in the market.
Refurbishers put substantial labor into the preparation of used computers for resale , including formatting hard drives and reinstalling the operating system .
What is needed is a mechanism to organize outdated software content to make it accessible to these refurbishers.
One possibility is to bundle abandonware with the discs used to flash the operating systems of outdated computers.
There is a special opportunity to take advantage of obsolete software titles, known as "abandonware."
There are vast online archives of abandonware containing thousands of obsolete software titles and games , some of which could substantially enhance the value of outdated computers.
While abandonware often occupies a legal grey zone due to the long duration of software copyrights, rightsholders typically ignore the reuse of their software if it has no commercial value.
Aside from abandonware, new games can be developed to be compatible with outdated computers, perhaps taking advantage of the widespread availability of Adobe Flash players .
What software would be most valuable on outdated computers?
First, games and other kinds of entertainment sofware will increase demand for outdated computers by increasing perceived hedonic utility.
It is notable that the TVC, while used primarily as a gaming device, strongly markets itself as an "Educational Computer"--perhaps to improve parental perceptions?
While useful for marketing, educational software might also provide significant social and economic value to a family.
A game that supports the development of typing skills, for instance, could provide substantial economic benefits to the learner.
There are similar opportunities for educational math and language games.
For instance, Banerjee et al.
While the educational games on the TVC were less appealing than the entertainment games, they were still widely used.
As video games and educational software are particularly useful to children, it seems that children would be best positioned to benefit from experiences with outdated computers.
Game Controllers as a default GUI Input Device: While the mouse is the dominant mechanism for controlling PC GUIs, game controllers were far more important to the adoption of the TVC.
By extension, low-cost USB game controllers  may be more suitable for small lowincome households than a mouse.
Unlike a mouse, game controllers do not require desk space, which we found to be highly limited  within low-income households.
Multiple game controllers can facilitate multiplayer participation, but even with just one input device, game controllers are better suited for sharing and turn taking behaviors than a mouse.
Additionally, game controllers are better suited to computer use while standing or sitting on the floor, which may appeal to the cultural practices of many families.
Additionally, packaging lowcost USB game controllers with refurbished PCs could substantially increase their perceived hedonic utility.
TV Connectivity: A major design lesson from the TVC is the benefit of using a television as a display.
Financially, the use of an existing television saves costs, while the lack of a monitor also saves space in small households.
Socially, the use of the family television positions computing within a social setting where users can benefit from collaborative learning.
Furthermore, the use of the television may increase the accessibility of the TVC to young children and women.
This is important because women and young children are often excluded from the use of laptop or desktop computers in the home and also have fewer opportunities to access computers outside of the home.
The main drawbacks from using a TV as a display is the substantial competition with TV programming and the reduction in graphic resolution that comes with using a 640x480 television display.
But because VGA-to-RCA connectors can cost less than $2 per unit, they may be useful for reducing costs while increasing the entertainment value of second-hand computers.
Our recommendations may result in economicallydisadvantaged families having increased access to video games.
A range of evidence suggests that playing video games may, in fact, be beneficial to a person's economic well-being.
Qualitative and quantitative studies of information and communication technology adoption in central Asia by Kolko et al.
Once individuals begin using computers to play games, their proximity and attraction to computers aided the development of more advanced computer skills.
Similarly, Hayes  argues that early experience playing games leads US students to spend more time on computers.
She argues that the lack of video games designed for girls reduces their early computer exposure, contributing to the substantial gender disparities in the computer technology workforce.
Together, this research suggests that playing video games may actually support social well-being among disadvantaged populations by enabling participation in digital environments, where games can serve as an important stepping stone for learning economically valuable computer skills .
Both lowcost second-hand tablets and low-cost off-brand Chinaorigin tablets have proliferated in the marketplace.
Will our findings and design recommendations remain relevant for this radically different computer format?
While we anticipate that the recommendation for preloaded games and educational software will remain especially relevant, we look forward to further research exploring the social life of tablets in small urban households.
Our qualitative research documented the social, material and design factors that contribute to the continued use of the TVC, a 30-year-old home computer technology that is still widely used in lower-middle class households in India.
With over 80 million households earning between US$80200 and very low computer ownership, this demographic may be the most likely to adopt outdated, low-cost computers.
Our research therefore contributes key design lessons from the TVC that are likely to support extended lifespans within other outdated computer technologies.
We identified hedonic utility  as the key factor supporting the continued adoption of the TVC.
We introduced a new model of social participation in gameplay that shows how hedonic utility can be multiplied when games are played socially.
By understanding how the TVC supports hedonic utility and social gameplay, we propose a set of low-cost design recommendations targeting the computer refurbishment industry.
These recommendations focus on expanding the perceived hedonic utility of outdated computers through a low-cost  refurbishment process that involves preloading abandonware games and including hardware support for colocated social gameplay.
While much work remains to evaluate whether these design recommendations can be implemented at scale within the distributed and largely informal PC refurbishment industry, this paper provides a practical and theoretical foundation to support future research in extending the lifespan of computer technology.
Bangalore Field Researchers: Aliya Pabani, Alisha Panjwani, Tanvi Srivastava.
Ahmedabad Field Researchers: Sonali Dubey, Pranav Patadiya, Parth Rao.
Programming team : Ankit Patel, Vivek Fitkariwala, Darsh Shah, Dheeraj Medikonda, Yash Soni, Vishvesh Revoori, Anshul Pahwa.
Much thanks to the Playpower.org community, especially Daniel Rehn, Jeremy Douglass, Don Miller, Sarah Grant, RetroUSB.com and NullSleep.
Thanks to the participants at the 2009 Winter School at IIIT Hyderabad.
Much thanks to Sara Kiesler, Robert Kraut and Chris Hoadley for commenting on initial drafts.
This project was funded by a MacArthur Foundation Digital Media and Learning Award and the Humanities, Arts, Science, and Technology Advanced Collaboratory .
Ali, M. and Bailur, S. The Challenge of "Sustainability" in ICT4D: Is Bricolage the Answer?
Antonopoulos, C. and Sakellaris, P. Estimating computer depreciation using online auction data.
Banerjee, A.V., Cole, S., Duflo, E. and Linden, L. Remedying education: Evidence from two randomized experiments in India, Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol.
Blevis, E. Sustainable interaction design: invention & disposal, renewal & reuse.
On the absence of obsolescence.
In the Annals of the History of Computing, IEEE, vol.
DiSalvo, C., Sengers, P., and Brynjarsdottir, H. Mapping the Landscape of Sustainable HCI.
In E. Berndt and C. Hulten, eds., Hard-to-Measure Goods and Services: Essays in Honor of Zvi Griliches.
Hayes, E. Girls, Gaming, and Trajectories of IT Expertise.
Huh, J., Nathan, L.P., Blevis, E., Tomlinson, B., Sengers, P., and Busse, D. Examining appropriation, reuse, and maintenance for sustainability.
Jackson, S., Pompe, A., and Krieshok, G. Repair worlds: maintenance, repair, and ICT for development in rural Namibia.
Kahhat, R. and Williams, E. Product or waste?
Importation and end-of-life processing of computers in Peru.
Improving literacy in rural India: Cellphone games in an after-school program.
Kim, S. and Paulos, E. Practices in the creative reuse of e-waste.
An Exploratory Study of Unsupervised Mobile Learning in Rural India.
Lomas, D., Douglass, J., and Rehn, D. Playpower: Radically Affordable Computer-Aided Learning with $12 TV-Computers.
Lomas, D., Ching, D. Patel, K., Hoadley, C., & Kam, M. When a console game becomes CSCL: Play, participatory learning and 8-bit home computing in India.
The International Conference on ComputerSupported Collaborative Learning, Hong Kong.
Mitchell, E. The Dynamics of Family Interaction Around Home Video Games.
Sussman, ed., Personal Computers and the Family.
Pal, J., Lakshmanan, M., and Toyama, K. "My child will be respected": Parental perspectives on computers in rural India.
2007 International Conference on Information and Communication Technologies and Development, , 1-9.
The case of the occasionally cheap computer: low-cost devices and classrooms in the developing world.
ITID: Information Technology and International Development, MIT Press, April .
Parikh, T. and Ghosh, K. Understanding and Designing for Intermediated Information Tasks in India, IEEE Pervasive Computing Magazine, Vol.
Rangaswamy, N. and Sambasivan, N. Cutting Chai, Jugaad, and Here Pheri: towards UbiComp for a global community.
Rogers, E. M. Diffusion of Innovations.
Sahni, S., Boustani, A., Gutowski, T., and Graves, S. Reusing personal computer devices-good or bad for the environment?
A market at the bottom of the pyramid?
National Council of Applied Economic Research .
Made to Break: Technology and Obsolescence in America.
Smyth, T.N., Kumar, S., Medhi, I., and Toyama, K. Where there's a will there's a way: mobile media sharing in urban India.
Stevens, R., Satwicz, T., & McCarthy, L. In-Game, InRoom, In-World: Reconnecting Video Game Play to the Rest of Kids' Lives.
The MacArthur Foundation Series on Digital Media and Learning.
Streicher-Porte, M., Widmer, R., Jain, A., Bader, H.P., Scheidegger, R., and Kytzia, S. Key drivers of the ewaste recycling system; Assessing and modeling ewaste processing in the informal sector in Delhi.
Van der Heijden, H. User acceptance of hedonic information systems.
Voida, A. and Greenberg, S. Wii All Play: The Console Game as a Computational Meeting Place.
Williams, E., Kahhat, R., Allenby, B., Kavazanjian, E., Kim, J., and Xu, M. Environmental, Social, and Economic Implications of Global Reuse and Recycling of Personal Computers.
Forecasting global generation of obsolete personal computers.
