ABSTRACT An experiment was conducted to determine whether people use physical world wayfinding strategies in large virtual worlds.
ABSTRACT People have severe problems wayfinding in large virtual worlds.
However, current implementations of virtual worlds provide little support for effective wayfinding.
We assert that knowledge about human wayfinding in the physical world can be applied to construct aids for wayfinding in virtual worlds.
INTRODUCTION They may then have difficulty relocating places recently visited.
Virtual world navigators may wander aimlessly when attempting to find a place for the first time.
INTRODUCTION Problems associated with wayfinding have been encountered in every large virtual world.
Our intent is to show that these same principles will produce skilled wayfinding behavior  in virtual worlds.
BACKGROUND BACKGROUND The principles we are investigating are based on spatial knowledge theory and environmental design methodology.
Our intent is not to find new principles which are unique to virtual worlds but rather to determine how much of what is already known about wayfinding in the physical world is independent of the type of space and therefore can be applied to abstract computer-generated environments.
Environmental Design We use this information directly to structure spatial knowledge.
These pieces can then be directly encoded into a hierarchy of spatial knowledge.
Lynch also notes the importance of frequent directional cues to orientation maintenance.
Passini  expands on these ideas applying them to architectural design.
APPROACH APPROACH Previously, we implemented a number of navigation aids and tested their effect on subjects' ability to perform wayfinding tasks in virtual worlds .
In this paper we set out to capture subjects' behavior in an objective form from which we could readily infer the search strategies used in accomplishing wayfinding tasks.
Rather, it presented a number of alternative cues and tools which were shown to improve subjects' performance.
Wayfinding Tasks Primed search: Any searching task in which the navigator knows the location of the target.
Wayfinding Tasks We classify wayfinding tasks into three primary categories: Naive search: Any searching task in which the navigator has no a priori knowledge of the whereabouts of the target in question.
Exploration: Any wayfinding task in which there is no target.
The opposite ordering of tasks is equally common.
Design Principles Provide frequent directional cues.
Design Principles Organizational principles are intended to provide the necessary structure by which an observer can mentally organize the environment into a spatial hierarchy capable of supporting wayfinding tasks.
The basic principles are: Divide the large-scale world into distinct small parts, preserving a sense of quotplace.quot Organize the small parts under a simple organizational principle.
METHOD In addition to visual comparison to the actual environment, we analyzed the sketch maps using a metric incorporating target distances and directions and land mass shapes developed for this particular purpose .
We analyzed the audio and video tape using a verbal protocol analysis  and captured observed behavior in the same notation used in CMN-GOMS .
METHOD The performance of each subject was observed and measured on wayfinding tasks in several virtual world treatments.
We asked subjects to think aloud and recorded each treatment with video and audio tape.
Design Five male and five female subjects participated in the study.
The availability of subjects is limited due to both the location of the laboratory and the total time required to complete all trials .
Design All subjects were tested on all treatments.
All subjects had a technical background and were between the ages of 20 and 45.
Stimuli and Apparatus The outer posts are placed on the white ring.
Black radial lines are placed every 45 degrees and extend beyond the white ring.
The radial grid used in the grid treatment was constructed from a red center post and four different colored posts in each cardinal direction.
The outer posts each have a quotflagquot which points inward toward the red inner post.
Procedure The wayfinding task performed for all treatments required the subject to execute five naive searches followed by one primed search.
During task execution, subjects were asked to quotthink aloudquot  as a method of knowledge elicitation specifically aimed at understanding search strategies.
Subjects were given as much time as needed to complete the task.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION During a single task sequence, subjects may choose more than one method to achieve a goal.
Figure 2: High-level schematic diagram of task execution.
Either method is acceptable but the subject will never execute both in a single task sequence.
Many subjects used several strategies during any one trial as they discovered better alternatives or found their current approach ineffective.
Orientation and Position One subject even created an external reference by grounding one foot in physical space.
The colored rings specify range from the center post.
The lack of suitable orientation cues in the control treatment caused subjects to use relatively weak grounding techniques which proved to be error prone.
Subjects most often used a dead reckoning  technique with the home target as a reference point to determine position.
Spatial Memory This is also shown clearly by the subjects' paths .
The amorphous nature of the control treatment allowed subjects to apply any structure to the environment.
Figure 3: Cognitive representations for spatial memory Based on analysis of the paths and observed behaviors we defined structures  which appear to have been used to represent spatial information.
Primed Searching Most often, subjects unsuccessfully attempted to infer a direct path.
Primed Searching The ability to perform an efficient primed search is dependent on the level of useful spatial knowledge obtained during navigation.
The grid markings were used in one of two ways.
Subjects who were able to connect targets in a chain-like fashion retraced steps back to familiar ground.
SEARCH EFFECTIVENESS Figure 5: A typical control treatment path and its associated map drawing.
This ratio was shown to be significant across treatments .
This is further illustrated in the distance travelled during each treatment which also showed a significant effect .
There were significant effects for directional accuracy across treatments  as well as land form .
CONCLUSIONS The radial grid provided enough information to successfully execute a search but required reinforcing actions to maintain orientation.
A structure must be imposed on the world if an organized exhaustive search is to be attempted.
The lack of directional cues and spatial organization in the control treatment led to ineffective search strategies and frequent disorientation.
General conclusions drawn from this work include: When not given an adequate source of directional cues, disorientation will inhibit both wayfinding performance and spatial knowledge acquisition.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The authors would like to thank Manuel Peacute;rez and Dan McFarlane for their assistance as well as our experimental subjects at NRL for their time and effort.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This research was conducted through support by the Virtual Environment Laboratory of the Tactical Electronic Warfare Division of the Naval Research Laboratory in Washington, D.C.
ENDNOTES A Manhattan distance measures movement constrained to horizontal and vertical directions.
ENDNOTES We define skilled wayfinding behavior to be purposeful, oriented movement during navigation.
For more information, see Wayfinding and Navigation in Virtual Worlds There were two cases of motion sickness.
