No one would dispute that designing a great game takes talent, just as no one would dispute that designing an effective learning tool requires skill.
Serious games are expected to serve both purposes well; they are faced with a double burden.
A number of researchers have suggested design strategies, mechanics, and patterns that support current best practice based on existing serious games, and previous design experience, e.g.
Other researchers have adopted more holistic approaches to serious game design, and have suggested design methodologies and frameworks, e.g.
This work is helpful in guiding us at a theoretical and abstract level.
What the present literature gives us less insight into is the complex process of the evolution of a serious game.
It rarely conveys a sense of the tensions, dynamics, and subtle contextual factors that act on large-scale, ongoing game development projects.
Tales about these experiences are being told, but often they are transmitted only in oral form, as candid coffee break confessions from one colleague to another.
These stories disappear from the final cut of serious games literature, leaving no recorded trace, which in academia is akin to never having existed.
For researchers and practitioners from novice to veteran alike, this can lead to hidden and undiscussed tensions needing to be discovered anew, despite their prevalence across serious games efforts.
In this paper, we illuminate some of these tensions, dynamics, and factors.
We share insights from the design and development process of an EU-funded serious game project being undertaken by an interdisciplinary consortium.
The goal of this project is to develop a game that facilitates children in learning about conflict resolution.
We show how the serious game creation process can be understood in deeper, more nuanced ways that facilitate reflection on practice if it is understood as an interweaving of different, occasionally competing agendas and perspectives.
We critically examine our experiences from five perspectives: project organisation, technology, domain knowledge, user research, and game design.
In doing so, we illustrate the inherently messy nature of serious game design as a practice.
We also present a set of underlying forces at work in projects of this nature that emerge from viewing our process through these perspectives, as these forces play profoundly important roles in shaping the trajectory of game creation.
Our game is still a work in progress, but we find it important to point out these tensions as they emerge.
In reflecting on our process so far, our intention is to bring to light those parts of serious game projects that often remain backgrounded and hidden.
Serious games have received much positive attention; correspondingly, many researchers have taken up the challenge of establishing how to best design them.
However, the current literature often focuses on best practice design strategies and frameworks.
Fine-grained details, contextual descriptions, and organisational factors that are invaluable in helping us to learn from and reflect on project experiences are often overlooked.
In this paper, we present five distinct and sometimes competing perspectives that are critical in understanding factors that influence serious game projects: project organisation, technology, domain knowledge, user research, and game design.
We explain these perspectives by providing insights from the design and development process of an EU-funded serious game about conflict resolution developed by an interdisciplinary consortium of researchers and industry-based developers.
We also point out a set of underlying forces that become evident from viewing the process from different perspectives, to underscore that problems exist in serious game projects and that we should open the conversation about them.
The notion that games could have agendas in addition to entertainment holds appeal for many audiences - educators, parents, and activists, to name but a few.
Efforts to create games of this nature have been taking place for some time, under the umbrella of serious games .
Whereas games have been attacked for being too influential in terms of promoting violence while also being too frivolous, serious games have managed to benefit from the intersection of these qualities, namely, the possibility to educate, inform, train, and persuade in an entertaining and compelling manner.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
The reflective critical stance we adopt in this paper has a provenance within the design literature.
In 1983, Sch on proposed the reflective practitioner perspective , which has since been widely embraced by the design community.
More recently, Sengers et al.
They suggested that reflection could be used for a number of purposes, including as a lens during the design process, as a way of uncovering limitations and challenging dominant assumptions, as a means for supporting users in reflecting on their lives, and for inviting dialogue between designer and user.
Reflection as a tool for understanding design consequences contextualised in the world is also a commonplace practice, as evidenced by the growing number of retrospective accounts in the interaction design  literature, e.g.
Within more industry-oriented writing, we see similar accounts in the way of game postmortems.
Game Developer , a wellknown industry-focused magazine, regularly publishes postmortems contributed by game designers and developers.
Typically these document the development of a game after it has been released, detailing and dissecting positive and negative aspects.
Recently, one designer wrote a meta postmortem based on two years worth of previous postmortems to identify whether there were patterns in game development pitfalls .
He noted that 56% of the problems volunteered by postmortem authors focused on process issues.
Within the industry-based game community, then, process problems are already noted as ubiquitous.
Several of the aforementioned works, particularly those presenting retrospective reports, focus on reflections on practice after the fact.
In contrast, we wish to examine project tensions and forces as they emerge, as this would circumvent the "resolved" qualities many retrospective reports acquire.
We also choose to report on these experiences now because of their fleeting nature.
Once projects finish and time passes, experiences that spur process insights or changes to practice can lose their potency.
But this does not render the experiences or insights any less important.
Unlike the IxD literature, such reflections are still rare within the serious games literature.
Perhaps due to its youth, it currently focuses on successes and best practice as gleaned from previous projects or the literature of other disciplines.
To move the field towards maturation, researchers and practitioners should be able to share their war stories.
This is the stance we adopt in this paper, which we see as a complement to the existing literature.
The project is being undertaken by an interdisciplinary consortium made up of six small teams, five of which hail from academic research backgrounds, and one of which is a serious game development studio.
Each research team belongs to a distinct community, with separate traditions, epistemologies, and work practices.
All six teams have been tasked with leading work packages related to their own areas of expertise, on the understanding that the work packages will eventually dovetail together to produce the final game, as well as encompass design and evaluation tasks.
Due to the dovetailing of the project work packages, limiting focus to one's own work package has not been possible.
All of the partners have needed to at least partly understand each others' contributions, both for reasons related to task balancing, but also to make sense of their own responsibilities.
Three teams have been researching sociology and psychology literature on conflict with a special focus on children, including best practice for conflict management and resolution.
A different grouping of three teams have been conducting user research with children and teachers who represent potential future users.
All of the partners have been involved in developing functional and nonfunctional requirements.
Two teams not involved in user studies have commenced work on early technology demonstrators.
Three teams are developing the underlying technologies that were promised in the final version of the game, namely, procedural content generation , interactive story-telling, and natural user interfaces , and a fourth team has also committed to developing intelligent agents for the game.
Finally, the industry partner has been tasked with developing assets, GUIs, and final versions of the game software.
When reading the literature on serious games, it often seems that diverse project concerns will naturally weave together.
Further, the retrospective nature of many reports presents a view of process where there was never ambiguity or contradiction in terms of needs or design perspectives.
Within our project, and indeed serious game projects in general, we propose that there are at least five active perspectives: project organisation, technology, domain knowledge, user research, and game design.
All of them are operational in shaping the final game.
When viewed individually, however, the perspectives are radically different from one another.
To gain a nuanced understanding of how serious game projects are fueled and shaped, exploration of each perspective is critical.
The game we discuss in this paper is the core focus of a European Commission 7th Framework Programme  funded three year project, which began in September of 2010.
Our ongoing goal is to develop a serious game to support children in learning about conflict resolution, that can be played in the classroom, and that will allow players to explore a variety of conflict handling behaviours.
The game will be playable in both single player and multiplayer modes, it will feature content that will adapt based on player behaviour, and will partially rely on emotion detection and recognition.
In 2009, the European Commission launched a call for applications for its FP7 ICT funding scheme.
These application calls are often quite specific in terms of expected characteristics of funded projects.
The call that our consortium responded to was ICT-2009.4.2: Technology-enhanced learning.
In particular, our application was targeted for Outcome : "Innovative adaptive and intuitive systems for learning featuring affective and emotional approaches, including related new forms of assessing learning outcomes as well as feedback/guidance mechanisms  to the learner and the teacher" .
Thus, from the beginning of the funding process, various project constraints and evaluation criteria had been set.
In response to the call, our consortium was formed, with each member pledging to contribute relevant specialised expertise.
We then assembled an application for a three-year project.
For projects of this type, applicants are required to describe work plans in terms of work packages, which are blocks of research or development led by one project partner that culminate in one or more project deliverables that must be delivered by particular dates.
In writing the application, we thus committed to a specific organisational structure and set of project deliverables prior to any real experience of the project itself.
Some months after submitting our application, we learned that we had been successful.
Our project officially commenced in September of 2010 at a kick-off meeting in Athens, when many of the consortium members met each other for the first time.
The Athens meeting also served as the first time we encountered the large disciplinary gaps that exist in our consortium, which contains experts on PCG in the context of games, NUI and emotional detection, intelligent agents and robotics, interactive story telling, culturally-relevant game design, character-centric IxD, and childhood from an anthropological perspective.
At times, we literally did not understand what other members within our consortium were talking about.
While the participatory design literature emphasises the importance of establishing shared vocabularies between designers and users , we found such a lingua franca was necessary just within the consortium itself, to better understand each others' perspectives, experiences, and needs.
Within the organisation science, software engineering, and serious games literature, project organisation has been noted as having a strong influence on project performance .
With so many types of expertise represented in our consortium, any decision making has involved coordinating diverse philosophies and expectations with regards to the user research, the theory on conflict management and resolution, the game design, and the use of certain technologies, all while satisfying individual partner responsibilities and overall project responsibilities.
In an ethnographic study of a serious games company, Tran and Biddle suggest that factors that contribute most positively to team collaboration are role respect - understanding one's own contribution to the game as well as the efforts, contributions, and working habits of others, iterative development - requiring frequent meetings, constant evaluation, and high levels of team member involvement, and shared vision - having a common understanding about what the game product should be .
The heterogeneous and distributed nature of our team, coupled with the research bent of the project have made all of these factors difficult to control.
In terms of Constantine's organisational paradigms for software projects, we found ourselves adopting an open paradigm of organisation.
To reach our project goals, we sought guidance from several methodologies.
For the software development aspects of the project, we looked to agile methodologies, which have arisen in response to "high risk" projects with changing requirements that must be delivered on tight schedules .
Many industry-based game developers have also used and adapted agile methods to suit their needs, leveraging the concept of iteration to develop playtestable prototypes .
As noted earlier, researchers from the serious games community have proposed patterns and frameworks for the development of serious games .
For user participation aspects, we looked to participatory and user centered design methods .
Noting that none of the traditions exactly fit the needs of our project and different disciplinary practices, we assembled a set of modified methods from software engineering, IxD, and game design.
Serious games as a general practice will always struggle with suggesting "best practice" processes at the project level, because serious games are an umbrella genre of diverse games.
Every serious game is associated with a specific domain and development context, and involves different groupings of stakeholders with particular disciplinary traditions.
All of these factors must be taken into account in devising a process that supports the needs of the project and the perspectives of the stakeholders.
Requirements, disciplinary traditions, and project organisation are a hidden input into serious games.
It is tempting to envisage game development as a smooth procession from an idea to design to implementation.
But numerous other organisation factors, from proposal requirements, to team communication, to methodological decisions have a very real impact on the final product.
To some extent, a large part of the organisation for our project was set in place even before the project began.
One year in, we have worked hard to develop open channels of communication within the consortium and to move towards a joint vision for the project, but much remains to be done.
During the design phase of any interactive system, technology creates constraints.
Often, these constraints arise for historical reasons.
For example, if the new system is intended to replace a legacy system, then characteristics and affordances of the legacy system may partially constrain what can be done with the new technology.
Other times, these constraints are based on surrounding infrastructures, and underlying platform capacities.
Our project also features a third kind of constraint: technologies that must be featured in the solution.
As mentioned earlier, from the beginning of our project, we were aware that we essentially had a contractual obligation to make use of particular technologies in our system, that is, adaptive computing in the form of PCG and AI-based player modelling, intuitive systems in the form of NUI, and interactive storytelling.
As a consequence, whereas project teams tasked with responsibilities related to user research and game design could not fully begin making decisions prior to research phases, the technology-focused teams were able to begin development work as soon as the project commenced.
These teams have already produced functional early prototypes of the various necessary technology solutions.
They have begun collaborating and sharing in-house software with one another to establish how to usefully connect these technologies.
So even before some of the important macro-level game design decisions were reached, underlying architectural choices were quietly taking shape.
Whereas a naive perspective might suggest that technology decisions should be shaped by game design decisions, the game studies literature provides counterexamples showing that this is often not the case.
Montfort and Bogost, for example, pointed out how many of the design tropes we associate with games arose in response to hardware constraints imposed by the Atari VCS, an early mainstream gaming console .
This trend has been continued by serious games, as one of their typical value propositions is the technological progress they deliver .
Our game design concepts have constantly been coupled to considerations for how to maximise the individual and collaborative potential of the requisite underlying technologies.
For example, the team concerned with contributing NUI technology developed a component that infers players' attention levels according to gaze detection on the screen.
Part of the design challenge has become to determine how the game should respond in accordance to differing levels of player attention.
The conflict resolution literature highlights the importance of emotions in conflict management and resolution, but the emotions discussed in the literature typically concern frustration, anger, and sadness, as opposed to level of attention, which falls within the broader domain of affect.
Players' attention levels certainly do impact on the play and learning experience, and could be leveraged very usefully to adapt game contents.
But they address an aspect of affective design that is different from that examined in the domain literature.
While some of the technologies have not readily formed an affinity with the problem domain, others have seemed more immediately applicable.
For example, the conflict resolution literature proposes narrative structures as a metaphor for understanding conflict, which fits well with the narrative focus of interactive storytelling.
Our progress in the interactive storytelling domain has been slower than some of the other technology components, however, partially because it has been contingent on the user research and literature findings.
In step with our ambitions for developing ground-breaking technology, we have been tethered by the limitations of existing computing platforms available to our users.
This presents a paradox for the value proposition of technological progress presented by serious games advocates.
Scholars have noted that one of the biggest challenges for serious games is integration within existing infrastructures, whether these be ideological, pedagogical, or technological .
Nielsen, for example, conducted an empirical study to explore the practical challenges of introducing serious games to the classroom.
Over a seven week period, he encountered numerous technological challenges, including a shortage of computers, a lack of technical support, and vandalism by the students .
We committed to implementing player modeling within the game, which translated to the constraint that only one player would be able to play per computer as it is currently infeasible to conduct  player modeling on computers being used by two or more players.
But early explorations of the technology set-ups in the schools participating in our project revealed that not all of them had computer labs.
In some schools there was only one computer per classroom.
While we have not yet settled on a solution, a potential workaround we are considering is inviting these schools to play the games in the computer labs of the nearest participating partner.
This, of course, will end up impacting on how evaluation can be conducted down the line, and more long term, whether our games can indeed be integrated into the infrastructures of schools.
We find ourselves needing to balance our project commitments and personal desires to innovate against the realities of classroom technology facilities.
The "serious" in serious games is largely explained by the intended relation to the real world inherent in the mechanics, content, objective, or outcome of a game .
As such, a fundamental aspect of a serious game is that it has real world relevance.
To this end, an invaluable resource is existing research within the relevant subject domain.
But the transition from literature to game design is not always obvious.
Moving from literature to game design requires significant creativity.
At a more subtle level, it requires scope reduction.
As no one in our consortium is already a conflict resolution expert, three partners have taken on the task of exploring the sociology and psychology literature on conflict.
This process has helped us to develop a better understanding of how conflict management has been, could be, and should be addressed.
Simultaneously, it has helped us to articulate what we are not doing in our project.
There is no shortage of research on conflict resolution, and part of the task of those involved in literature reviews has been to establish which of the research to draw from.
Our choices regarding literature have undeniably been shaped by an awareness that we will need to proceduralise and computationalise these concepts, transforming them into game components, mechanics, and scenarios.
For example, one popular definition of conflict proposed by Deutsch that we have adopted presents conflict in a way that strongly resonates with game-based challenge: "a conflict of interests occurs when the actions of one person attempting to reach his or her goals prevent, block or interfere with the actions of another person attempting to reach his or her goals" .
Another definition proposed by Thomas that we have also taken into consideration positions conflict as a process, which again seems wellsuited to procedural representation: "the process which begins when one party perceives that another has frustrated, or is about to frustrate, some concern of his".
Beyond definitions alone, in step with learning more about conflict, we have essentially been developing literatureinformed views of conflict that support game-based stories and technology-based representations of conflict.
We now see conflict as follows: it is a dyadic event - while it may involve many participants, it is an interaction between two opposing sides.
It is also an episode of social interaction - even if not always a constructive one - with a recognizable temporal duration.
As such, it has much in common with narrative.
Indeed, Laursen and Hafen explicitly compared the typical plot of conflict to that of a play or novel, and we see potential in translating these concepts to game design: "There is a protagonist and an antagonist , a theme , a complication , rising action , climax or crisis , and denouement " .
Understanding the constituent components of conflict is one thing; educating young people on how to resolve it is another; and communicating how to do so using games as a medium is yet another.
Bodine and Crawford noted that the way conflict resolution is typically approached in schools includes third party settlement of disputes, reactive responses after conflict has reached a critical point, and breaking of school rules as key focal points .
To facilitate young people in dealing with their conflicts more proactively and effectively, Bodine and Crawford developed a six-phase problem-solving process.
In order, these phases include: setting the stage, gathering perspectives, identifying interests, creating options, evaluating options, and generating agreement.
The process-based perspective was appealing to us because it echoed with major rhetorical strengths of computer games, namely, the ability to represent processes and for players to enact those processes themselves .
We also found resonance for this model in Gee's principles for learning in games, namely the Probing Principle and the Multiple Routes Principle .
Bodine and Crawford's process also echos classic HCI models, namely GOMS , and Norman's human action cycle .
The flip side to relying on certain views and perspectives means that others have not been incorporated.
Conflict perspectives which are less well-suited for representation through games and technology have correspondingly received less attention from us.
Games and technology have become a literature filter for this project.
Even though we set out to enrich our game experience, context, and content with relevant research, as a side-effect of the nature of our project, we inevitably introduced a skew into our interpretation of the existing literature.
What are the conflict resolution philosophies of the schools involved in the project?
Do the students receive specialised instruction on conflict resolution?
Which class subject should the game be played in?
How game-literate are these students, and what does this suggest about what kind of game we should design?
To establish how to meet the needs of our end users, and their understandings of, and responses to conflict, three partners have been conducting user research with students and teachers in schools in the UK, Portugal, and Greece.
The project member who has been tasked with much of the user research efforts, who is also an author of this paper, has a background in anthropology.
Children can be challenging user research participants, due to reasons including shyness, attention span, difficulties in articulating abstract concepts, and awkwardness surrounding power issues between interviewer and interviewee.
To further complicate issues, conflict tends to be a sensitive topic for people in general.
To mitigate these concerns, the partners in our project are employing a number of methods.
These include ethnographies conducted at school, interviews with students and teachers, cultural probes, and data collection using the comics tool Pixton .
Here we reflect on the ethnography and interview process.
The anthropologist commenced his user research by conducting ethnographies at two schools in the UK, where he spent two weeks sitting in on classes and observing playground events.
Next, he embarked on the interview phase, during which he interviewed 47 students from the aforementioned schools.
His objectives were to find out about conflict situations they had either been involved in personally or had recently witnessed, what conflict resolution strategies they had adopted, and their emotional responses following these incidents.
In addition, he conducted interviews with two teachers from these schools to gain insight into how teachers approached conflict resolution in their classrooms.
On transcribing and coding the data gathered, a number of recurrent themes were observed.
These included conflicts related to jokes going wrong or being misunderstood, conflicts related to cultural and religious identity and norms, and conflicts related to breaking promises and deception.
In terms of resolution strategies, the most common responses were: physical aggression, verbal aggression, and withdrawal.
With regards to teachers, their strategies for mediating conflicts tended towards trying to keep students apart until their emotional responses had calmed in terms of intensity.
Afterwards, they encouraged conflicting parties to talk to each other to obtain both perspectives.
In interpreting the data, the anthropologist made an effort to relate his findings to the theoretical constructs introduced in the previous section, but noted that drawing strict connections between the theory and the observed data was often difficult.
As the last three decades of HCI have shown, user research greatly improves the relevance and longevity of technology.
A key goal of our project has been to develop games about conflict resolution that can fit into learning contexts and regular classrooms.
Developing such games requires asking a series of questions that the domain literature cannot answer.
Questions we have found ourselves asking in order to progress with design include: what conflicts do children from our target group actually experience in a school setting?
Furthermore, much of the literature conceptualises conflict from adult perspectives, which does not necessarily translate to children.
The early user research data was met with interest from other project partners, but also triggered additional questions often related to specific, technology-related responsibilities.
For example, the partners involved in PCG and NUI were both keen to find out about what emotions students were feeling while conflicts were taking place, because they were interested in using it as game input to drive adaptation.
Not being familiar with the ins and outs of the technology implementation plans, however, emotions experienced during conflicts had not been a core focal point for the anthropologist during the initial user research phase.
In addition, from early on in the project, for practical and ethical reasons, analysing emotions generated during interpersonal conflicts in situ was ruled out.
But to doubly complicate matters, the participants involved in the user research were not always adept at articulating conflict-related concerns.
Even when the anthropologist had asked the participants about their emotions, it was rarely the case that they were able to fully elaborate on them.
Our user researchers have in many ways needed to be the most knowledgeable about everyone else's needs, as they have been the single point of contact with the users.
They have also had to become experts at conducting research with the specific user group, which in this case is children.
This highlights an interesting tension: as technology and technology projects become increasingly complex, we expect more and more from user researchers.
We expect them to be in possession of social science and design research skills, meanwhile, we also expect them to understand  the complicated internal workings of technology.
In our project, as one of our core objectives is to develop ground-breaking technology, this effect has been exacerbated.
Within the field of IxD, there are widely understood paths for moving from user research towards design ideation stages.
The same cannot be said for serious game design, which rests, in large part, on design practices borrowed from mainstream game design.
Current game design processes privilege the perspective of game designers.
Typically, a designer comes up with a concept, which initially relies very little on player opinions and input.
Fullerton and others have advocated for playtesting of game concepts with real players from early on .
Even so, future players rarely shape the game design from the beginning - their involvement generally begins once a playtestable game exists.
Whether or not this is problematic for game design, a lack of early player involvement is problematic for serious game design.
In a related vein, while it is unusual to think of user requirements in relation to mainstream games, such requirements are needed for serious games, sometimes with different requirements needed by different stakeholders.
With the exception of a handful of works e.g.
Further emblematic of the problem, user research processes do not straightforwardly map to game design processes.
Conflict resolution can be taught in a number of ways.
It can range from indirect methods - including day-to-day skills gleaned from normal social interactions - to the explicit - including role play exercises, workshops, classroom-based instruction, and cognitive behavioural therapy exercises.
From the inception of this project, we were contractually obliged to develop a serious game.
So part of our research has been establishing what affordances games as a medium offer for teaching and learning about conflict resolution.
Simultaneously, we have been attempting to progress the game design in a manner that suits the needs and expectations of the diverse members of the project consortium.
Within the serious game design literature, there is widespread acknowledgement of the complex interrelations involved in designing a serious game.
The insights provided often centre on how to design effective, entertaining, and pedagogically meaningful game mechanics.
Several sets of such best practice design guidelines for serious games exist, ranging from mechanics that have been observed in existing serious games , mechanics that have been observed in popular games , and design suggestions that are derived from broader theoretical perspectives, such as behaviourist psychology , and situated learning .
The literature also describes potential design processes to adopt  and frameworks of operation .
While partners were tasked with user research and conflict scenario design efforts, no particular partner was tasked with game design, which is not interchangeable with the aforementioned tasks.
Allocating the design decision making to one partner alone would have created a bottleneck in terms of management, decision making, and effort.
As such, the game design responsibility dynamic that has emerged in the consortium is that both no one and everyone is responsible for the game design.
In moving towards a game design that satisfies all of our criteria, we have simultaneously progressed along two channels: exploration of the literature and of qualities of existing games and serious games that could be beneficial in our project, and design ideation strictly related to conflict resolution.
Whereas the former has progressed smoothly, the latter has proved to be a delicate undertaking.
The design ideation has involved trying to marry technology needs and perspectives, theory demands and constraints, and user requirements and ethnographic insights, for the purpose of producing game design concepts.
Each of these perspectives on their own, in fact, could inspire separate and distinct game designs.
At some points, this process has felt almost deadlocked, as it has been nigh impossible to move forward with any design decisions before getting clearance from other partners.
Our task has been to try to incrementally weave together these distinctive threads into a cohesive artifact and experience, in step with the insights that keep progressively emerging as different partners continue their particular project tasks.
As well as remaining cognisant of interweaving on a design concept level, though, we have also had to deal with the human aspect of collaboration.
This has included establishing how to promote preferred concepts while not stepping on the toes of, or creating friction with other consortium members, negotiating when necessary, and knowing when to choose our battles.
For example, one design concept proposed by the team tasked with PCG technology was inspired both by Thomas's scheme of five conflict management modes , and the need to create PCG content.
The game consisted of a multiplayer resource management game lasting for a number of rounds, in which players oversee different sets of workers, and must barter, compete, and cooperate with each other to survive.
The bartering and socialising mechanics of the game could be mapped to different modes of conflict handling strategies, thus the design supported the tracking of strategic tendencies amongst certain players.
Furthermore, the game scenarios were to be adapted procedurally in response to players' strategies.
The PCG team were optimistic about this concept, but were careful to not commit to it too deeply as they felt that the concept could easily be rejected by the other partners.
Following the PCG team's proposal of the resource management concept to the consortium, the team developing intelligent agents presented a different design concept.
This concept was based around a theater director metaphor that enabled players to act as conflict mediators, and also maximised the potential to explore interesting behaviour for intelligent agents.
Naturally, the different technology-focused partners suggested and gravitated towards design solutions that optimally leveraged their own technologies.
As our project does encompass a number of distinct agendas, the consortium decided that the most sustainable, efficient, and manageable path of progress would be to come up with separate minigame designs, and to present the collection of these minigames as the complete Siren game.
The divide-and-conquer approach to game design seemed like one that would ease project complications by giving all partners a degree of autonomy.
But this approach of presenting a collection of minigames did not feel sufficiently cohesive to an author of this paper.
She proposed an overall game frame story to house the minigames.
In the frame story, the player is dreaming, and encounters a number of recurring dreams that each correspond to minigames developed by the different partners.
The recurring dreams are eating over the space of the player's dreamscape, so the player's objective is to resolve the conflicts to dissipate the dreams.
The dream metaphor as an organising system dynamic seemed to have a number of advantages.
It was a meta-level solution for narrative inconsistency caused by multiple minigames.
It facilitated independent team work on separate minigames highlighting different technologies.
Furthermore, it provided a plausible context for considera-
On hearing about this concept, however, the other author of this paper was not completely happy.
He raised concerns about whether the dream metaphor was too scary for the age group.
He also queried whether there was a need for a game frame story, and whether the coherence was more for the sake of developing a cohesive game in keeping with our existing expectations of games, or whether it would be genuinely advantageous for students learning about conflict resolution.
His question in fact highlighted one the classic tensions involved in developing serious games - what to prioritise: game experience or serious application?
In addition, he voiced concerns that if our game felt too "game-like" and was too far removed from the reality of the classroom then teachers would not embrace it.
The conservative perspective he presented seemed at odds with the future-oriented research encouraged by the European Commission, but emphasised the importance of serious games needing to fit into their surroundings to stand a chance of success and adoption.
Amongst our consortium, opinions are still split.
Creating watered-down compromises of everyone's visions is not an appealing option, as good design is rarely a matter of finding averages.
As the above discussion highlights, the dynamics of design and development for larger-scale serious game projects are complex.
Work flows are messy, often difficult to explain, and collaboration requires a lot of time and translation effort.
What has gradually become evident is that there are many different, sometimes hidden forces involved in large projects.
More conventional software engineering methodologies, which favour positivist and modernist perspectives, often cast stories about technology as grand narratives of progress.
But these have the effect of backgrounding more minor narratives and underlying forces.
Here we examine some of the forces that have been acting on our project.
Identifying them facilitates us in turning a critical eye towards our work, it helps us to develop a better awareness of interactions involved in projects, and informs us in terms of where to usefully invest effort.
We do not present general solutions for how to address these forces, but do briefly describe how we have been responding to their effects on our specific project.
Before our project had even begun, certain factors had already been set in stone, especially with regards to technology solutions.
In terms of our grant agreement, successful development and integration of the technologies discussed above plays as important a role in the evaluation as does successful addressing of the problem domain.
Some of the technologies naturally map to the problem domain, while others do not.
As the maxim goes, there is freedom within constraints.
In our case, it has sometimes seemed that technology has added constraints to the solution of a different problem: we have found ourselves trying to build bridges between these problems, transforming one into the other.
Or from another perspective, technology has brought rigidity to the solution.
We understand rigidity as somewhat different in nature from a constraint - whereas constraints bound a design solution space, rigidity is within the solution space.
That is, certain aspects, features, or forms already exist within the solution space, and part of the design challenge is to make the rest of the design solution connect with rigid aspects.
Technology has brought rigidity to our project in more indirect ways as well.
It has heavily informed how we have come to understand conflict resolution research - such as our focus on emotions, our understandings of conflict-as-episodic and conflictas-narrative, and procedural interpretations of conflict events.
The technology lens acting on our readings of the conflict resolution research has already impacted on how conflict resolution will ultimately be represented and experienced by our players.
As technology is central to our project, we cannot avoid this rigidity.
We have, however, begun more openly acknowledging it, which has freed up partners to suggest solutions, interpretations, and philosophies that do not readily support technocentric understandings.
This has broadened our understanding of the problem space, encouraged debate amongst consortium members, and made us more thoughtful about usefully leveraging technology.
As our discussion of the literature review activities and user research highlights, there is no straightforward way to interface between either research-informed understandings of phenomena or user research-informed perspectives of phenomena to game design.
This is an issue faced by design in general and serious games in particular, expressly because of the contradictory qualities of "serious games".
Breaking these contradictory qualities down into some of their constituent parts, two bodies of literature that surround the serious games literature broadly include game design literature and the IxD literature.
Unfortunately, neither literature provides us with clear answers.
The game design literature provides much insight into how to design games, but has little guidance for how to conduct early stage design research with end users , or how to fold these insights back into the design process.
The IxD literature, on the other hand, features well-developed and well-tested methods for incorporating user perspectives, but unsurprisingly sheds little light on how to move from user insights to game mechanics and game concepts.
The serious games design literature itself often focuses closely on insights from the learning sciences, or psychological principles supporting post-game consequences, but rarely provides in depth treatments of how to incorporate players.
To address this under-explored area, one of our objectives has become to document and reflect on our ongoing experiences with user research-informed serious game design.
Our user researchers and game designers have been working together in this regard, and are currently looking into repurposing Scaife et al.
But the more diverse the members of project consortia are, the more a burden is placed on all project members in terms of needing to understand each other's specialised domains.
We touched on this issue above with regards to the anthropologist needing to be knowledgeable about a topic far outside of his background, and the burden placed on user researchers as technology becomes progressively more complex.
In fact, this is a concern faced by most of the partners involved in our project.
For example, some technology-focused partners have found it equally difficult to make sense of user research methods and some of the more intangible design processes.
The learning curve for everyone has been increased by the dovetailing of project responsibilities and the open paradigm of organisation we adopted, with its relatively flat management structure and decision-making processes of negotiation and consensus.
For interdisciplinary projects taken on in the future involving new disciplines or foci, this situation cannot be avoided.
But measures can be taken to acknowledge the diversity and to create bottom-up contexts of crossover interests.
Recently we conducted a workshop featuring some of the consortium partners to address some of the semantic and conceptual impasses that we kept encountering.
The workshop served as a review session of collective project vision and as a forum for in-depth examination of the responsibilities of different partners.
It culminated in the shared authoring of a revised version of a game design document, and resulted in greater feelings of project cohesion.
In software engineering, encapsulation is understood as a way of hiding away details of object data, components, and the inner workings of procedures.
In order to acquire some autonomy, as well as facilitate progress in an overall process that has sometimes felt logically deadlocked, we have often encapsulated our responsibilities and conducted work individually in our separate teams.
While this has the short term appearance of economising on time, the long term consequence has often not followed suit.
When regrouping at meetings featuring members from across the consortium, or during task handover from one partner to another, issues have arisen ranging from a lack of understanding, to lack of agreement and endorsement, through to lack of ability to integrate.
The obvious alternative is deeper collaboration at all points along the process.
As discussed above, this is a surprisingly costly undertaking, both in terms of time, work effort, and at the human level.
In fact, our process has been characterised by alternations between faster, autonomous work sprints followed by slower, collaborative work, on occasion associated with a degree of backtracking.
So, while in the context of software engineering encapsulation supports collaboration, in the case of our design process it has sometimes hindered it.
Within the consortium, we have now opted to pursue tighter collaboration and less encapsulation, as it has generally led to more rewarding experiences.
One way we are doing this by having certain individuals participate in tasks that are interdependent, as these individuals will be able to relay understandings to others.
Another way is by creating more joint tasks, which necessitates greater coordination and collaboration.
Large-scale serious game projects need to satisfy many different constraints.
They involve numerous stakeholders, including researchers from different traditions, practitioners, funding bodies, and users.
They also draw together distinct and sometimes competing perspectives - project organisation, technology, domain knowledge, user research, and game design.
All of these perspectives have an effect on one another.
They cannot be cleanly separated.
The trajectory of tasks conducted from each perspective is intertwined with that of other perspectives.
As tasks motivated from one perspective are advanced, tensions can be created on tasks from others.
In this paper we presented a reflective examination of our process so far of working in an interdisciplinary team to design a serious game to facilitate young people in learning about conflict resolution.
In focusing on five different perspectives, we brought to light some factors that are often overlooked once projects draw to a close, including methodological discrepancies, funding and evaluation criteria, selection processes for literature, burdens placed on user researchers, mismatches between research agendas and contexts of use, and disagreements amongst project members.
We demonstrated how project concerns are complex, interwoven, and inseparable, resulting in what occasionally feels like deadlock.
We also described a number of underlying forces that emerged from examinations of the perspectives: the rigidity of technology, the lack of a well-trodden path between IxD and game design, communication gaps between project members caused by complexity and expertise, and autonomous project work being at odds with collaborative project work.
Throughout, we have attempted to avoid presenting a grand narrative perspective of our progress.
A grand narrative would have underplayed the idiosyncratic details of the smaller constituent stories that characterise the nature of our project.
If we do not acknowledge the existence of these little stories, we lose the ability to be reflective about and accountable for decisions made and courses of action sought, because the grand narrative of large projects gradually over-write and come to stand in for what actually happened.
Because of rosy retrospection and the research-oriented drive to provide value, it is tempting to paint increasingly more positive pictures of research endeavours.
While positive post-hoc overall narratives do provide us with optimism, they are less helpful from a methodological perspective for people currently mired in project processes.
We provide these real-time observations from the front lines of a large-scale serious game project.
Bodine, R., and Crawford, D. The Handbook of Conflict Resolution Education: A Guide to Building Quality Programs in Schools.
Persuasive Games: The Expressive Power of Videogames.
Bornemann, K. The elusive 'quick iteration' - tips for indie devs.
Card, S. K., Newell, A., and Moran, T. P. The Psychology of Human-Computer Interaction.
Cockburn, A. Agile Software Development.
Constantine, L. L. Work organization: paradigms for project management and organization.
Deutsch, M. The resolution of conflict: Constructive and destructive processes.
Yale University Press, New Haven, Connecticut, 1973.
Egenfeldt-Nielsen, S. Third generation educational use of computer games.
Practical barriers in using educational computer games, 20-26.
FP7 Cooperation Work Programme: Information and Communication Technologies.
Published on European Commission CORDIS FP7 ICT website, July 2009.
Flanagan, M., and Nissenbaum, H. A game design methodology to incorporate social activist themes.
Fullerton, T. Game Design Workshop, Second Edition: A Playcentric Approach to Creating Innovative Games , 2 ed.
Gaver, W., Bowers, J., Kerridge, T., Boucher, A., and Jarvis, N. Anatomy of a failure: how we knew when our design went wrong, and what we learned from it.
Gee, J. P. What Video Games Have to Teach Us About Learning and Literacy.
Digital games in education: The design of games-based learning environments.
Hoegl, M., Weinkauf, K., and Gemuenden, H. G. Interteam coordination, project commitment, and teamwork in multiteam r&d projects: A longitudinal study.
Isbister, K., Flanagan, M., and Hash, C. Designing games for learning: insights from conversations with designers.
Future directions in the study of close relationships: Conflict is bad .
Linehan, C., Kirman, B., Lawson, S., and Chan, G. Practical, appropriate, empirically-validated guidelines for designing educational games.
Losh, E. Making things public: democracy and government-funded videogames and virtual reality simulations.
Malone, T. W. What makes things fun to learn?
In Proceedings of the 3rd ACM SIGSMALL symposium and the first SIGPC symposium on Small systems, SIGSMALL '80, ACM , 162-169.
Racing the Beam: The Atari Video Computer System.
The Psychology of Everyday Things.
User centered game design: evaluating massive multiplayer online role playing games for second language acquisition.
Scaife, M., Rogers, Y., Aldrich, F., and Davies, M. Designing for or designing with?
The Art of Game Design: A book of lenses, 1 ed.
The Reflective Practitioner: How Professionals Think in Action.
Sengers, P., Boehner, K., David, S., and `jofish Kaye, J. Reflective design.
Shirinian, A. Dissecting the postmortem: Lessons learned from two years of game development self-reportage.
Sotamaa, O. Perceptions of player in game design literature.
In Situated Play: Proceedings of the 2007 Digital Games Research Association Conference, B. Akira, Ed., The University of Tokyo , 456-465.
The Role of Players in Game Design: A Methodological Perspective.
Squire, K. From content to context: videogames as designed experience.
Thomas, K. W. Conflict and conflict management: Reflections and update.
Tran, M. Q., and Biddle, R. Collaboration in serious game development: a case study.
The design, play, and experience framework.
In Handbook of Research on Effective Electronic Gaming in Education.
Zyda, M. From visual simulation to virtual reality to games.
