The dynamics and variability of grips call for more systematic investigation of the functional area of the thumb.
This paper models the functional area of the thumb in interac tion with a hand-held device.
Interaction with any interface element falling within this area is possible without a change in grip.
The model is a quadratic equation that yields a parabola for the extrema of thumb motion.
We derive this form through an observation that, although the free movement of the thumb is three-dimensional, the motion trajectory on a surface is two-dimensional.
The thumb motion on a surface can be pre dicted from index-finger position, because the index finger and the thumb are linked.
The model assumes that the in dex finger is maximally extended on the back of the device.
Therefore, the estimate yielded is conservative: If the index finger is not extended, the real area lies somewhere within the predicted one.
The approach is generalizable: The model covers all grips in which the rest of the fingers are on the back of the device and the thumb operates on the screen surface.
The model also accommodates grips with several orientations, users with various hand sizes, and devices of varying screen dimensions .
We discuss three applications: 1.
Given statistics on the most probable grips, hand sizes, and screen dimensions, or even intuition as to these, the model can inform the designer of where best to place interface elements.
We present a predictive model for the functional area of the thumb on a touchscreen surface: the area of the interface reachable by the thumb of the hand that is holding the device.
We derive a quadratic formula by analyzing the kinematics of the gripping hand.
Model fit is high for the thumb-motion tra jectories of 20 participants.
Designers can use this model to ensure that a user interface is suitable for interaction with the thumb.
The model can also be used in versely - that is, to infer the grips assumed by a given user interface layout.
This paper addresses a challenge unique to interaction with hand-held touchscreens: not all of the surface can be reached with the thumb of the hand that holds the device.
We call this area the functional area of the thumb.
The larger the dis play and the smaller the user's hand, the smaller this area is in proportion to the total display area.
If an interaction ele ment is beyond the thumb's immediate reach, the user must change grip in order to reach it.
The cost of changing the grip is particularly high if the other hand has to be recruited for the task.
Frequent grip changes can be detrimental to mobile interaction, wherein users must also devote attention to their surroundings.
This is not a new problem.
Designers have long been aware of it and developed estimates of the functional area .
However, such heuristics are only rough approxima tions of a complex phenomenon.
Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted.
To copy otherwise, or re publish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Given the positions of interface elements, the model can predict the grips that can cover them conveniently.
This can be used in gauging whether a design is likely to be suitable for thumb-based interaction.
The model can be used to refine adaptive interfaces that use on-device grip-sensing .
That is, users change their grip to reach the target.
They further suggested that interface elements should be pre sented near the thumb`s resting position instead of close to the limits of the functional area.
The model presented here contributes to this line of work with its suggestion as to the area a thumb can reach without a grip change.
Our model is not aimed at predicting the performance gradient within the area.
However, the conclusion of Trudeau et al.
Finally, recent work has looked at adapting interfaces by means of on-device sensors that can predict the user's grip.
Input fingers can also be distinguished via tracking of the touches on the screen .
Taylor and Bowe  use a capac itive sensor grid and accelerometer to characterize five grips on a hand-held object.
It can sense the position with 1 cm accuracy and adapts the keyboard type and position on a tablet touchscreen.
To our knowledge, these techniques do not predict the functional area of the thumb and are limited to locally specified grip classes or to a single di mension defining a grip.
However, they do demonstrate the advantages of grip-based layout adaptation.
Our aim is to cover all grips wherein the other fingers hold the device from the back while the thumb acts upon the screen.
Existing kinesiological or biomechanical models of object manipulation are not directly applicable to our case, because separate modeling is typically used for each of the two key elements: prehensile movements, for grasping , and nonprehensile movements, for aiming or gesturing .
The concepts of functional space and workspace have been used in kinesiology and biomechanics to refer to the pos sible postures of the thumb but not with the kinds of con straints typical of the case of touchscreens.
The results cannot be directly applied to touch screen interaction, because screen surface constrains thumb motion.
Their results imply a parabolic form of motion of the thumb when opposed to the palm.
Firstly, the grip affects the performance of thumb input on the front-facing surface.
The grips were distinguished by the orientation and by where the edge and corner of the tablet device contacted the hand.
Odell and Chandrasekaran  measured the thumb's reach on a tablet.
They controlled one dimension of the grip in relation to the device: the position of the hand along the tablet's edge.
Users performed a reaching task with two grip positions, palm on the side or on the corner of the device.
The results of these studies cannot be directly applied to our case, because the grips studied address only a subset of the possible cases.
Secondly, the positions of interface elements have been found to affect grip and performance.
Both studies suggest that perfor mance of thumb input improves closer to the center of the screen.
The model is aimed at predicting the thumb's functional area for any grip wherein the other fingers are at the back of the device.
In other words, if one "pushes" the index finger  further from the edge, the thumb's tip moves toward that edge.
Therefore, if we know the position of the tip of the index finger on the back of the device, we can pre dict the thumb's functional area on the screen side.
We work from the fact that the tip of the index finger is linked in a predictable manner to the base of the thumb and the tip of the thumb.
The joints and joint articulations of this chain are introduced in Figure 2.
Starting at the index finger, the chain consists of the following joints and ranges of motions : 1.
The index finger's distal interphalangeal , proximal interphalangeal , and metacarpophalangeal  joints.
The DIP and PIP joints allow extension and flexion of 65 and 110 , respectively.
The MCP joint allows 85 flexion and active hyperextension of approx.
In addition, the MCP joint can abduct up to 30 from the midline of the hand.
However, abduction becomes difficult or impossible when the MCP joint is flexed.
The index finger's MCP and the thumb's carpometacarpal  joints are connected by a metacarpal bone in the palm.
The thumb's flexion/extension in rotatory planes are en abled by the CMC joint.
The model's coordinate system: the y-axis is defined by the index finger, and the red circle points to the origin defined by the yaxis crossing the device's edge.
The model input is d, the distance of the index finger's tip from the origin.
The output is the quadratic model fy  and its coefficients.
What we still need to know is the thumb's workspace.
Although the thumb's unconstrained 3D motion covers an ir regular volume , the maximum of its reach on a surface appears parabolic.
This knowledge has been used in consider ation of the opposition of the thumb against the other fingers .
Figure 3 illustrates the rough form of the thumb tip's motion from the ulnar  to radial  side when the thumb opposes the other fingers.
In summary, the assumption that a surface limits the motion allows us to model the motion in two dimensions.
We later confirm the parabolic shape with empirical data.
Because of the link described above, when the hand is gripping the mobile device, the position of the extended index-finger tip on the back determines the extrema of the thumb-tip position on the screen.
In this section, we introduce the input parameters and then present the model and its coefficients.
Throughout, we assume a coordinate system that is hand-centric; that is, the index finger line is the y-axis in the model .
The model assumes an extended, ad ducted  index finger.
The origin  is at the intersection of the y-axis and the edge of the device .
The x-axis is orthogonal to the y-axis at .
Index-Finger Distance d In the model, index-finger distance, denoted as d, is the dis tance between the index finger's tip on the back surface and the origin .
The effects of the coefficients ay , h, and k are illustrated in Figure 6 and describe the following features of the parabola: * ay : Curvature, or the speed of decrease from the vertex .
Our model opens downward , so a  0.
A larger a  indicates slower decrease, and a smaller a indicates faster decrease .
The coefficient ay expresses curvature, and coefficients h and k refer to the position of the vertex in x and y coordi nates, respectively.
Figure 4 illustrates the coefficients of the quadratic model in relation to the axes, the hand, and the de vice.
The coefficients ay , h, and k in Equation 1 are assumed to depend on d. The dependencies are analyzed later with the collected data.
For the time being, these are referred to as unknown functions fay , fh , and fk .
Figure 5 shows that decreasing index-finger distance d on the back  transforms the grip, giving the thumb CMC joint  more space to move.
When the touchscreen is held firmly in the palm and the four other fingers support the device over their full length, this "power grip" restricts CMC joint motion and only the MCP and IP joints of the thumb can move .
In contrast, we can see  that when the device is balanced on the same digits in a precision grip, the CMC joint and the whole thumb from there on can move more freely.
The user-specific dimensions of the index finger and the thumb necessarily affect the position and size of the thumb's functional area.
However, it is not known which of the many measurements of the hand's anatomy is the best predictor.
For example, one candidate might be finger span - the distance between an extended index-finger tip and thumb tip against a surface.
We later test eight common hand measurements and apply the best scaling factor in the model.
Thumb-motion data were collected via a touchscreen, en abling us to do the following: 1.
Validate the quadratic form  by analyzing its fitness to the data 2.
Find a normalization parameter for hand size s from cor relations of eight hand measurements and the maximum values in the motion data  3.
In the study, 20 participants were asked to extend the thumb to its extrema on a touchscreen and perform a continuous move ment that marks the limits of functional areas.
We controlled the distance of the index finger d at the back of the device in 11 increments, while the touchscreen tracked the trajectory of the thumb in the front.
The task was performed with the right hand, and the orientation of the index finger  was kept constant .
Data were collected from 20 subjects, eight of them female and 12 male, with a mean age of 29.4 years.
The data also include samples from the 5th and 95th percentiles of the anthropometric data reported in previous work .
Also, the mean of male and female samples fit within the standard devi ation range of the anthropometric mean from the earlier work.
Therefore, the sample can be considered representative.
The participants received a movie ticket as compensation for their time.
The moderator monitored sensor values during the reach action, to ensure that the index finger was held in the correct d position, and the task was repeated if the finger slipped.
The task was to extend the thumb's reach as far as possible with one continuous movement toward the edges of the de vice while keeping the tip of the index finger in the d position .
Participants were asked to hold all of their other fingers together .
For measurement of extreme reach without device mass affecting performance, the participants were allowed to support the de vice with the left hand.
Also, subjects were allowed to hold the device in any position, globally, by tilting or rotating it.
The trajectory of the thumb motion was shown on the screen during the task .
The tasks were performed with the screen held horizontally to record as wide a motion as possible.
However, with larger hands, some tasks were performed vertically if that was needed - i.e., when the reach at d was observed to extend beyond the opposite edge, the screen was shifted to vertical orientation to allow for and track the extended reach.
Participants were allowed four practice rounds for holding the index finger still and seeing the touch trajectory on the screen.
They were asked to start the thumb reach from the left  side and finish on the right  always, only performing a single, continuous movement.
One such move ment was considered a task.
The speed of the movement was not important: participants were told that determining maxi mum reach was the primary goal.
After the practice rounds, hand measurements commenced.
The experiment consisted of as many as 11 tasks, depending on the greatest distance the participant could reach on the screen.
The experiment took approximately 20 minutes.
An iPad Mini was used to track the thumb touches on the screen .
The iPad Mini has a wide enough screen for tracking of the thumb's full motion when the index finger  is placed in the middle of the de vice's back.
This device is also lightweight and has a thin profile that does not obstruct movement.
An Interlink Electronics round force-sensing resistor  of 0.2-inch diameter was placed every 15 mm along the back of the device .
The first block, 0-15 mm, placed the center of the sensor 7.5 mm from the edge.
The FSRs were powered by an Arduino Uno, rev.
Analog re sistance was also measured on the Arduino analog input pins and computer-logged via the Arduino serial port.
The analog force values were scaled to 0-1023.
A > 0 force was required to indicate the index finger as touching the correct position, and 10 k  resistance was employed to ground the values.
The experiment followed a within-subjects design wherein the value of index-finger tip distance d was adjusted to vary from small  to maximum .
The order of approach  was counter-balanced across subjects by rotation.
In this section, we validate the assumption that the shape of the thumb's extreme reach on a surface is described by a quadratic equation .
Secondly, we identify a hand-size measurement for the normalization parameter .
Thirdly, we model the relationship of d to the functions fay , fh , and fk  of Equation 2.
The dataset consists of, in all, 160 motion trajectories.
None reached the 10th or 11th d location.
Data points with the same x-value but a y-value lower than another point were filtered.
This procedure removed accidental touches by other fingers or other parts of the thumb or palm from the data.
We used non-linear regression and a least-squares approach to find the parameters ay , k , and h of Equation 1 for every trajec tory individually.
This tests whether there exists a quadratic function that describes the shape of the trajectory.
We later return to modeling every trajectory with a single model.
The average fitness of these is R2 = 0.958 with a minimum of R2 = 0.822 and maximum of R2 = 0.998, suggesting that the limit of the thumb's functional area is parabolic.
From an anatomical point of view, the quadratic function's coefficients for curvature  and maximum  and fk  depend on the d value as discussed above .
The mean of the vertex's x-coordinate was hmean = -15.996, with SD = 11.612, suggesting that the maximum point of the functional area was located, on aver age, at -16.00 mm from the y-axis.
This observation simplifies the model, because we use the mean values thus obtained as constants for ay and h. The coefficient k was correlated significantly with distance d , and the relationship needs to be modeled in the function fk .
Significant correlation was found for no other hand measure ment than finger span.
The correlation with finger span is not surprising, since it is equivalent to the maximum reach from the tip of the index finger to the tip of the thumb in one plane.
The finger span showed a significant correlation  for all but the greatest  dis tance.
The coefficient k is the maximum value of the quadratic function.
Here we model the function fk  and test its fitness.
Be cause the finger span equals the maximum reach between the thumb tip and the index finger's tip on a surface, sub tracting s from d should indicate "ideal" maximum reach k : fk ideal = .
By "ideal," we mean that no device is gripped such as would restrict the motions.
Because the index-finger-thumb chain must travel around the edge of the screen , the real k must be equal to or less than the ideal k .
Ideal k s were calculated for all of the data individually, in accordance with the participant's finger span.
Now the model fk  can be used for predicting the maximum value k of the thumb's functional area for any d and s.
In this section, we present the final model, test its fitness, and estimate its prediction error with cross-validation.
Adding the model of the maximum  from Equation 4 to the quadratic model in Equation 2 gives us the final model for the functional area of the thumb: fy  = ay 2 + fk  = ay 2 + s - d - bk 
In the first case, we consider the task of predicting the func tional area when given assumptions about the users.
This em ulates the case wherein the designer knows the average hand size of the user and uses the model to estimate the functional area of a grip for a particular device.
The protocol for this case is described in Table 1.
Following this protocol, we provide two examples: a female user group with an oblique, one-handed grip on a smartphone and a user group of Oulasvirta et al.
The goodness of fit of the final model was obtained by com paring the predicted curves with the trajectories from the data.
Both the trajectory data and the predicted curves were av eraged over the participants in the nine distance  condi tions.
Averaging the model means simply utilizing the av erage finger span .
The error estimate for the individual-level predictions is given with the cross-validation.
The model predictions  for different dis tances  are illustrated in red in Figure 8.
Leave-one-out cross-validation was used to estimate predic tion error for new data.
Cross-validation is a standard pro cedure in machine learning to avoid overfitting and to assess generalizability to new instances.
The model  was trained on n-1  observa tions from the original sample of 160 trajectories and tested against the remaining, unseen sample.
This was repeated such that each observation in the sample was used exactly once in the test data.
We consider a particular smartphone, the Nokia Lumia 900, which is 68.5 mm wide and 127.8 mm high.
In line with Ta ble 1, the first step is to determine the finger span.
Then we determine the grip.
The grip in this example has the fingers extended on the opposing edge from the thumb, as if the user were reading the screen and firmly holding the de vice with the palm and fingers bent around the sides .
However, because we will need the parame ters for the extended fingers, we estimate d with the extended non-grasping index finger posture .
Step 3 then establishes the position of the hand.
This point is 50 mm from the bottom corner, so the x-axis is limited by the edges of the device to  .
In Step 4, the model is oriented according to the angle  between the index finger line and the edge of the device.
The distance of the index finger's tip from the opposing edge is estimated from a grip wherein the index fin ger would be straight and extended  and along the y-axis .
Finally, the model parameters are inserted in Equation 5, the model axis oriented according to , and the results limited on the basis of the device dimensions .
Moreover, we estimate that the origin is 30 mm from the bottom corner and set d to 80 mm.
The model input and output are illustrated in Figure 9.
Our model predicts this well: the function  crosses the bottom edge of the device at 57.9 mm.
The model can also be applied to the evaluation of interfaces.
Here we give an example of grip coverage: the permissible grips assumed by positions of interface elements.
Utilizing the model of the thumb's functional area, we parameterize the grip by the index finger's position on the back of the device.
The larger the covered area, the better the layout supports in teraction and allows changing one's grip.
The area could be weighted on the basis of a known frequency distribution for grips, but for the purposes of this example we treat all grips equally.
Grip coverage refers to the combination of the areas that the function of the index-finger distance d covers on the back surface.
The function of d in x is fd  , and we obtain it from Equation 5:
The area is now calculated simply as a combination of the areas under the functions of d evaluated from the four sides, in line with the procedure presented in Table 2.
The figure accompanying Step 6 in Table 1 illustrates the out come for this example in red .
We observe that, for example, the call but ton cannot be reached with this user's finger span without a change in grip.
We obtained the hand-size data from Oulasvirta et al.
The mean hand size in Oulasvirta et al.
Grip 1, which performed best in their grip study, is illustrated in their figures 2 and 3 .
For the next example, we determine the grip coverage for the call button in the Nokia Lumia 900 default start menu.
We follow the protocol in Table 2.
The first step is to choose a fin ger span for the model.
In this model of device, the button chosen for evaluation  is  =  .
In Step 3 , we start from the side  from which the item posi tion is determined and proceed through all four sides, insert ing the limits and item position on the basis of the viewing side.
Finally, the combination of the plotted areas indicates all possible index-finger positions on the back.
Bimanual cases can be analyzed as well, if both hands are modeled separately.
We have shown that, no matter its simple form, the modeling approach can yield a high fit, with trajectories collected from 20 participants.
We could predict the reachable area of a grip reported upon in a previous study .
Cross-validation sug gested an error related to fingertip size .
The prediction ac curacy achieved is sufficient for interfaces with medium-sized and large elements, but more work is needed to cover smaller elements, especially close to the limits of the functional area.
The model assumes that the fingers at the back are extended.
Our casual observation is that this is often the case, and a power grip is needed for a firm hold, especially when the user is walking.
We note also that a possible source of error exists in the adduction/abduction of the fingers at the back.
How ever, when those fingers are kept together and the MCP joint of the index finger flexed, as is often seen in holding of a mo bile device, there is virtually no adduction/abduction.
The model should also be improved to deal with devices with different form factors.
At present, the model can take into account thickness: for a "chunky" device, the d parameter can be increased in line with the thickness of the device.
For example, with an index-finger distance of 30 mm and device thickness of 60 mm, the input to the model can be approx imated to d = 90 mm.
However, the joint angles introduce complexity to this scaling, and user data must be collected to verify the approximation.
While rounded corners of devices are not dealt with, corner grips can be estimated through ro tation of the axes in the manner illustrated here.
Although the results support the potential of this modeling approach, more work is needed, to validate it further.
We plan to collect a larger sample, with a broader distribution of device form factors, to adjust the model's constant coefficient values.
Finally, calculate the combined area.
The functional area of the thumb in the interface region has been important for designers, who have previously taken heuristic approaches .
Some of these heuris tics are special cases of our model, but various of them make implausible assumptions.
The first heuristic on the left in Figure 1 corresponds to a special case in which the screen is smaller or hand size is greater than in our sample.
On the other hand, in the second heuristic, the grip seems sim ilar to that in our example.
However, our data show that the thumb could not have reached the opposite upper corner.
The third and fourth heuristic make contradictory suggestions as to what the thumb can reach.
We hold that the functional area of the thumb is too complex to be captured by such heuristics.
We have proposed a novel mathematical model that predicts the functional area of the thumb on a touchscreen surface for given hand size, device dimensions, and grip.
The model needs only one input parameter to describe the grip, the dis tance of the index finger from the edge , and another for the hand size, , and it returns a parabola that describes the limit of the functional area.
The model can inform the design of input interfaces operated with the thumb.
The model can be used to address practical problems in in terface design.
Its application requires that the designer have some existing knowledge of, for example, statistics, or at least intuition about the probable dimensions of the device, grips, or interface layout.
A modeling tool will be released for practitioners on the project's Web site.
This work was supported by the Helsinki Doctoral Programme in Computer Science - Advanced Com puting and Intelligent Systems, Max Planck Center for Visual Computing and Communication and by the Cluster of Excel lence on Multimodal Computing and Interaction at Saarland University.
