In this paper we introduce CheekTouch, an affective audiotactile communication technique that transmits multi-finger touch gestures applied on a sender's mobile phone to a receiver's cheek in real time during a call.
We made a pair of CheekTouch prototypes each with a multi-touch screen and vibrotactile display to enable bidirectional touch delivery.
We observed four romantic couples in their twenties using our prototype system in a lab setting over five consecutive days, and analyzed how CheekTouch affected their non-verbal and emotional communication.
The results of the user study showed that CheekTouch could effectively support audio-tactile communication in various ways - persuading, conveying status, delivering information, emphasizing emotion/words, calling for attention, and being playful.
A number of past projects have explored touch channels to support emotional communication in distance.
However, most of them required additional equipment, such as pads , woofers , rollers , and arm-band type devices ; users should put their palm on the desk, or push the device with both hands to use.
They make remote emotional communication arguably difficult; users cannot maintain the conventional phone calling posture, which consists of the receiver on the ear and the transmitter on the mouth , that is, a device on the cheek.
In addition, they have rarely been evaluated in real time  and discussed in enough detail to show their practicality in remote emotional communication .
In this paper, we suggest a novel audio-tactile communication technique called CheekTouch, which allows sharing touches over phone calls by transmitting multi-finger touch gestures applied on a sender's touch screen of a mobile phone to a receiver's cheek using vibrotactile stimulation, in real time.
In addition to applying only components that current smart phones normally use while not requiring additional special devices, it makes possible for users to share their emotions in the conventional phone call posture.
To examine its usefulness, we observed four romantic couples using CheekTouch in phone call situations over five consecutive days.
Here we illustrate the potential of CheekTouch with findings of the user study about how it can help non-verbal and emotional communication.
Mobile phones are now an essential medium of our daily communication.
We use mobile phones to share information, ideas, music, photos, feelings and emotions with family members, friends, and colleagues.
Because mobile phones help us feel connected with others, their importance as an emotional communication medium is growing as our life style is being more individualized and isolated.
Emotional communication using traditional phones depends on phonetic information such as amplitude variation, pitch inflection, tempo, duration, filtration, tonality and rhythm.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
To make remote emotional communication natural and effective without changing the conventional style to use phones, we identified the following design considerations.
First, we used an existing mobile phone's vibration motor because they can be easily adapted even if they are used in large numbers compared to other actuators.
We placed nine coin-type vibrotactile actuators  in a 3u3 grid  to represent simple finger touch patterns , which might be applied with one or two fingers of the hand holding the phone during a call.
The distance between each of the nine actuators was set to 7mm because the two-point discrimination threshold on the cheek is 7mm on average.
We inserted  the coin-type actuators  into a high-density sponge  so that each actuator's axis of rotation is perpendicular to the sponge surface's normal vector, in order to stimulate local cheek area more efficiently.
Also, we inserted an acrylic panel  and sponges  between the actuator part  and  and the iPod touch  to prevent undesired vibration from spreading over the entire device.
Figure 1 and  show the actual CheekTouch prototype fully implemented.
During our observation, we covered the protruding actuators with thin tissue  in order for them not to directly contact participants' cheeks.
We conducted an explorative user study to find the usage patterns of CheekTouch in phone call situations and examine its usefulness.
Specifically, what kinds of touch gestures are exchanged in what situations in CheekTouch communication?
And do the touch gestures help non-verbal and emotional communication?
Four couples in romantic relationships  participated.
We expected that real couples would express more feelings and emotions in their communication than people in formal relationships.
Each couple was led to two separate rooms for five consecutive days, and asked to have a phone call using CheekTouch for 20 minutes per day.
The rooms were well set for natural phone conversations.
On Day 1, we taught them the basics of CheekTouch for five to ten minutes, including how to hold the device, how to apply touches, and how to receive tactile feedback.
Because we wanted to find as many potential usage patterns using CheekTouch as possible, we ran a minimal instruction session and did not introduce any predefined gestures.
A short interview was conducted every day after the call.
As our observation was done in a lab setting, we could record the voice communication and videotape the finger gestures; all the touch event signals were logged by our gesture analyzing software.
In the daily interview, we gathered each couple' comments on differences between the usual audioonly call and audio-tactile call using CheekTouch based on the day's experience, how well their specific touch gestures were conveyed to each other, and overall usability issues.
We identified 675 touch gestures from 400 minutes of phone calls made by the four couples .
That is, CheekTouch was used every 35 seconds on average.
Through a careful examination of the audio and voice records, we found numerous unique patterns which could not be seen in regular voice phone calls.
In particular, C1  used a total of 21 times with voice  or without voice .
Sally was depressed because the roommate - her best friend - left the dorm after graduation.
I know you have a lot of good friends in the school.
Sally said that Charlie's patting on her cheek was comforting like his tapping on her shoulder in their face-to-face conversation.
CheekTouch usage log showing all the frequency of CheekTouch uses by male  and female  participants of the four couples  over five consecutive days .
These changed the atmosphere of conversation in a positive way, making the other laugh.
Single tapping, multi tapping, drawing Z's or squares and long press-and-holding were used.
In C1's conversation, Charlie responded with multi tapping  without directly saying "No" when Sally made unreasonable demands.
Sally said that she could detect his reluctance to accept her requests, and then changed topics not to hurt the conversation mood.
Similarly, when the other's talk was boring or hard to listen to, they indirectly expressed their opinions by multi tapping or applying tickling gestures to prevent their conversation from turning sour.
By horizontally stroking, drawing circles or squares, multi tapping, and tickling, they conveyed their presence to the other even when nobody talked on the phone.
When I sensed Sally was doing something, even though the feelings of the tactile gesture were not that precise, it seemed to me we were more closely connected."
Colin  created tactile patterns in the middle of conversations habitually, and Emily  liked to imitate them.
They said they could confirm the other's presence in a positive way.
Also C3 unconsciously killed time for 2~5 minutes when the verbal conversation died down by mimicking each other's tactile gestures.
In particular, C3 described the structure and shape of the room where they were seated by drawing patterns on the touch input screen.
C2 and C4 mentioned that they could actually feel the expression of noodles and clapping in the context of conversation and the following conversation proceeded in a delightful direction.
Furthermore, CheekTouch was used with various onomatopoeia  while tapping, stroking, and alternating finger gestures.
Also there were cases that used CheekTouch in expressing mimetic words; Emily  mentioned that wriggling and simmering have the image of shaking, which was similar to the feeling of the vibration.
Interestingly, single tapping replaced "Yes" sometimes.
Double tapping, tickling, pinching, and patting were used depending on the situation.
If the person on the line was quiet, sometimes they applied tapping gestures to check whether s/he was there.
Some tapped when they started a conversation to notify the other.
C4 used CheekTouch to massage the back of the other's neck using the vibration; they mentioned that the vibration delivered by touching the screen with three or four fingers for a long time was like a real massage with hands.
In addition, C2 used CheekTouch in a role playing game; Rachel played a dentist treating Brian's cavities by placing the device close to the cheek near his teeth.
CheekTouch was not used much when they were angry, or were expressing negative emotions directly.
They mentioned that tactile stimulation on the cheek in a negative situation could make them angrier and more irritated.
We found in C4's conversation, "Keep your hand off" in this kind of situation.
Because I think it would be better not to stimulate her.
I try not to touch Emily until the atmosphere becomes better."
C4 only used CheekTouch for three times on the fourth and fifth days of the experiment, during which they fought.
Interestingly, we observed that they pressed the touch screen hard for a long time to express angry feelings.
Active and delightful people like Sally  often used double tapping gestures when whining and pestering, whereas quiet and shy people like Emily  moved fingers side-to-side weakly when asking for something.
All four couples mentioned that the vibrotactile feedback didn't disturb their conversation.
Some said they could hear weak vibrating sound, however in most cases it was not continuous and did not cause any inconvenience.
Even I could not hear the sound.
However, C1 and C2 mentioned the needs of turning on and off, or controlling vibration intensity.
There should be a function to control the strength of vibration stimulation."
In this study, we developed CheekTouch to enrich emotional mobile communication with touch while preserving the traditional interaction style of phone calls.
We observed that CheekTouch could help phone calls in terms of supporting non-verbal communication and delivering tele-presence.
CheekTouch can be used effectively to give comfort and lead a conversation in a positive way, which might had flowed in a negative way with voice alone.
It allows touches normally seen in faceto-face communication, which emphasize emotion/words, which call for attention, and which describe the shape of objects and body motions, in mobile phone conversations.
Also it helps people going through remote communication feel more closely connected by giving ways of revealing their presence with touches, which fill conversation gaps during a call and express "I'm hearing/thinking/here," and which mimic each other's touch patterns.
Built on current smart phone technologies, CheekTouch has shown a new possibility of enriching emotions with touch over phone calls in the near future.
Some participants wanted to confirm if their gestures had been delivered safely and see the other's actual finger motions that resulted in the incoming tactile stimulus.
I hoped to have established some patterns that she and I both knew.
Sometimes I asked her the meaning of tactile patterns that she had sent."
I wish I could see it from the screen."
Touch gestures used were different depending on the context of the conversation and each individual's character and habits.
Especially, a variety of touch gestures were used when asking, answering, whining, forcing, and calling for attention.
The participant who usually gave short answers mostly did single or double tapping gestures; positive answers like "Yeah, it's okay" were often accompanied with tickling gestures.
Answers like "Um...I don't know exactly" with scratching gestures on the screen were like they usually scratch their head; questions like "Does your head or back hurt?"
