The goal was to create a set of specially adapted fonts.
Additionally, we had to establish the rules of use for these fonts geared to future cockpit interfaces, in order to provide design engineers with relevant information about the relationship between font specificities and context of use.
Cockpit screens, as others Safety-critical interfaces, are essentially based on the display of textual information and, thus, rest on the use of digital fonts.
The large number of available digital fonts, as well as the published guidelines should not lead us to consider that legibility is no longer an issue of concern.
On the contrary, a special effort should be made to prove the safety, usability and performance of this software component.
The creation of a numeric typeface necessarily involves highly specialized knowledge in the field of design and typography.
The critical area of use of these fonts also requires the contribution of particularly rigorous evaluation methodologies of the kind used by experimental sciences.
In aeronautical context, design, development and operational deployment are strictly supervised by system engineering methodologies, evaluation and finally, technical and users' validation required for certification and approval of new operational systems.
This paper presents a study involving the design of typeface suited for cockpit, its development and evaluation.
We present the different phases making up the study: task analysis, description of the specific needs, links with theoretical work, definition of the ensuing requirements and design principles and, lastly, an iterative process of designexperiment cycles geared to help and validate design choices.
Among tests designed at the character, word or whole page levels, only results from three detailed experiments pertaining to character discrimination are reported here as a coherent whole within our design process.
Finally, we conclude with a discussion of the contributions of this kind of integrated study within the design process and the possible implications for HCI.
Designing Safety-critical interfaces entails proving the safety and operational usability of each component.
Largely taken for granted in everyday interface design, the typographical component, through its legibility and aesthetics, weighs heavily on the ubiquitous reading task at the heart of most visualizations and interactions.
In this paper, we present a research project whose goal is the creation of a new typeface to display textual information on future aircraft interfaces.
After an initial task analysis leading to the definition of specific needs, requirements and design principles, the design constantly evolves from an iterative cycle of design and experimentation.
We present three experiments  used mainly to validate initial choices and fine-tune font properties.
Results confirm the importance of rigorously testing the typographical component as a part of text output evaluation in interactive systems.
When designing safety-critical interactive system, one needs to evaluate them against the requirements of Safety, Usability, Reliability and capacity to Evolve   that can be seen as convergent and always desirable properties.
Evolution in the design of safety-critical HMI calls for a change in the way we conceive of the links between user needs, system constraints, requirements and validation.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
On commercial flights, pilot crews ensure five major activities: aircraft piloting , navigation , aircraft systems monitoring, communication with air-traffic controllers and ground support, and lastly, management of the airline mission.
In order to conduct these activities, they interact with specialized interfaces displayed on the cockpit screens.
The increasing complexity of aircraft systems leads today to a more integrative approach with an aggregation of cockpit systems, and a significant increase in data and functions displayed for pilots.
These complex visualizations may cause new risks to the usability of systems.
Observations of pilots in the cockpit have shown that both display environment and data have very special characteristics, thus entailing highly idiosyncratic needs.
Below are listed the most important ones.
Additionally, the visual transition between the aircraft inside and outside can be very abrupt.
These constant adaptations to brightness and focus generate visual discomfort and fatigue.
Character design itself has some flaws that tend to bring about confusion between some letters.
Significant problems were found concerning visual spacing, letter size or contrast.
Lastly, fonts used on different views are sometimes heterogeneous.
The close proximity or overlapping of graphical elements  can significantly interfere with legibility.
Results from this analysis allowed us to define a multidisciplinary process to design, guided by theory and validated progressively through experimental studies.
We first researched relevant models from theoretical work in order to translate the previously defined needs into design requirements.
For anyone whose work implies presenting textual information, whether printed on paper or displayed on screen, there is a large corpus of knowledge and rules meant to facilitate text legibility, ranging from font size, colour and contrast choices, to spacing and text disposition.
While making good use of this literature, the specific operational environment - aircraft safety-critical interfaces - drove us to explore more fundamental aspects of the reading mechanisms and use typographical knowledge and approach.
On the one hand, time pressure, fatigue, extreme lighting contexts and heterogeneous complex data are seriously constraining text display.
On the other hand, there is a much larger than usual expectation from the reader about the kind and whereabouts of the displayed information.
Opening our study to new solutions meant fitting our specific reading context within the available knowledge about basic reading mechanisms.
During reading, the eyes move across the text, mingling short rapid movements and, about four to five times per second, short stops.
This succession of saccades and fixations allows for groups of characters to be successively projected onto the central part of the retina, where they enter the nervous system to be further processed.
This part of the retina, the fovea, is extremely small -1 or 2 degrees of visual angle- and is responsible for the most precise visual perception.
In normal reading conditions, this area perceives at the same time 4 to 5 characters with great precision.
Swift movements across the text, the saccades, tend to jump over 7/8 characters - the range being 1 to 20 characters - and serve to bring the fovea to the next relevant group of characters for a fixation.
Saccade lengths, fixation durations and regressions to text already read vary considerably with reader experience and text difficulty.
The retina is not homogeneous, leading to considerable differences in the perceptual capacity of the central versus peripheral parts of the receptor field.
We perceive precisely only the small part of the visual field which is projected on the fovea.
Starting from this area, the rest of the visual field becomes progressively blurred .
Nevertheless, as far as reading is concerned, character size is not a decisive factor for the reading performance: smaller characters are not more difficult to read than bigger characters.
Indeed, increasing the character size increases by the same token the peripheral area covered by any given number of characters, causing those falling outside of the fovea to become blurred.
In contrast, smaller characters allow the eyes to perceive precisely a larger number of letters.
Within limits of the retina resolution, the two mechanisms, central precision and blurred periphery, compensate each other, so that small and large characters tend to yield equivalent reading performances.
Saccade lengths tend to be rather constant in number of characters whereas they vary greatly in size, depending on the text font.
Seven to 9 seems therefore to be the amount of characters processed during a fixation.
Processing time can be extremely brief.
Although the average fixation duration is about 200ms, a display duration of about 50ms allows for reading to proceed normally .
While the fovea identifies exactly the characters, the peripheral vision uses their global shape in order to anticipate the words yet to be processed .
Obviously, some characters are easier for the peripheral vision to discriminate, for example, "i" and "p", or "l" and "m".
Studies have proposed to cluster letters according to specific parts of their anatomy  .
Most probably, when character shapes are very close , the brain additionally uses linguistic regularities and semantic context to help anticipation.
In fact, Reicher  showed a Word Superiority Effect where letters embedded within words are identified faster than when they are presented in isolation.
More recent work by Pelli et al.
Such results support the idea that reading involves detection and likelihood of features at several levels at the same time, characters, graphemes, syllables and words, each level providing a linguistic context to help recognition.
However, any Word Superiority Effect is of limited use for deciphering some of the specific data displayed in aeronautical context where legibility may rest crucially on the discrimination between individual characters in order to disambiguate non words.
More recently, Majaj et al.
As a result, global -lower frequency- shape of the characters will be well perceived by the peripheral retina, but details will be perceived only by the central retina .
In order to help character discrimination by the peripheral retina, and therefore facilitate word anticipation and presumably reading, one has to pay attention to the low frequency components of the characters.
Enhancing readability Highly readable displays allow for good anticipation and less demand on attention .
When the characters projected on the peripheral retina are too blurred to be read, the brain still uses the perception to detect alternating space and characters, and word length.
In order to enhance further readability, one should pay attention to the relationship between the inner spaces of the character, the spacing between characters and between words.
Visual perception can be described in terms of spatial frequencies or, in other words, as a number of cycles per degree of visual angle.
One can very simply visualize this notion as a grid of very thin black vertical lines on a light background: our perception is best when there are 8 lines  per degree of visual angle.
Above 50-60 cycles per degree of visual angle, most people perceive only a uniform grey.
While being a good approximation of a standard situation, these results are not absolute and depend on display contrast.
Any letter of a given size at a given distance from the eyes can be described in terms of spatial frequencies: the global shape will be defined by lower frequencies whereas fine details will come from higher frequencies.
Enhancing legibility We already stated that the specific organization of the retina entails a decrease in visual precision from the fovea to the periphery.
Another way to describe this phenomenon is to express this decrease in terms of a differing sensitivity to spatial frequencies: the fovea is sensitive to high frequencies whereas the periphery is sensitive to low frequencies.
Spatial frequency is thus a very useful notion to describe and compare character shapes .
Basic character strokes are vertical, horizontal or diagonal, straight or curved.
The field of Typography produced a large corpus of knowledge and rules, commonly used by designers to address typographical needs of interfaces.
Today, management and rendering technologies for digital text are very efficient.
The available type library  for many languages and uses is large, but primarily intended for displaying text written as sentences.
For our own needs, the display of specific textual information in Safety-critical context, we had to go back to the foundations of typography, letter anatomy, composition and harmony.
We conducted a detailed anatomical study of alphanumeric characters.
We described the structural elements of stroke and listed the main characteristics to be safeguarded for each glyph.
A font is a typographical representation of writing, consisting of a set of characters.
In digital font, characters are instantiated by glyphs, images  of typographical sign .
The shape of these typographical signs is built from regular stroke parts corresponding to basic gestures of the character writing.
Five standard parts describe the academic drawing of most Latin letters anatomy: the stem, e.g.
Along with these five parts, there are many other anatomical elements such as spikes  or loop , ascenders and descenders , or serifs .
Typographic contrast is the variation in thickness between the thicker and thinner parts of the character.
Some lineals  typefaces, such as Arial, have a very low contrast, thus inducing simpler, more basic shapes, than Oldstyle type, like the Times New roman used for this text.
Typographic contrast is used to reproduce writing gestures and is thus better suited to visually express the stroke parts making up a character.
Verdana is the regularity of the spacing , producing an excellent readability.
French Air Navigation Services have conducted studies on the specific typographical needs for air traffic control interfaces in safety-critical context.
Similarly to cockpit screens, the data displayed on the controller's radar screen are very specific.
Especially tricky are callsigns , a mixture of letters and numbers where two callsigns may differ by only one character, for example, AF974ZL and AF9747L.
Both bitmap  and vector  digital fonts families have been designed to enhance legibility and ensure discrimination between characters.
These fonts have been evaluated and recommended in a Eurocontrol study  and are currently used for ATC and aircraft systems.
For typography, harmony is based on balance and visual consistency of form and composition.
Character drawing is based on three main visual horizontal alignments: baseline, cap-height and x-height .
Traditionally, stroke and contrast regularities are produced by the writing implement, oriented to form a slanted axis for character drawing.
For Typographers, spacing is one of the most important issues to address.
The visual balance of inner spaces of each character shape  and the regular spacing between letters and words are fundamental.
Due to the constraints of pixels at low resolution, counter spaces are especially difficult to adjust in digital fonts.
Respect for the letter anatomy and visual alignments, good use of typographic contrast and balanced spacing are essential to the legibility and harmony of typefaces .
Building on the needs defined in the activity analysis phase and the theoretical approach, we were able to list the requirements necessary to guide the design and, whenever possible, to highlight and scientifically express important issues.
We then proceeded to design a first prototype of a cockpit suited typeface.
These requirements relate to major aspects of typography traditionally defined by the terms of legibility and readability.
In addition, we had to take into account more technical requirements to comply with current layout constraints of cockpit screens.
Adrian Frutiger  worked for the signage system of Roissy-Charles de Gaulle Airport in France.
He designed the typeface to ensure maximum text legibility, both from afar and from various angles.
Among others, he tested the visual robustness of blurred characters.
The high quality of Roissy typeface is due both to extensive work on the design of letter  and to a carefully balanced and aesthetical typography.
This work led to the creation of the Frutiger typeface which was used for roadway signage in France and Switzerland and many transit systems around the world.
Microsoft's Verdana typeface , was designed by Matthew Carter and hinted by Tom Rickner specifically to address good readability of text on screen and rendering of scalable characters, even for low resolution devices.
In these fonts, incorporating many hand-hinting instructions enhances pixel rasterization.
They attempt to correct undesirable rasterization effects of glyph by equalizing the weights of stems, arms or stroke letter anatomy, thus preventing parts of glyphs from disappearing.
As a consequence, even for low resolution, hinting maintains legibility and aesthetic appearance.
Particularly in Safety-critical systems and for specific data, each glyph, even isolated, must be completely identifiable and easily discriminated from other glyphs.
As already stated, glyphs should ideally be distinguished from one another solely on the basis of low-frequency visual information .
In complex graphic context, it is also necessary to address multi-layout interfaces and text superposition with other graphical objects.
In typography, readability strives to improve reading efficiency through coherence and regularity of text disposition, and letter proportions and contrast.
Translating these requirements into typographic design principles is difficult because these set of requirements are partly conflicting or highly dependent.
Thus, comfort of reading requires regular shapes whereas legibility in aeronautical context requires increasing visual distance between glyphs; or compliance with current text density on cockpit screen coerces character width and can interfere with the legibility or readability.
Of all the requirements listed above, only R1 to R6 have been tested ; R7 has been taken into account in the design but not tested.
We have identified a set of typographical recommendations for design, not strictly limited to, but including: * Typeface will strictly express basic stroke parts of letter anatomy  to provide good character identification .
Figure 1 was produced by superimposing the glyphs of ten digital fonts: Univers, Frutiger, Helvetica Neue, Vera Sans, Verdana, Lucida Grande, Myriad Pro, Calibri, Tiresias PC and Bleriot.
Overlapping of glyphs shows a high overall similarity of forms, with some interesting variations for some signs, for example glyphs "Q" or "3" .
Proximity of the main typographical invariants values  of these fonts allows us to consider them as reference values for our experimental exploration of font properties.
Regardless of their qualities, none of these fonts satisfies all the requirements.
The most difficult requirement is compliance with cockpit layout constraints .
One of our design principles is to discriminate glyphs on the basis of low visual frequencies and thus improve the prediction of the characters in peripheral vision.
For a lowresolution text rendering, rasterization of characters adds blur to the glyphs  and smooth angles of visual forms.
Figure 2 illustrates this visual effect by applying a Gaussian blur on a pair of characters , displayed using 3 different fonts: aeronautical, Verdana and Helvetica Neue.
This technique allows, for example, to increase an angle by adding or removing pixels at opposed outgoing and incoming angles of the form , in a fashion similar to the one used by artists to increase the salience of angles by extending or distorting the edges.
The rendering visually enhances the characteristics of the expected form.
We have used special serif forms, like glyphic  typefaces, to test the visual increase of angles and junctions of stroke parts.
This form is compatible with the design of lineals sans serif fonts and can be achieved by the creation of light serifs, thickening the extremities of shapes like the Optima fonts.
Figure 3  shows two modifed glyphs of the first prototype .
Even after blurring, the glyphs remain visually well discriminated.
Taking into account the previous remarks and requirements, the next step was to instantiate a typeface.
This typographic creation rests on a calligraphy work, calling for use of a drawing tool on paper.
After a paper study with roughs, a reduce set of characters was drawn in large format, then scanned and vectorized.
Bezier paths of letters were finalized and harmonized.
Using these vector shapes, a first TrueType font  was then created with the outline font editor FontForge, including uppercase and lowercase alphabets, numbers, and ASCII punctuation and symbols.
Each session started with the above-mentioned pre-test: seated 100cm away from the screen, the subject was briefly presented with a Landolt C  and had to report its orientation  using the arrows on the keyboard.
The size of this symbol was 4.75mm, the same as the character size used in the experiment.
Twenty contrast values were used for the test: starting with a good contrast, each following symbol was stepwise displayed in a decreasing contrast value.
After the 20 decreasing steps, the process was reversed and, starting with the last, virtually unperceivable, contrast value, it was stepwise increased back to good contrast values.
A sound was emitted when the symbol was displayed and if the subject could not perceive its orientation, s/he was to report it by depressing the space bar.
Results were scanned and an appropriate contrast value was chosen in the response range between "always correct" and "never perceived".
This contrast value was used throughout the subsequent experiment.
The subject had to name as quickly as possible the character which was displayed on the screen center.
For each font , thirty-six characters  were presented.
Figure 5 illustrates the three fonts.
A trial started with the display of a fixation pattern on the screen center during 700ms, followed by the display of the character at the same location during 17ms, then followed by a 200ms-span without display, during which time the subject gave the response.
The next trial started with the display of the fixation pattern.
A block consisted of the successive display of the 36 characters for one given font.
Within each block, the characters were pseudo-randomly presented.
For each experimental condition, there were 2 blocks.
The subject could rest at will at the end of any given block.
The goal of the first experiment was to position our prototype in terms of legibility and character discrimination.
We thus compared a font widely used in aeronautical context, a font well-known for its good readability  and our first font prototype.
In order to enhance the role played by lowfrequency components in character recognition, the stimuli were displayed with a low character/background contrast which was adapted for each subject with the help of a pre-test.
Twelve subjects  named characters  which were briefly presented on a screen  set either 80cm or 100cm away from the subject.
A device bolted to the table maintained the subject/screen distance.
In contrast, Verdana and the prototype font confusion matrices yield tighter distributions, reflecting mostly known confusions between characters.
Figure 7: letter confusion matrix  for the prototype .
Left column shows displayed characters; top row shows subjects' responses.
Each intersection of column and row presents the number of occurrence of the stimulus/response pair.
The correct responses are displayed on the diagonal of the matrix .
All other cases are wrong answers, e.g.
The far right column  presents the number of no-responses for each character.
The goal of this second experiment was to repeat our first experiment within the context of a cockpit, using the displays, orientations and distances from the screens as they are in aircrafts.
We thus compared the same 3 fonts as in experiment 1 , using the same experimental design.
In the following section, the experimental information will be reported in detail only when departing from experiment 1.
Twelve subjects  named characters , which were briefly presented on a screen.
As in the first experiment, the stimuli were displayed with a low character/background contrast, which was adapted for each subject with the help of a pre-test.
In other words, with increasing distance, the aeronautical font became illegible whereas the prototype font and Verdana gave rise to more errors.
To sum up, the prototype font and Verdana produced, by and large, results which were fairly similar and significantly better than the aeronautical font.
Though of a different magnitude, there was also a slight, but significant advantage for the prototype font over Verdana.
The only departure from the settings of experiment 1 was the length of time during which the characters were displayed on the screen.
Due to technical constraints, in order to ensure display of the character on cockpit screens, it had to be displayed over 2 cycles, thus during 34ms .
Independent variables and dependent were the same as in experiment 1.
In order to better understand the role of features for letter recognition, we generated letter confusion matrices .
Such matrices show the relationship between the displayed stimulus and the response given.
It is a somewhat indirect but useful measure of character shape similarity.
Figure 7 shows detail of a matrix.
By and large, for the aeronautical font, the distribution of confusion between characters is quite spread out, many confusions being made only once; no-responses are numerous and correct responses range from 2 to 14.
Results are presented on Figure 8.
The number of "no-response" was to low to allow for an ANOVA, so that when reasonable a chi2 was calculated.
The goal of this experiment was to help the design in setting a correct value for the character weight, taking into account that the characters would be displayed using different polarities .
In order to evaluate the robustness of each tested weight, we used 2 character/background contrast values.
In this experiment, we used only instances of the prototype font.
Twelve subjects  performed a visual search task .
At the end of the session, using the pairwise comparison method, subjects were shown samples of the characters from the experiment and asked for their preferences.
We found the same trends in both experiments where the aeronautical font scores notably worse than both Verdana and the prototype.
The main difference between the two experiments lies in the overall level of performance.
Due most probably to the longer display time , results from the cockpit simulation show a larger amount of correct responses and a smaller amount of wrong or no-responses.
It is interesting to note that, whereas the decrease of no-responses in the cockpit setting is of the same magnitude for all 3 fonts , the increase of correct responses, as well as the decrease of wrong responses set the aeronautical font apart.
Indeed, the increase of correct responses is on average greater for this font .
The increase reaches 67% for the aeronautical font at the larger distance, versus 23% and 26% for the prototype and Verdana respectively.
Concerning the decrease of wrong responses, it is on average the same for all 3 fonts .
However, whereas the decrease is of the same magnitude for the prototype and Verdana irrespective of the distance , it varies from 48% at the smaller distance to 5% at the larger distance for the aeronautical font.
The subject was presented with a 10 x 10 characters table displayed on a screen  placed 80cm away and had to search for a given target character among distractor characters.
Once the search was completed, the subject gave the number of occurrences he thought was correct.
There was no limit to the search time, even though the instructions emphasized speed and accuracy.
A trial started with the display of a round target pattern on the screen center during 500ms, followed by the display of the character to be searched during 1s.
The 10 x 10 table was then presented centered on the screen.
When the subject was finished, s/he depressed the space bar, which caused the table to disappear from the screen, and announced the number of occurrences s/he had found.
For any given trial, the number of occurrences of the target character could pseudo-randomly be 1 to 5.
Taken from our prototype font, there were 36 distractor characters  and 18 target characters, numbers and uppercase letters , chosen for their tendency to become blotched with increasing weight , or their capacity to be confused with other characters .
Thus, any given table was made of 1, 2, 3, 4 or 5 occurrences of a given target character and the completing number of distractor characters .
Each target character could pseudo-randomly appear in any given contrast/weight condition, but was presented once and only once in each polarity.
There were 4 independent variables: 3 polarities , 2 contrast values , 3 weights  and 3 repetitions.
Polarity, contrast value and character weight were blocked but counterbalanced on the subjects.
The 3 repetitions of each experimental condition were blocked.
The design team must agree to work in a very interactive but constrained manner, each domain imposing or adapting its own rules and limits.
In our study, design and typeface artifact constantly evolve from experimentations.
To conceive the experiments, we had to operationalize the requirements of legibility with typographic properties and experimental questions.
For example, testing robustness entailed manipulating the weight properties to ask if more pixels lead to better shape perception, especially in degraded environment .
Thus, needs, requirements and design choices are linked through quantified typeface parameters .
With this method, designing takes time but yields a multi-layered product which can easily be further adapted, should the need arise.
Safety-critical context of use has driven our choice to go through iterations of short cycles of experimentation-based design in order to ensure conformity with previously defined requirements and design principles.
These experiments were designed either to validate broad typographical choices or to fine-tune font properties.
Results are presented on Figure 9.
The ANOVA on the response time showed only 2 significant main effects and no significant interaction effect.
There was an effect of the polarity  = 3.778, p = 0.038 where post-hoc pairwise comparison showed that response time was longer for the black background than for the white background.
The gray background was not significantly different from, either the white, or the black background.
The significant effect of the contrast  = 4.968, p = 0.047 showed that response time was longer when the contrast was lower.
Lack of further significant results is probably due to the fact that the range of the weight values was purposefully chosen very small.
Indeed, larger differences might have yielded significant effects but were of no interest within the context of our study.
One should keep in mind that the goal of this experiment was to help the designer choose the correct value, not to prove the effect of a given factor.
Pairwise comparison At the end of the session, we displayed on the screen pairs of pseudo-words or numbers, on the same background, but using different weights.
For each pair, subjects were asked to tell which seemed more pleasing and comfortable to read .
Results show that heavier and medium weights were preferred on black and grey backgrounds whereas medium and light weights were preferred on white background.
In other words, if choosing only one weight value, the medium one is best to make reading comfortable regardless of the polarity.
Results from experiments 1 and 2, a comparison of font legibility, has shown that our basic prototype font does well with respect to the tested requirements of legibility  and robustness, and yielded better results than an in-use aeronautical font and the Verdana font.
We conducted these experimental manipulations in order to validate our initial design concepts, first in a carefully controlled laboratory environment and, then, in a real but controlled cockpit environment.
To our knowledge, the replication of laboratory experiment in an operational environment, as well as the transposition of laboratory experimental constraints to an "almost" real world cockpit setting is fairly innovative.
It allowed us to quantitatively evaluate legibility and validate our results on the intended destination screen and in cockpit ergonomic context .
Indeed, this type of experiment should be replicated on the final product if one wants to definitely state its legibility as required.
In this study undertaken in the context of safety-critical systems and difficult environments, we integrated design, scientific models and experimental observations in order to elaborate typeface artifacts in a carefully controlled stepwise fashion.
Mackay & Fayard  provided a framework for interfaces design, integrating research, engineering and design.
Even though our font design was largely validated, the confusion matrices pointed to legibility problems for some character shapes.
Confusion matrices reveal not only the localization but also the direction of asymmetric confusions.
For example, in the 5 and S pair confusion, we found that the problem was rather with the drawing of "5" than that of the "S".
Used on results from experiments geared towards design validation, confusion matrices nevertheless helped refine character shape.
Comparing instances of the prototype font designed with different values of one given property, has allowed us to build a range within which the effect of the values is known.
Not only does it help to choose the best values for a given effect, but it also allows predicting with fair confidence the consequences on a given property to have to contend -for some reasons- with "less than best values".
In other words, such fine-tuning of font properties serves to define a space of available choices, and their effects, for the design.
In contrast with traditional end-user evaluations which strive to validate a finished product with respect to a definite set of specificities, our iterative evaluation process leaves room and direction for changes, should the requirements change.
We can also use this range of values to ensure compliance across multiple requirements.
For example, the manipulated range of available width helped design condensed shapes to address the text density of current cockpit interfaces.
The experimentation-based design process was necessitated by the safety-critical context of use.
In mundane context, digital typefaces tend to be taken for granted.
Reading is such an ubiquitous task that it is rarely tested as such.
Generally, text reading is the unquestioned input for a given tested interaction involving a widget, for example.
The ensuing observed performance will be understood as a function of the widget.
As long as text display and rendering conforms to set specifications, interfaces designers will probably not subject the chosen typefaces to the rigors of testing and evaluation they subject other aspects of interface design, let alone tinker with the typefaces.
Reading is a task requiring cognitive resources and typeface legibility is bound to influence cognitive load.
Our results clearly show how minute design differences  can influence character reading performance, even when comparing two typefaces, both aiming above all for legibility, such as Verdana and our prototype.
Acknowledging the importance of typefaces and validating their usability should not be confined to safety-critical contexts.
The ubiquity of text display in numerous interfaces and the multiplicity of contexts lead us to believe that the experimental verification of such typographical components in context of use is fundamental for interfaces design.
