In this paper we describe an experiment, in which we examined older and younger adults when interacting with a simulated PDA .
Independent variables were users' age  and device interface .
Dependent variables were the effectiveness and efficiency of menu navigation.
To understand how user characteristics influence performance, spatial ability, verbal memory, computer expertise and technical self-confidence were determined.
Technology experienced young and older adults  took part.
They had to solve four tasks either with hyperlink interface or without hyperlinks in the interface.
The method to collect, to automatically analyze and to structure the data according to interaction sequences and presumed user intentions is a novel approach supported by the open source software tool Clever .
The tool is briefly described; more details can be found in .
Results revealed that hyperlink interfaces showed overall higher effectiveness.
However, the impact of hyperlinks for efficiency was age-related.
Younger adults strongly benefit from having hyperlinks.
The contrary was the case for older adults, who showed higher menu disorientation when using hyperlinks.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Modern societies are characterized by two major trends, which are assumed to have considerable impact for the development and interface design of technical devices.
The first trend refers to the profound demographic change with an increasingly aging population.
Thus, increasingly more and older adults will be confronted with very different technical devices and will be urged to understand, learn and use these devices.
The second trend is the ongoing diffusion and penetration of technical devices in all parts of daily life.
As opposed to the past, when mostly sophisticated and technology prone professionals were the typical end-users of technical products, now broader user groups have access to information technology .
Its easy and effective use has become an essential requirement in today's working and private life.
Parallel to the increasing diffusion, the technology itself has changed considerably.
This is aggravating the situation especially for older adults, as the understanding of how technology works is to a large extent formed by upbringing and cultural factors.
Twenty years ago, stationary computers entered the offices and changed the type and the process of work.
The Internet and boundless information access characterized the 1990s, introducing the basic networking of computers worldwide.
Today, mobile communication technologies are predominant and show continuously increasing growth rates each year .
While several years ago cell phones were mainly used for calling purposes, smart phones, communicators and electronic organizers are now replacing the classical cell phone, providing a much broader set of functionalities.
Apart from business applications, mobile technologies are expected to specifically support older adults in their daily needs.
Mobile devices are applicable for medical monitoring, as navigation and memory aids or for conventional personal data management.
It is a central claim that mobile devices are designed to be in line with older users' specificity and diversity.
However, the intelligent interface design of mobile devices, which meets the demands and abilities of older users, is an extremely sophisticated task.
Aging itself represents a highly complex process.
Design approaches should therefore take the user-perspective seriously.
This includes that older adults' behavior with current technical devices is carefully studied and also, that user abilities are identified, which affect the interaction with interactive computing devices.
The miniaturization of small screen devices may also contribute to usability shortcomings.
Beyond handling and visibility problems, the restricted screen space allows only little information to be displayed at a time.
By this, memory load is increased.
In addition, orientation in the menu is complicated, because users do not experience how the menu might be "spatially" structured and how the functions are arranged .
In network or hypertext structures, the information is represented by nodes, which are interconnected by links.
On the one hand, networkstructured systems should allow higher navigational control, because the nodes and the information can be directly selected.
On the other hand, in network structures disorientation is even more likely to occur, as the orientation in non-linear hypertext structures and in the multitude of cross-references could be considerably hampered.
Accordingly, as shown in a study , hypertext structures on a computer, which consisted of a large number of crossreferential links, caused a significantly lower navigation performance than hierarchically structured linear menus.
The participants  reported to have completely lost their bearings, and this was confirmed by their navigation style .
Another factor, which is crucial for menu navigation performance in small screen devices, is users' spatial ability 1,8,10,28,30.
The lower self-efficacy is assumed to reduce the probability of active computer interaction and in turn may lead to generally lower computer expertise levels .
As older users represent a main target group of future ambient computing devices, we focused on the interaction of older users with small screen devices.
In order to find out which specific characteristics affect navigation performance when using small screen devices, users were surveyed with respect to their spatial abilities, verbal memory, technical self-confidence and computer expertise.
Moreover, a control group of young adults was examined to mirror the aging impact from another side.
On the one hand, one would expect that hyperlinks are well known from computer and Internet usage.
Experienced users should then easily be able to transfer their knowledge about computer interaction with hypertext structures to mobile small screen devices.
On the other hand, one could also expect that hyperlinks in small screen devices generally increase the difficulty to properly orientate in the menu, especially for older adults whose cognitive abilities  are less pronounced.
To critically test these controversial assumptions, it was necessary to pursue a benchmark testing procedure, by selecting younger and older adults, which have a high level of computer experience.
Furthermore, in order to exclusively examine effects of experimental variables and controlling for confounding factors, we developed a simulation of a PDA device, in which menu depth and complexity, content, and keys were controlled across experimental conditions.
For detailed insight into navigation behavior, the navigation paths the users took while wandering through the menu were recorded online.
For this purpose we utilized a specific analyzing and recording software, which allowed us to extract different navigation measures ex post in a very detailed manner.
These changes may account for older adults' lower performance when using technical devices.
Furthermore, due to a different upbringing, older adults often have a lower technical understanding and are less experienced in computer usage.
Thus, performance of older adults can just as good as that of younger adults when they can rely on elaborated domain-specific knowledge.
In the following, first the PDA simulation and the analyzing and recording software are described.
Then, the experiment is reported, in which older and younger users had to complete different tasks.
A software prototype of the palm-computing platform has been chosen as the usability test case for a complex small screen device .
It has been implemented as a functional Java GUI  prototype based on Palm OS Garnet 5.4 .
The simulator's screen has the original resolution of 320 x 320 pixel, and provides exactly the functionality needed for the experiment.
All basic palm applications with their start screens and menus have been realized.
The web browser is the main application for the usability test for navigating in complex hypertext structures.
Thus, the prototype offers full functionality of the palm web browser application.
Additionally, an offline web site for ordering tickets has been integrated, and several entries in the address book, calendar, notes, SMS inbox, etc.
The web site has been designed to vary the complexity of the hypertext structure inside the palm device.
There are several options to set up the test environment, such as activating or deactivating the content or hyperlinks in the palm applications and the website.
In order to meet ecological validity, tasks were implemented, which represent highly common applications for small screen devices.
Participants had to search for entertainment and cultural events and book tickets.
While solving the tasks, users navigate through hypertext structures within the information space of the test scenario.
All tasks have the same starting point, but take different paths through the hyperlink structure of the menu tree.
The depth and complexity of the path to be followed by a user differ for the different tasks.
In Figure 1, a snapshot of the simulated device  is shown.
The red colored lines represent mouse motions, which can be made visible when replaying the recorded session in a specific mode.
The implementation in Java has two major advantages:  the prototype runs on various platforms, and  it can be embedded into the capture & replay framework Jacareto , which provides the functionality to observe, record, structure, and analyze user interactions automatically.
The palm prototype has been implemented in order to carry out empirical studies.
On the one hand it realizes the functional prototype of a complex system, on the other hand it also implements the software to collect interaction data.
To study the behavior of participants, this way is less intrusive and more objective than personally observing the conduction of the experiment or taking videos.
In general, there are different ways to implement the recording or user-program interaction.
The simplest type of behavior recordings are log files, which represent important events initiated by user actions as textual descriptions in a linear list.
These lists can automatically be analyzed, but often lack the information how a certain event has been triggered by the user.
Thus, it is not possible to analyze how a certain goal has been achieved, if the software offers various ways, e.g.
For our experiment, these were important questions.
Another way of recording interactions is the analysis of video-like recordings of screenshots in equidistant time intervals.
But, again, in many cases these are also not sufficient.
The main drawback is the limited possibility to access single behavior sequences and the impossibility of detailed automatic analyses.
Also, analyzing video sequences is rather time-consuming.
A capture & replay-tool  is a program, which records the user actions on GUI of a given program  and which is able to replay these interactions with the target software.
User actions are mouse and key events, for example.
The actions are stored using a symbolic representation.
In order to replay recorded interactions, the target application is invoked and all captured events are dispatched to the new instance of the application, similar to a macro functionality built into the program.
The events can be replayed in different modes: the real-time mode repeats the actions with the same time intervals as they have been captured.
Other possibilities are fast-forward to user-defined break points, slow motion, single step or multiple steps etc.
Interesting applications of CRTs are the software tutorials, which run self-acting, and active specifications of software requirements as well as GUI-based test cases in software engineering contexts .
CleverPHL is an instantiation of the Jacareto framework , which has already been used to foster active learning processes  and innovate qualitative content analysis  in general.
CleverPHL captures user-application interactions as well as program initiated actions like showing or hiding windows or program states like starting page or printing dialog etc..
The resulting linear data structure represents user and program actions in a chronologically sorted interaction record .
The process of structuring corresponds to analyzing and interpreting user actions.
Therefore, it can be used for qualitative analysis in which behavior of predefined categories can automatically be detected.
In addition, quantitative analyzes can be performed by collecting attribute values of structure elements contained in one or more structured records and by assembling them in a data sheet.
Those data sheets can then be loaded in statistic programs to apply common statistical functions to the determined values like calculating means and variations.
In its raw format, the interaction record has a very fine granularity: There is one element per event.
For example, a single user action of moving the mouse to a target area comprises many mouse motion events of a few pixels stored within the record structure.
Thus, manually reading and interpreting interaction records is rather cumbersome.
CleverPHL has an integrated mechanism to automatically structure the record in order to make it more concise.
This mechanism groups successive elements together to build an element on a higher level.
This element may again be part of an element on a next higher level resulting in a hierarchical tree structure with the original events as its leaves.
For example, the `PalmUserAction Hyperlink' in Figure 3 can consist of several mouse motions in order to position the cursor on top of the hypertext, a mouse click or keyboard events for the input of a URL.
CleverPHL links into the Java AWT  event queue, thus it can record and replay any software with a Java graphical user interface ; this includes Java applications as well as Java applets.
There is no necessity to adjust the target applications to make them work with CleverPHL.
CleverPHL detects the structure of the visual components of the observed application.
Besides this facilitation, the target applications may be extended to make application specific events available to CleverPHL, which cannot be derived from the standard GUI events, like events for semantic user interaction such as pushing a specific button or invoking a certain function within a menu.
Capturing simple user interactions like mouse clicks or key events is often not enough for qualitative analysis of interactions.
Instead, researchers are interested in meaningful interactions with the target application.
In such cases the target application has to inform the capture & replay tool about its state.
One simple method for notifying other tools of internal states is to generate and fire events, which contain the information about state changes.
Those semantic events can be captured the same way as AWT events.
In the palm prototype, semantic events were defined to capture the state of the running task, the action a user is executing, it's pending result, and an event to cover the quantitative data like reaction time, current path length of the user walk through in the palm hypertext structure, etc.
In order to automatically evaluate the level of difficulty for solving a given task while navigating through a hypertext structure, we had to define a model, which covers this problem.
The cognitive complexity theory   defines a theoretical approach to show the cognitive complexity of an interaction between user and device by the means of if-then production rules.
This theory had to be refined in order to get a more detailed statement about the difficulties in using complex hypertext structures.
As a model we represent a walk through the menu structures of the palm as an optimized search in a complete graph.
Each transition in the complete graph has a unique cost function, so each search path has defined costs depending on the visited nodes and used transitions .
The latter was regarded as a measure for utter disorientation, which was selected when the users did not know where they were in the menu and where to go next.
For theses measures semantic events in the PDA prototype were defined.
User characteristics, spatial abilities, verbal memory capacity, self-confidence when using technical devices and the computer expertise, were surveyed.
Applying our model, every user walk through corresponds to a search function in the complete graph of the user menu with defined costs.
The cost function per transition is defined as the number of possible transitions of the outgoing node.
This value corresponds to the number of possible choices for invoking a function on the current screen.
The accumulated value of click-options covers all possible alternatives the user could have made during her/ his navigation through the palm menu structure and thus gives a value for the complexity of the complete task.
A high score of click-options thus represents a large number of steps with decisions between many alternatives and thus is more complex than a walk through with a low value of click-options.
In order to extract quantitative data from a record and its structure for statistical analysis, several interaction records can be summarized and exported as a CSV  formatted file.
When creating a data set, elements can be filtered according to rules implemented as converter classes.
In the following sections, the experiment is described, in which the software tool was applied.
20 participants took part in the study, 10 older users  and 10 younger users .
A benchmark procedure was pursued regarding the selection of the two age groups, which should have considerable computer experience.
For the younger group, students of a Technical University with different academic fields were selected.
They all were highly experienced with computer work.
For the older group, we aimed at the "younger and healthy older adults", which were used to frequent computer work.
All of them were active parts of the work force, mentally fit and not hampered by strong age-related sensory and psychomotor limitations.
Thus, they can be regarded as one of the main future target groups of the "mobile society" using small screen devices.
Ten users  were randomly allocated to the "hyperlink" condition, the other ten to the "non hyperlink" condition.
The participants of the hyperlink condition did not significantly differ from those in the nohyperlink conditions, neither regarding age, nor user characteristics, thus differences in the navigation performance can be referred to experimental variations.
Two independent variables were examined.
The first variable referred to users' age, contrasting the performance of older and younger participants.
The second independent variable was the type of interface condition, comparing a "hyperlink" condition to a "non-hyperlink" condition.
From the multitude of measures, which can be extracted from our software tool, we chose only a small number of dependent measures, which were known to sensitively reflect user behavior in the menu of small screen devices.
For task effectiveness, the number of solved tasks was summed up.
As efficiency measures, the time needed to process the tasks, the number of steps executed and the detour steps were analyzed.
In order to measure spatial ability, participants completed a spatial visualization test from the Kit of Factor-Referenced Cognitive Tests  .
Each item shows successive drawings of two or three folds made in a square sheet of paper.
The final drawing shows a hole punched in the folded paper.
One of five drawings had to be selected to show how the punched sheet would appear when fully opened.
The maximum score to be reached was 20 points.
To assess verbal memory abilities, a verbal memory test as used in earlier experiments  was conducted.
In order to diminish semantic processing of the stimuli and further elaborative processes, participants had to memorize Turkish nouns, which are completely unfamiliar to German native speakers.
15 nouns were presented successively for three seconds.
Immediately after, participants had to recognize each target word among three phonologically and visually similar distractors.
The maximum score was 15 points.
The technical self-confidence  measures the subjective confidence of a person regarding his/her competency when using technology.
The maximum score was 100 points.
In order to determine the computer expertise and computerrelated knowledge, respectively, participants had to answer 18 questions, dealing with theoretical and practical knowledge in the context of the usage of computers and soft ware applications.
Each question had to be answered by selecting one of four possible answers .
The maximum score was 18 points.
Significant correlations between spatial abilities and the technical self-confidence  were revealed.
Thus, users with a high spatial ability also had a high level of computer expertise and reported a higher confidence when using technical devices.
Verbal memory abilities, in contrast, did not show significant interrelations.
Four different tasks had to be solved.
The order of the tasks was varied across participants ruling out confounding effects from presentation order.
In the hyperlink condition, a minimum of 14 steps had to be executed to solve the four tasks and a minimum of 23 steps were needed in the interface without hyperlinks.
Task 1: Search for the theatre in the city map in the website Task 2: Inquire prices for a cinema ticket Task 3: Search for the phone number of the ticket hotline Task 4: Reserve tickets for the cinema for the same evening Results were analyzed by bivariate correlations and uniand multivariate analyses of variance.
The significance level was set at 5%, values within the 10% level were referred to as marginally significant.
First, the outcomes of psychometric testing are reported.
Second, the results in navigation performance are described.
Here, the performance of the four tasks was comprised.
Finally the interplay of user variables and performance is focused upon.
The results of psychometric tests are illustrated in Figure 5.
To make age-related variations in both age groups transparent, distributions of the single scores are pictured rather than means.
When focusing on computer experience , younger users reached, on average, 14 out of 18 points .
Regarding the technical self-confidence , no age differences were present.
Now, the navigation performance is focused on and the question how the two age groups handle the two interface types, is addressed.
A MANOVA was run with age and interface condition as independent variables and the effectiveness and efficiency measures as dependent variables.
Summarizing the key findings so far, this means that the hyperlink interface yielded a higher effectiveness than the interface without hyperlinks.
However, when looking at the interaction of both main variables, the picture changes.
In Figure 7, the interactions are illustrated for the time , the detour steps , the blind clicks  and the clicks on the home button .
Methodologically, a critical consideration refers to the high number of clicks on the home button in the younger group when working with the interface without hyperlinks.
Clicks on the home button had been operationalized as "utter disorientation"- as it seems quite inefficient to return to the top menu level without the need for.
However, the usage of the home button could just as well represent an especially efficient navigation style, assuming that younger adults may use this as strategic short cut.
In order to understand the potentially different navigation style in both age groups, we made further analyses.
If the assumption is true that the use of the home button reflects an efficient rather than inefficient navigation behavior, then there should be a positive relation between the use of the home button and the tasks' success  and a negative relation to the number of detours .
Thus it seems safe to conclude that the measure actually reflects an inefficient or sub-optimal navigation style.
As can be seen from Figure 6, older and younger adults reacted differentially to the two types of interfaces.
Not having the possibility to use hyperlinks hampered younger adults' high performance.
They needed more time, made twice as many detour steps and made more blind clicks than when using the interface without hyperlinks.
Inefficiently, they even returned about four times to the top menu level , beginning from scratch.
The inverse pattern was revealed for older adults.
Their task efficiency was considerably lower when they worked on an interface, which offered hyperlinks.
Older adults inefficient navigation was most pronounced respecting the detours and blind clicks.
The capture and replay tool, which allowed us to individually retrace participants' navigation paths, confirmed this.
In this section it is analyzed whether there were specific user characteristics, which affected navigation performance.
Neither spatial ability nor verbal memory showed a significant effect on navigation performance.
Also, the selfconfidence levels did not affect navigation effectiveness and efficiency.
The fact that cognitive user factors -beyond computer expertise- did not significantly impact performance as found in other studies , might be due to the overall high scores in cognitive factors in both age groups.
However, gender effects on performance were found.
Though, as no interaction of gender with the interface type was found, this effect must be assumed to generally affect navigation performance.
The results show that hyperlinks are basically well understood, which can be taken from the overall higher task success in the hyperlink condition.
However, a cautionary note comes from analyzing interacting effects of age and interface condition.
Even though the older group was highly experienced with computer usage and Internet applications, older adults did not master the hyperlink condition as well as younger adults did.
As found out from older adults remarks after the experiment, the problem they experienced was not that they did not know the meaning of hyperlinks or how they could be activated.
Rather, they reported to feel disoriented in the menu, often not knowing at which point in the menu they were.
The detouring routes and the higher frequency of using the home button  reflected this.
It can be concluded that hyperlinks in small screen devices bear a considerable risk for older adults to get disoriented in the menu of the PDA device.
Regarding the user characteristics that underlie the aging effect, spatial ability, verbal memory capacity and the level of computer related knowledge were significantly lower for older adults compared to the younger adult group.
Interestingly, no age differences were revealed regarding the confidence when using technical devices, corroborating that the older adult group examined here was highly experienced with the usage of technical devices.
Taken from the strong correlation of computer experience with navigation performance and the good performance of the younger group, one could argue that usability problems will become extinct when the current generation of technology-experienced young users becomes older.
However, it should be taken into account that the cycles of technical innovations become faster and faster and lead to a development of novel and still more complex devices, which might even be a challenge for the current technologyprone generation.
Second, the young generation will also grow older and will also be liable to cognitive aging processes.
This underlines the importance of transgenerational designs, where even the "weakest" user is able to handle a technical device successfully.
With respect to the methodology and the simulation prototype we developed in this study, the palm prototype in conjunction with the Jacareto framework yielded valid data to use in usability studies about small screen devices.
Jacareto combines the functions of different tools and methods and provides an easy to use and very fast analysis of the captured user interaction data.
In the past there were many different tools involved to reach the same goal.
For instance, it was a lot of work to watch and evaluate a video of an experiment or to make a log file readable and analyze its data.
In Jacareto a user walk through is understandably represented in the structured data.
This is not only highly insightful for usability research, but can also be highly useful in the training and pedagogic context.
By watching the replay function, pupils can see how they performed and teachers can comment on the performance at the same time.
Furthermore, learnability effects can be fed back the same way.
During the replay function on the original GUI by using the mouse move painting options; it is very easy to reconstruct the user interaction and to identify unclear situations where a user had difficulties to use the device.
Some final remarks deal with potential limitations with respect to methodological aspects and the generalizabiliy of our findings.
A first point refers to the selection of a rather untypical older adult group, which definitively cannot be referred to as representative for the whole group of older users.
The older adults here were relatively young, well educated and showed a comparably high experience with technology.
Even this rather unusual older group showed problems in the navigation tasks with hyperlinks.
It should therefore be kept in mind that we examined a kind of "best case" scenario.
The problems experienced by this older group are likely to be exacerbated for older adults with less technology experience or those, who have some type of  impairment.
Thus, in future studies, more typical older users should be considered.
A second remark refers to methodological limitations.
Our results are based on the menu navigation performance in a simulated PDA device.
Moreover, participants worked with the mouse, an input device they were highly familiar with.
This experimental setting was chosen in order to exactly refer effects to the two factors under study.
However, when using mobile devices in real environments, higher demands are characteristic for the interaction with mobile devices.
In a mobile context users have to manage different and complex demands simultaneously .
Thus, our findings must be considered as an underestimation compared to the demands given in a real mobile context.
A third point, which should be taken into account, is that the task complexity was quite low.
For the experimental tasks that had to be solved, only 4-7 steps were to be carried out to solve them most directly.
Given that the complexity of functions and applications in small screen devices is often much larger, future studies should also consider more complex tasks.
A last point refers to the sample size examined here.
Even though the results were clear, future studies will have to validate the findings with a larger sample size.
Arning, K. & Ziefle, M. Understanding age differences in PDA acceptance and performance.
Computers in Human Behaviour .
Bay, S. & Ziefle, M. Design for all: User characteristics to be considered for the design of devices with hierarchical menu structures, In Human Factors in Organizational Design and Management, H. Luczak and K.J.
Beier, G. Kontrolluberzeugungen im Umgang mit Technik , Report Psychologie, 24, , 684-693.
Busch, T. Gender Differences in Self-Efficacy and attitudes toward computers.
Handbook of Aging and Cognition.
Age differences in the Performance of Computer-based work.
The effects and interaction of spatial visualization and domain expertise on information seeking.
Princeton, NJ: Educational Testing Service, 1976.
Goodman, J.; Gray, P.; Khammampad, K. & Brewster, S. Using landmarks to support older people in navigation.
Hasher, L. & Zacks, R. Working memory, comprehension, and aging: A review and a new view.
The Psychology of Learning and Motivation, 193-225.
Klaudt, D. & Spannagel, C. Computerunterstutztes Operieren am mentalen Zahlenstrahl .
Age differences in the performance of hypertext perusal.
In Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society 45th Annual Meeting.
Park, D. & Schwarz, N. Cognitive Aging.
A field study of the impact of gender and user's technical experience on the performance of voice-activated medical tracking application.
Application of Qualitative Content Analysis in UserProgram Interaction Research.
Spannagel, C. Qualitative und quantitative Analyse von Interaktionsaufzeichnungen .
Masterthesis, Technical University Darmstadt, Germany, 2003.
Schroeder, U.: PTAH: validation driven software development.
In: 5th International Conference on Integrated Design & Process Technology 2000, Dallas, Texas, Juni 2000.
Individual differences in the use of command line and menu computer interfaces.
Ziefle, M., & Bay, S. Mental Models of a Cellular Phone Menu.
Comparing Older and Younger Novice.
Ziefle, M., & Bay, S. How older adults meet complexity: Aging effects on the usability of different mobile phones.
Ziefle, M.; & Bay, S. How to overcome disorientation in mobile phone menus: A comparison of two different types of navigation Aids, Human Computer Interaction, 21, , 393-432.
Ziefle, M.; Arning, K. & Bay, S. Cross platform consistency and cognitive compatibility: the importance of users' mental model for the interaction with mobile devices.
