We introduce the Envisioning Cards - a versatile toolkit for attending to human values during design processes - and discuss their early use.
Drawing on almost twenty years of work in value sensitive design, the Envisioning Cards are built upon a set of four envisioning criteria: stakeholders, time, values, and pervasiveness.
Each card contains on one side a title and an evocative image related to the card theme; on the flip side, the card shows the envisioning criterion, elaborates on the theme, and provides a focused design activity.
Reports from the field demonstrate use in a range of research and design activities including ideation, co-design, heuristic critique, and more.
In a recent cover story for interactions, Liam Bannon has called for a rethinking of HCI, inviting the field to reorient itself, to be "centered on the exploration of new forms of living with and through technologies that give primacy to human actors, their values, and their activities" .
This call for an even greater focus on what is important to individuals, groups, and societies, that is, a more humancentered perspective, will require the field to bring in new sensibilities, new approaches to conceptualizing and reporting research, new theory, and new methods.
In this note we discuss the early use of the Envisioning Cards , a versatile tool for attending to human values during design processes.
The Perceptions of a Value card, one of thirtytwo 3.5 x 5.0 inch cards in the set, is shown above.
We see the Envisioning Cards as falling within a design toolkit genre, namely "cards," where ideas for design activities and approaches are represented in a compact, concise physical format.
The physical format allows for persistence and recombination of the discrete ideas represented on individual cards.
Two outstanding examples of this genre are the IDEO Method Cards  and the Interactive Thread Cards , both of which tend to represent process and methodological design knowledge.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Stakeholder criterion, a key concept in value sensitive design, emphasizes the range of effects of a technology, both on those who are in direct contact with a technology , and on those who might not be direct users, but whose lives are nevertheless affected by various interactions around the technology .
Inspired by the long-term perspective of urban planning, the Time criterion helps guide designers to consider the longer term implications of their work - implications that will only emerge after the technology has moved through initial phases of novelty to later phases of appropriation and integration into society.
The Value criterion emphasizes the impact of technology on human values.
Our use of the term values draws from the value sensitive design literature, "what a person or group of people consider important in life" .
The Pervasiveness criterion emphasizes systemic interactions that follow from the widespread adoption of an interactive technology.
Technologies can become pervasive with respect to geographic , cultural , demographic , and other factors.
The Envisioning Cards  is comprised of 28 themed cards and 4 "create your own" cards, one for each of the envisioning criteria.
In addition, a 3-minute sandtimer is included to both symbolize and facilitate the possibility for meaningful use in a brief amount of time.
Each envisioning card addresses a specific theme within one of these envisioning criteria.
As can be seen in The Perceptions of a Value card reproduced above, one side of the card contains the card title and an evocative image related to the card theme.
On the flip side, the card highlights the key criterion for the card; the card title; a theme describing the card's key concept; a focused design activity related to the theme; and a "big" action word such as "think," "identify," "sketch," or "ask."
Taken as a group, the card images seek to evoke the diversity, complexity and subtlety of human affairs, as well as the interconnections among people and technologies.
To reflect cultural and geographic diversity, the photographs were taken in such political locales as Kazakastan, Rwanda, and the United States and at different seasons of the year.
To speak to the diversity of human communities, the photographs include villages, open air market places, concrete office buildings, religious structures, and the like.
To be applicable for envisioning many kinds of technologies, various levels of technical and societal granularity are represented including personal computers with avatars and large-scale infrastructure such as smart grids and transportation systems.
To prompt consideration of diverse technologies and technological integration, the photographs portray digital and non-digital artifacts, as well as tools and infrastructure - electrical power lines, personal computers, photocopy machines, surveillance cameras, traffic lights, train tracks, wind turbines, and virtual reality.
Starting in 2007, the Envisioning Cards have been developed through a fairly slow and iterative process, with some explorations of their use taking place outside of the development group.
They have been used in prototype form since 2008 at such venues as research talks, conference workshops, and a tutorial at CHI 2009, and have been distributed to colleagues for exploration and reaction.
Our colleagues are currently using the cards for a range of research and educational uses, including  to provide breadth in usable security analyses,  to foreground human-centered systemic effects in the design of health informatics systems in eastern Africa, and  to stimulate socio-technical imagination in graduate and undergraduate HCI design courses and capstone projects.
In this section we report briefly on three other cases, with diverse design, analysis, and evaluation goals, seeking to convey how the cards were used in design processes.
To surface key needs and features in a technical design, HCI researchers and designers often engage in co-design activities, such as low-fidelity prototyping.
A long-standing issue is how to scaffold non-designers' active participation in the design process, including focused iterative design.
Extending a study of mobile phones and safety for homeless youth , the authors used the Envisioning Cards in a two-step co-design activity.
First participants, homeless young people, aged 19-34, were prompted to make a 3-D prototype using materials such as clay and broken mobile parts.
The design goal was to envision mobile phone features that could help to keep homeless youth safe.
In addition, participants filled out a "spec sheet," including name, key features, and operational notes.
In the second step, participants were prompted to select an Envisioning Card, consider it, and if needed refine the original design.
Five groups independently completed this structured design activity.
We found that the Envisioning Cards stimulated the creative exploration of the design space.
Specifically, the following accounts illustrate how the cards helped the participants to reframe technical problems, to reconsider technical aspects of their designs, and generally to catalyze their technical imaginations.
The Crossing National Boundaries card , for example, prompted one participant group to consider the operation of their design for homeless young people in Antarctica , Australia , and Japan .
Many systems can be applied or extended to support a desirable environmental outcome .
At the same time, systems may have unintended negative effects on the environment .
Choosing Not to Use .
Some people may decide to use your system, or may attempt to remove themselves from an indirect stakeholder role .
How might deliberate non-use of the system affect a person's daily life ?
Sample Envisioning Cards with Image, Title, Theme, and Activity.
As a final example, the Consider Children card  prompted a third group to write about their design "Add safety features that prevent children for accessing inapp content," clarified with the note: "An 11year old is able to use the phone to continually stay connected with friends and family with no danger of the phone getting destroyed."
That is, the phone needs to be durable in the hands of an 11-year old.
Given this dilemma, how should designers, individuals and societies respond?
Addressing this question, Kaptein, Eckles, and Davis  drew upon the Envisioning Cards to uncover the value implications and technical possibilities.
They report the use of two cards: Value Tensions and Consider Children.
The first card prompted the authors to consider the points of tension and congruence between advertisers and the users of social network sites.
The second card prompted the authors to consider how children, and in turn their parents, might be affected by persuasion profiles .
These two reframings led the authors to consider people who, in general, are particularly susceptible to advertising and to consider possibilities for how the profiles might be shared, owned, and controlled.
With the design space opened to a range of issues and technical possibilities guided in part through the use of the Envisioning Cards, the authors reported that the next step was to converge and to focus on a set of issues comprehensively.
To do so, the authors developed a value scenario in which a father is able to inspect his son's persuasion profile  and to use that profile to help his son lose weight.
Anticipating the uses, benefits, and harms of a new technology that is likely to diffuse widely is a recurrent challenge for HCI.
At present, "persuasion profiling" is one such technology.
Persuasion profiles, created through widespread monitoring of individual online behaviors, represent specific strategies based typically on authority  or consensus  that are likely to positively influence a person's actions across diverse commercial and social contexts.
Persuasion profiles, however, appear to depend on a kind of deception or at least concealment; when individuals are informed that a particular influence strategy is being employed its effectiveness is undermined.
Thus, making the operation of this technology transparent or obtaining informed consent prior to its use will likely reduce its effectiveness.
Finally, Davis reports that the cards can be taken up quickly by designers new to value sensitive design and recommends that the Value Tensions card be used early on to help designers discuss the full space of values and tensions that might be addressed .
Infrastructure shapes interaction; and, in turn, interaction design shapes human experience.
Future Internet architecture, energy smart grids, and FastTrak transportation systems are but a few examples.
In our third case study, akin to a heuristic evaluation to surface usability issues, one of the authors used the Envisioning Cards as an analytic heuristic tool to surface critical issues for potential cloud computing solutions .
To provide a flavor for this analytic assessment, results from considering three of the cards follow: Political Realities.
The Political Realities card calls attention to the ways in which "different political systems ... can influence perceptions and practices that emerge in relation to ."
Applied to cloud computing, how will the cloud support or hinder data sharing and communication among individuals who live within different political systems?
Will users always be operating in networks or living within governments they trust?
Or will it be the case that users sometimes will need  to operate in networks that they fundamentally do not trust?
How will the cloud support these different use cases?
The Environmental Sustainability card  directs designers to consider how a technology can "support a desirable environmental outcome" as well as situations in which "systems may have unintended negative effects on the environment."
Applied to cloud computing, one effect entails continual electricity use; an unintended effect entails encouraging a proliferation of physical devices .
An analogy can be found in urban planning with debates around increased highways leading to greater sprawl and automobile use.
As with transportation there are no simple answers here; however, the interaction among cloud computing and device proliferation, etc.
This third card foregrounds the impact of national policies and regulations on technology development and use, recognizing that "nations have different rules, customs, and infrastructure that affect the use of a technology."
Applied to cloud computing, how will various technical mechanisms enable or hinder communication and the exchange of digital goods and services across different legal frameworks.
Particularly germane would be differing frameworks governing speech , digital rights management, and intellectual property, among others.
Engaging values can be daunting; we believe in progress, not perfection.
Robust like a pencil, the Envisioning Cards were designed to be a versatile tool, useful for many design processes: ideation, co-design, heuristic evaluation, critique, and more.
Through their form and structure the cards position researchers and designers to consider values, time, pervasiveness, and stakeholders; that is, to attend to what is important in people's lives.
The three cases point to rich and diverse applications, and suggest to us that the cards catalyze designers' humanistic and technical imaginations.
Moving forward, as the cards diffuse, we believe that it will be important to explore and reflect upon their uses, but more, to seek systematic ways to place them within design processes and educational settings, to make HCI an even more human-centered practice.
Bannon, L. Reimagining HCI: Toward a more human-centered perspective.
Human Values and Technical Infrastructure.
Keynote presented at the Microsoft Security Summer Institute, Cle Elum, WA, USA, 2011, July 25.
Value Sensitive Design and information systems.
In Humancomputer interaction in management information systems: Foundations, 348-372.
IDEO Method Cards: 51 ways to inspire design.
Kaptein, M., Eckles, D., and Davis, J. Envisioning persuasion profiles: Challenges for public policy and ethical practice.
Mackay, M. Interactive Thread: A participatory design toolkit.
Nathan, L.P., Friedman, B., Klasjna, P.V., Kane, S.K., and Miller, J.K. Envisioning systemic effects on persons and society throughout interactive system design.
Improving the safety of homeless young people with mobile phones: Values, form and function.
