In this paper, we report our findings on the adoption practices of used personal digital assistants  to inform reuse of outdated computing products.
Our interviews with 12 eBay users who bought used PDAs showed a variety of ways in which users indirectly supported sustainability.
This allowed us to re-examine sustainability as something that is dynamically and arbitrarily shaped by the users and not just dependent on the sustainable feature of the product.
We end with design implications for supporting users' shaping of sustainability.
However, how outdated computing devices are reused and sustained by the users is under-explored.
People often unintentionally support sustainability, for example, through purchasing older computers even if they may not have sustainable traits that SID mentioned.
In this study, we wanted to explore how sustainability was being achieved by users in the real world through reuse.
What makes people buy outdated computing devices over new ones?
How do users transform products designed without an eye toward sustainability into sustainable devices?
In this paper, we present our findings on a small group of users who adopted used and outdated personal digital assistants .
We discuss why certain outdated PDAs were still being purchased by our participants and reexamine what sustainability in computing means from the users' perspective.
We end with design implications.
Sustainability has emerged as one of the critical problems in the CHI community .
More specifically, Blevis' Sustainable Interaction Design   was one of the major stepping stones in putting forward a design agenda that directly tackled the issue of sustainability.
One of his visions for SID included promoting renewal and reuse, which could be enhanced through embedding materials that were easily upgradable and updatable and would not easily become obsolete.
This product-centered notion of how sustainability can be achieved has been expanded, employing situated and contextual factors.
Huang  stressed the need to incorporate concerns towards the ecology in which the product exists such as the availability of information on battery recycling of a phone.
Furthermore, Wakkary and Tanenbaum  discussed users as creative everyday designers who practiced SID at home with paper-based information items such as planners, recipe books, and calendars.
This allowed the HCI field to explore yet another agent that supports sustainability - the user.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Sustainability is an overloaded term, and even within the CHI community we have seen a wide range of accounts towards what it means to support sustainability: persuasive technology , sustainable design criteria , SID practiced in the everyday lives of users , and investigations of how people abandon, acquire, or replace cell phones , and what people keep .
What was common among these works was that the end goal was to make the environment more sustainable.
That is, reduce ewaste, reduce energy waste, and increase our abilities towards so-called green practices.
Accordingly, in this paper, we use the definition of sustainability as environmental sustainability, and sustainable practices as practices that support environmental sustainability.
Much of the current discussion on SID is about how we could design sustainable products and their environments, and how we could support users to think sustainably.
However, little research has engaged in a discussion of how users make products sustainable, without consciously deciding to support sustainability.
Our study examines how a product's sustainability is shaped by users, what users' shaping of sustainability looks like, and how we might be able to design for the users' shaping of sustainability.
We searched for PDAs introduced in 2004 or earlier that were discontinued.
We then examined which of them were actively sold and bought on eBay by searching each product and seeing how many were being sold.
We contacted 242 buyers that we tracked through the comments they had left for the sellers, among which 12 buyers responded.
The respondents were four Newton users, five iPAQ hx4700 users, and three users each for Atari Portfolio, Palm Zire 71, Axim x50.
Except for two, all of our participants were male.
Only two of our participants were in their 20's, and the rest were in their 40's.
Each phone interview lasted from 30 to 50 minutes.
The interview consisted of questions that examined reasons for purchasing a discontinued and used PDA, the roles the PDA played in conjunction with other computing devices, experiences with other used computing devices if there were any, ways to maintain failing devices, and the buyers' thoughts on sustainability of a digital product.
Each interview was transcribed and then analyzed with the open coding analysis.
In the case of P4, the Atari Portfolio in itself was not necessarily what he felt nostalgic for.
However, the Portfolio was able to recover the codes he had written many years ago that were kept in a disk sitting in his closet, and it brought back nostalgic memories tied to his experiences back then when he was writing code for mini games while traveling.
Nostalgia is probably one of the major reasons that many nearly decade old computers are being sold.
This made us rethink about the notion of sustainability.
Is a computing product considered sustainable as long as it does not go into a landfill?
Or does it have to be operational in order to be considered sustainable?
In fact, as we will see next, we found an interesting connection that some users made between nostalgic artifacts and operational products.
Our participants did not consider sustainability when buying the used PDAs.
Rather, the reasons included nostalgia, their hobby as a collector, feature and functionality, and simple practical concerns such as price in adopting a used PDA.
In the following, we discuss our participants' adoption practices of used PDAs as sustainable practices, regardless of their intentionality.
This is because, as with Blevis' discussions on longevity of use , our participants were able to prolong the life of a used PDA, at least to a certain degree, that would otherwise have been thrown away as e-waste.
Although P9 did not buy the vintage products to use them, when asked whether he then would also buy a broken used computer, he wanted a working one.
And when asked what was going to happen if the Newton broke, he said he would throw it away.
Thus for P9, clearly the Newton was just a collector's item, but it needed to work in order to sit on his shelf.
Items that some of our participants collected needed to be operational because their value was determined by what the PDA did and not the mere physical presence of it:
The used computers discussed in this section maintained an intricate status including that of antique collection item, toy, and a usable computer.
Otherwise devices may even be thrown away, which contradicted the common idea of keeping something for collection purposes.
Then sustainability, in this case, was only achieved if the PDA was operational.
Not all participants, however, purchased used PDAs for nostalgic or collection purposes.
In fact, quite a few of our participants had functional and practical reasons for acquiring these outdated PDAs, as Huang and Truong found in their study on PDA acquisition practices .
P3 described Newton as a lost treasure that let him take notes with nice handwriting recognition and at the same time have fun with it because of its nostalgic and historical value.
And he mentioned iPAQ as not user friendly and complicated when other participants utilized iPAQ as a GPS device and an ebook reader.
In a way, iPAQ was sustainable to P11 and P5, but not to P3, again indicating sustainable features are very much dependent on the users and their context.
The underlying reason cutting across all participants for buying an old used PDA was the fact that it was low cost and there was little risk in buying it off of eBay to either play with it, make it into part of their collections, or utilize it for one functionality.
P9 and P6 mentioned cheap price as a necessary condition in buying what they felt nostalgic about, and both P11 and P5 utilized iPAQ mainly for utilizing certain functionalities because buying a Garmin or a new ebook reader was more expensive.
Not all participants reasoned carefully before buying the PDAs.
P8 bought the iPAQ hx4700 only because her boyfriend was using it and it was cheap:
P5, unlike many of our Newton or Portfolio users, bought the iPAQ solely for the purpose of using it as an ebook reader and nothing more.
Similarly, P11 utilized the iPAQ as a GPS mapping unit in an aircraft because it was much cheaper than buying a Garmin.
Likewise, P2 and P3 highlighted the hand writing capability in the Newton as a technology that they believed was still competitive even in this day and age:
P7 also had no particular reason for choosing the Palm.
He had just gotten used to using her old PDA that broke, and so he bought the same model again.
He said that if he had known about iPod Touch when he ways buying the second Palm, he probably would have bought the iPod Touch, not the Palm.
Unlike our participants who felt nostalgic about certain PDAs and collected old computers for hobbies, P7 and P8 adopted the used PDAs mainly because they have just gotten familiar with using it.
When asked what was great about Palm Zire, or iPAQ to P7 and 8, they both told us that they do not know because they have not compared them to other products.
As discussed in this section, some outdated PDAs were purchased without clear reasons why they were selected.
This again suggests the arbitrary notion of what makes computing products reused.
P3's opinion was reflected by P2 who utilized Newton in his daily life as a replacement for papers and taking notes at work because his work did not allow bringing in iPod Touch due to its wireless capability.
As well, P4 preserved the Atari Portfolio as a game machine and also utilized it as a way to access obsolete data materials and I/O channels such as Zip drives and serial ports.
We observed from this section that the features and functionalities of a PDA that allowed users to reuse them could be seen as sustainable design features of a PDA.
P2 said as long as users can upgrade software themselves users would be able to prolong the life of computing products.
P10 said that there were many ways in which used computers could be utilized, but casual users would not have enough knowledge to utilize used computers.
P3 was willing to fix things himself to prolong the life of his Newton.
However, P7 said he was conscious of sustainability in general, but the fact that computing products were rapidly becoming outdated did not allow him to control how long he could use a computing product.
Also, because a used computer would not come with instructions, P4 stressed that it was difficult to maintain a computer by himself.
As participants told us, sustaining computing products was indeed a challenging problem for users to carry out by themselves.
However, they did not realize that they were in fact playing an important part in sustaining computing products through readopting used PDAs.
The challenge, however, is that what we observed from our participants and their sustainable practices are not necessarily widely practiced among average users.
Accordingly, we may face limitations in supporting sustainable practices discussed here such as nostalgia, to the general population.
The lesson that we take away from this study is the need to move away from sustainable design as being embedded within the design features.
Rather, in thinking about SID, it is valuable to pay attention to users' constant reinterpretation of what a product can do and the consequences of it that affect sustainability: e.g., prolonging the life of the product thereof.
Because our interviews did not involve a high number of users across a variety of older PDAs, we will not attempt to generalize our findings to the adoption practices of used computing products.
Rather, we want to examine why some people bought used PDAs using the data we collected through the interviews and use this as a starting point to investigate how different meanings of sustainability were being achieved by the users.
In order for the outdated PDAs to be reused by our participants, the PDAs needed to have some features and abilities that would allow them to be utilized even after many years, namely sustainable design features.
And these sustainable abilities - long battery life, easily upgradable software/hardware, and competitive technical features  as mentioned by SID- indeed played an important role in the devices being re-appropriated and readopted by the users.
Although certain sustainable features of PDAs contributed to their ability to be reused, it was the users who had the agency to make a product sustainable and this agency reflected their various value systems, incentives, technical abilities, and needs.
Accordingly, sustainability of a product, in our participants' cases, was not just a fixed, measurable trait that we could engineer - but rather a dynamic and situated notion that transformed depending on who owned the product and for what purpose.
There are two ways in which we can suggest sustainability, specifically reuse, could be achieved by the users.
One is social sharing of resources and knowledge in reappropriating older computing products.
P10 mentioned people often did not realize how old computers could be reappropriated for many useful purposes.
And P2 and 3 were getting their knowledge on Newton from an online Newton community.
A community-based infrastructure could allow users to socially share knowledge about how a product can be re-appropriated.
Second is recommendation system for reuse.
Another way to engage casual users into reuse may be through a recommender system.
For example, when users look for particular products in the search engine, the search engine could recommend users with cheaper options of re-appropriating used PDAs for a GPS or ebook reader as our participants did.
