Reminiscing is a valuable activity that people of all ages spontaneously and informally partake in as part of their everyday lives.
This paper discusses the design and use of Pensieve, a system that supports everyday reminiscence by emailing memory triggers to people that contain either social media content they previously created on third-party websites or text prompts about common life experiences.
We discuss how the literature on reminiscence informed Pensieve's design, then analyze data from 91 users over five months.
We find that people value spontaneous reminders to reminisce as well as the ability to write about their reminiscing.
Shorter, more general triggers draw more responses, as do triggers containing people's own photos-- although responses to photos tended to contain more metadata elements than storytelling elements.
We compare these results to data from a second, Pensieve-like system developed for Facebook, and suggest a number of important aspects to consider for both designers and researchers around technology and reminiscence.
And, although reminiscing is often associated with the elderly, reminiscing is a lifelong activity  that people of all ages wish they did more often .
Much of the study of reminiscence treats it as a foreground activity.
This is natural, given the focus in psychology on reminiscence as a potential "treatment" aimed at the elderly, to help people come to accept the past , to hopefully mitigate the effects of dementia , and frankly, just to give care home staff a structured activity to share with residents .
Technical support for reminiscence also often places it as a foreground activity, using purpose-built tools to help people capture, manage, and annotate media such as photographs  or physical mementos -- again, a natural consequence of the ways people generally interact with computers .
Although these perspectives are valid and useful in some ways for thinking about reminiscence, we prefer the lens of everyday computing .
That is, rather than being a task to be completed or managed, we see reminiscence as an activity: informal, unstructured, and woven into everyday life.
People report that reminiscence is usually spontaneous, externally triggered, and often not consciously attended to .
We tell stories of our past experiences to make friends, while a newspaper photo depicting one's hometown sometimes brings back a flood of childhood memories.
Thus, we hope to support reminiscence using technologies that leverage and support people's current practices and fit gently into their lives.
In this paper, we describe the design and deployment of Pensieve , a system that helps people remember to reminisce by sending them occasional emails containing "memory triggers".
These include both generic prompts, such as those that started this paper, and the content that people already create in social media sites such as Flickr and Last.fm--content that often has personal significance.
Do you remember your father's favorite pastime?
The smell of a bonfire?
A song you love to dance to?
There's a good chance that these questions prompted to you think, at least for a moment, about your past--in short, to reminisce.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
We start by describing the literature around reminiscence, both in psychology and in HCI, and how this work shaped Pensieve's design.
We then present data collected from 91 people over five months, during which Pensieve sent over 11,000 memory triggers and people made over 700 diary entries.
We analyze these entries, 20 people's responses to a questionnaire, and experiences with a Facebook application for reminiscing that, unlike Pensieve, requires people to consciously choose to reminisce.
We find that people like using Pensieve and that it improves their mood; that reminding people to reminisce is important; and that both social media and generic prompts are useful triggers, although they lead people to write in different ways.
The work shows the value of supporting reminiscing as an everyday activity and points to a number of fruitful directions for further study, particularly around exploring how technology might help people reminisce together.
People use a number of media and methods to support reminiscing, most notably photos, which are used both to record memory and to share remembered experiences .
Mementoes are also important in reminiscing , and almost anything can serve as a memento if the person attaches personal significance to the item .
Other triggers are less intentional, ranging from smells to sounds to pictures of nostalgic cultural items .
Some people collect and organize these reminders though scrapbooking, a kind of self-narration or storytelling where memory objects are created by arranging objects on top of the normally linear life narrative .
The value of capturing and recalling information and the intentional facets of reminiscing have led to the creation of a number of systems to support it.
SharePic  is a gesture based, multi-touch, multi-user collaborative tabletop device for photo sharing aimed at the elderly.
CaraClock  supports sharing collective family memories through metadata-enhanced photo collections, allowing interesting views such as "everyone in the family at age 20" and supporting intelligent selection of photos to show based on the relationships in the group.
The Personal Digital Historian Project  aims to help users to share and reflect on individual or collective experiences with others, while the Living Memory Box  helps families preserve their memories in a variety of media forms.
Reminiscence is a type of remembering where we recall, interpret, and often share memories that are personally significant , using autobiographical memory  developed--and sometimes lost--throughout a person's life .
Autobiographical memories can range from specific, vivid detail of events to general impressions of life periods or themes that make up one's whole life story .
Further, they are to some extent constructed "on the fly"; how a given memory is experienced depends on people's current situation and mood.
That is, rather than a storehouse of information, autobiographical memory is a resource that is used for a variety of psychosocial purposes .
Reminiscence strengthens self-esteem  and provides pleasure and enjoyment .
Not all reminiscence is positive--people also reminisce to maintain grudges and to escape the present --but on balance it is a positive activity .
It is often associated with the elderly , particularly as a systematic and organized kind of therapy .
Pensieve leverages a number of ideas from the work described above.
By reminding people to reminisce, we hope that Pensieve helps support the psychosocial goals of reminiscing.
It uses a variety of media, including photos, text, and music, to trigger memories.
It draws triggers from people's activity in social media sites in an attempt to provide reminders with personal significance, while generic triggers encourage reminiscing across the entire lifespan.
In addition to the work above, Pensieve's design is based on a series of prototypes and interviews described in  that highlighted a number of themes and design goals based on the ways people reminisce, including the value of spontaneity, the importance of people in reminiscing, and the need to manage privacy, control, and intimacy.
Pensieve has two main functions: to remind people to reminisce, and to help people write in the course of reminiscing.
People choose how often to be reminded to reminisce and can also link Pensieve to accounts on selected social media sites, including Flickr, twitter, Picasa, Blogger, and Last.fm.
The Pensieve server uses these preferences to create memory triggers, emails that contain specific pieces of content either taken from a linked social media site or a set of non-personalized text prompts somewhat like those used in group reminiscence therapy2.
Figure 1 shows examples of triggers from Last.fm, Flickr, twitter, and a non-personalized text prompt.
Pensieve has no user model, so it chooses triggers randomly.
To help people write about their reminiscing, Pensieve provides a diary, which exploits the metaphor of a real diary .
People can see every trigger Pensieve has sent and write about reactions or stories the trigger elicited.
People can also make diary entries by replying to an emailed memory trigger.
People learned about the diary and the ability to reply to emails through tips included as a tagline with each email sent.
These taglines also told people about other things they could do with Pensieve, including suggesting new non-personalized prompts and providing feedback about their experiences.
Systems that use special-purpose artifacts or software to support reminiscence  risk making reminiscing a conscious choice--easy to forget, and possibly changing its nature.
Planned reminiscing has its place in care situations and in sharing memorabilia and photos.
But in general, reminiscing is most like an everyday computing activity , woven into daily life, and our design tries to support that through irregularly timed emails and random selection of memory triggers.
Supporting privacy and control were also important.
We chose not to link to social media sites where we would have to store passwords and we do not store data from those sites, protecting people's privacy.
We also gave people a high degree of control, allowing them to choose whether to connect to social media and  how often to receive memory triggers.
An early prototype delivered triggers through SMS but people worried about the cost and about being interrupted , so we switched to email.
Making diary entries private also supports both privacy and control, as well as fitting with the metaphor of a real-world diary.
Privacy, however, had its costs, especially around potential social aspects of reminiscing.
People often reminisce about and with other people , and as a team we fought hard over whether to make diaries fully private, fully public, or to allow people to share specific entries publicly.
Public diary entries would have supported social goals; however, reminiscing is sometimes a very private and intimate activity, and although people are good at making privacy decisions, they're often bad at using computer interfaces to execute them .
Because of the real risk of emotional harm, we decided to forego explicitly social tools for reminiscing in this version of Pensieve.
Finally, the system suffered from occasional bugs that affected people's experience.
For instance, the system broke when twitter's tweet ids exceeded 231-1 because it used an outdated version of the PHP twitter API.
It also sometimes sends repeated prompts .
These bugs were occasionally annoying to users, but as we will see below, overall the system was well-liked and useful for reminiscing despite these flaws.
Non-personalized prompts dominate; 33 people have linked a total of 61 social media accounts to Pensieve.
We suspect the number of diary entries would have been higher had the interface for creating them by responding to emails been more visible.
Our overarching research question was how Pensieve would affect people's reminiscing practices, and how its use might inform the design of similar systems.
We presented a preliminary analysis of Pensieve use in ; here, we combine observations of people's use of the system, analysis of their responses to triggers, informal feedback, and questionnaire responses to ask a number of questions about how Pensieve might affect these practices.
How could it be better?
Do they use it in an everyday way?
Pensieve became publicly available in late February 2009.
The prevalence of females aligns with studies suggesting that women report more enjoyment than men while reminiscing .
Twelve of the young users are or were members of the research team.
People primarily discover Pensieve from other Pensieve users and the development team, helping to explain the predominance of younger users.
Still, the fact that young people use Pensieve suggests that reminiscing is something people want to do across their lifetime.
About 85%  of these people are currently receiving memory triggers, meaning that relatively few people turn the system off, suggesting that they value the reminders.
Of active users, 42 use the default setting of one trigger per day; the rest are evenly spread among 1, 2, 3, and 5 times per week and 3 times per day.
This points out both the power of default settings  and that the default of once per day seems reasonable.
Below we delve into the data to address the questions posed above.
We focus on people's responses to memory triggers.
This is partly pragmatic, as they are the main activity we can see, but responses also indicate that the trigger elicited a strong enough reaction to lead people to write, giving us access to reminiscence in the moment.
We supplement our analyses of responses with data from a questionnaire we administered to people who were not directly associated with the researchers.
It asked a number of questions about the ways Pensieve affected their reminiscing, whether they liked it, and how to improve it.
Two people independently reviewed the responses, looking for common themes and interesting anomalies, then discussed their analysis and came to consensus on the portions reported below.
We start with a high-level characterization of the tone and topics people reminisce about, based on linguistic analysis of the text of people's responses.
We used Pennebaker et al.
People's overall tone in diary entries was positive: 2.8% of responses contained words classified as positive and 1.1% negative, compared to 2.7% positive and 2.6% negative in the LIWC personal writing corpus .
This suggests that, on balance, people reminisce more about pleasant than unpleasant memories.
Questionnaire data also supported this finding; nearly all respondents said their mood was improved by reminiscence, either because the memory was pleasant or because it gave them a sense of closure.
People also frequently used pronouns: 13.17% of words were pronouns, versus 11.4% of the LIWC personal corpus .
This supports the idea that people are a dominant topic of reminiscence : "Well I'd say it was usually about people.
And it's also partially about places but the places are important probably because of the people."
People mention the past and present about equally , but rarely the future .
This may suggest that people used Pensieve to make terms with their pasts and apply it to present day problems, as suggested by the literature .
Some questionnaire respondents mentioned this explicitly:
Understanding what kinds of triggers are most likely to be evocative can help systems be more effective at supporting reminiscence.
Below, we explore aspects of triggers that led to more frequent and longer responses.
A trigger's response rate is defined as the number of times people respond to a trigger divided by the number of times the trigger was sent.
A trigger's response length is defined as the average number of words in all responses to that trigger.
We first analyze the non-personalized text prompts, both because they allow us to compare reactions across users , and because this analysis may inform the topics used in group reminiscence therapy  and in systems like Pensieve.
We define prompt length in two ways: by the number of words in a prompt and the number of "parts" in a prompt.
For example, the prompt ".
Prompts with more parts tend to include specific questions related to the overall theme of the prompt.
I think, like therapy, this helps understand myself."
People were unwilling to respond to some prompts.
Some triggers were simply disliked: "This is a terrible trigger.
Other people had privacy concerns, while almost every questionnaire respondent reported receiving a prompt that elicited a negative reaction.
Some prompts also led to memories that people said were too sad to want to dwell on or too strong to want to write about.
On the other hand, some prompts elicited strong responses.
The prompt "Your favorite book as a child.
Did you have your parents read to you or did you read on your own?"
He kept knocking things over with his tail, but it wasn't his fault--he was just a Great Dane or something.
The moral was that he just needed to get out into the country with a big house and a big yard.
My grandmother is in the hospital right now--that was a really emotional trigger."
Our findings suggest that, like reminiscence itself, people's writing about reminiscence is spontaneous and immediate, and that it is important to capture it in the moment.
Figure 3 shows, for each response, the time elapsed between Pensieve sending the trigger and the response.
There is a large spike within an hour after the trigger is sent; that is, if someone is going to respond to a trigger, it is relatively likely they are going to respond shortly after they receive it.
These results align with a number of questionnaire respondents who said they would respond to the prompt as soon as they saw it, or else not respond.
We also analyzed how much time elapses between responses by the same person.
Few people go more than seven days between responding to triggers, suggesting that people either write regularly or not at all.
Thus, systems that want to support writing must provide regular opportunities and reminders, as well as interfaces that make it easy to integrate writing into daily routines.
We suspect, but cannot show, that a similar pattern happens in people's attention to the triggers as well--that once people fall out of the habit of paying attention to triggers, it is hard to start back up.
Table 2 shows descriptive statistics for non-personalized text prompts based on number of parts.
This suggests that less specific prompts may be easier to respond to than longer, more specific prompts, but may not draw out as many details.
We also investigated whether a prompt's emotional tone affected people's responses.
We classified prompts as positive, negative, both, or neither based on whether they contain words from LIWC's positive and negative categories.
Positive prompts have on average 10.2% positive and 0.2% negative words, while negative prompts average 0.5% positive and 3.9% negative words.
My triggers have been very negative lately, and it makes me hate getting those emails."
People were able to suggest non-personalized text prompts for everyone; their submissions support our above findings.
Five users submitted 16 prompts.
Of these, ten had 10 or fewer words, while nine had one part, six had two parts, and one had three.
This supports our finding that users prefer shorter prompts.
Nine of these prompts were positive and seven were neither positive nor negative, also suggesting a preference for positivity.
The categories are hierarchical, with parent categories of things, people, places, and experiences, and up to two levels of subcategories; prompts can belong to multiple categories.
Table 4 shows how people responded to prompts broken down by category.
The highest number of responses, 17, was received for the prompt "Meeting someone famous."
Among the 10 prompts that received the most responses, 6 were coded as things and 4 were coded as experiences.
There was little difference in how people responded based on category.
At the level of parent categories, prompts had roughly equal response rates, and there were few differences at the level of subcategories.
We also looked at the topics people choose to write about.
Two coders used the category codebook to code a random sample of 93 responses; again, prompts could belong to multiple categories.
Intercoder agreement on high-level categories ranged from 79% to 91% and Krippendorff's Alpha from 0.52 to 0.81.
For instance, the prompt in Figure 2 asks about sunglasses, while the response is about the person's father.
This suggests that the prompts themselves may not be as important as the way people interpret them.
Finally, we looked at the effects of media type and personalization on users' responses.
Table 1 shows the number of triggers sent and responded to from the different social media; here, we focus on activity in Picasa  and the non-personalized text prompts .
We do not consider Blogger, twitter, or Last.fm in our analysis because these services had relatively few triggers sent.
We also exclude Flickr because it was plagued with a bug that generated malformed triggers that contained no pictures.
However, the tone of the responses was different.
Not all topics are created equal.
We were also interested in whether the topic a prompt referred to would affect people's response patterns.
We developed a codebook for prompt topics over five iterations in which people ranging in age from 16 to 52, some associated with the project and some not, coded a random sampling of the prompts.
Two members of the Pensieve team coded the full set of prompts using the final codebook.
Intercoder agreement ranged from 67% to 91% with a mean of 85% for parent categories and from 80% to 100% with a mean of 97% for child categories.
We report intercoder agreement by category based on .
Contrast the story about the grandmother or the diary entry about sunglasses to this response to a Picasa trigger: "I guess this is from the Ithaca Festival.
The guy on the left is Hilby the Skinny German Juggler Boy.
People noticed the tendency to record metadata as well; one person suggested that showing data already collected by the sites hosting the pictures might encourage responses with less metadata and more emotional content.
In this analysis, personalization and medium are confounded since Picasa sends personalized pictures while the prompts are non-personalized text.
We will return to this in our discussion of a second system for supporting reminiscence, developed in Facebook.
Our findings from Pensieve suggest that people valued receiving spontaneous emails reminding them to reminisce about random topics.
Prompts that are short and that are on general topics received more responses, while people responded more often but perhaps less thoughtfully to personalized picture prompts than to non-personalized text prompts.
People tended to use the emailed memory triggers to reminisce spontaneously; if they were to write about their reminiscing, they were most likely to do so shortly after receiving a trigger and if they were regular writers.
To investigate the generality of our findings, we wrote a sister application in Facebook .
FP is similar to Pensieve but with design differences to help test our claims.
Like Pensieve, FP's goal is to help people reminisce and to allow people to write about the past.
Each day someone visits FP, it selects a photo they were tagged in and a status they had written in the past and presents them with textboxes that allow people to respond.
Like Pensieve, FP is aimed at individuals; because of privacy and IRB concerns, it has no explicit social features--although we think adding social features is an important next step for supporting reminiscing.
FP differs from Pensieve in three important ways.
First, whereas Pensieve automatically sends emails, people must make a conscious decision to visit FP every day in order to reminisce.
FP does use Facebook's notification mechanism to remind people to visit; by default, once every three days.
Second, all content in FP is personalized.
Unlike the generic text prompts in Pensieve, text in FP is drawn from a user's own status updates.
Finally, Pensieve's primary interface is email, while FP's is within Facebook itself.
However, people received many fewer triggers than in Pensieve.
Only 17 people received 50 or more, while most received less than 10.
FP requires people to consciously reminisce, while Pensieve's push model requires no special effort.
Some aspects of users' response patterns were also different.
After eliminating test and repeated triggers, our analysis dataset contained a total of 120 responses  to 2,698 triggers.
Only 21 of 75 FP users ever responded, and only 5 responded more than 5 times.
Responses in FP were also much shorter than those in Pensieve on average .
We suspect this is because of the norm in Facebook to write short pieces of text for status messages, comments on photos, and wall posts.
However, there were similarities in terms of positive emotion and the ways people responded to different media.
LIWC analysis showed that, as with Pensieve, people's overall emotional tone was positive  compared to the personal writing corpus.
Also like Pensieve, people tended to refer about equally to the past  and the present , but rarely the future.
Here we define metadata as the who, what, where, and when of an item.
Unlike Pensieve, there was no significant difference in response length to photos and text triggers .
However, people's primary interaction with Pensieve was via email.
Just over half of diary entries were created through emails, and had we made this feature more obvious, we suspect it would have been even higher.
Further, had we made the ability to create diary entries by reply to emails more salient, we think people would have written more responses overall.
Likewise, the website allows people to request a trigger at any time.
Emails should also have offered this option, for times when a prompt was repeated or blank because of a bug, or for prompts that were not evocative.
We failed to focus our design work where it really mattered, a mistake we hope other designers can learn from.
The medium affects the message.
Behavior was different between FP and Pensieve, and much of this was because of the medium.
FP had less use and fewer responses than Pensieve, probably because of the need to consciously intend to reminisce in FP.
Responses in FP were also much shorter, suggesting that when you use Facebook as a delivery platform you may get Facebook-style responses.
We believe in supporting everyday reminiscing by leveraging people's current activity and practices; thinking carefully about the norms and implications of those practices  will inform designs.
The medium of the prompt itself also mattered, affecting response rates, lengths, and characteristics.
Careful attention to the characteristics of triggers used to support reminiscence will be important to successful systems.
People valued the idea of revisiting responses they had previously created.
Logs showed that several people went back through their diary, presumably to reflect on their previous responses.
We could better support this kind of reflection through intelligent aggregation.
For example, we could send prompts that asked people to reminisce about specific years and use the responses to create timeline views of a person's past.
We could also use either manual tagging or automatic tag extraction to give people access to topic- or person-focused views of their diary.
People wanted to use Pensieve to think about their past; such views might encourage people to reflect, reminisce, and write more, in a virtuous circle.
One user gave the following feedback: "I also find the triggers extremely US white middle class centric and as such, often irrelevant to me.
This just means that my past is culturally too different to fit well within these."
Designers should already be attending to cultural factors, but it might be fruitful to explore how reminiscence differs in cultures where extended families interact more closely or in contexts where the creation and sharing of memory-laden content such as photos is more difficult or less common.
Overall we consider Pensieve to be a successful prototype for supporting everyday reminiscence.
People continue to sign up and, once registered, they continue to receive the memory triggers.
They like the emails and being able to respond: "I really like coming to the website and having this personal space to write whatever I want about longforgotten things."
This shows that even when users do not respond to triggers, they still value the spontaneous reminder to reminisce, and report that it generally improves their mood and supports other positive effects of reminiscing such as reviving pleasant memories, working through one's past, and using the past to address current issues: "When I really think about the message and the memories related to it I typically feel better even if the memory itself is bittersweet.
I guess it is a sort of perspective taking process."
I think, like therapy, this helps understand myself."
Below, we discuss how our main findings bear on the design of systems that support reminiscence, suggest ways that common design issues such as cultural differences and the appropriation of systems may apply in this domain, and suggest future directions for both designs and research in reminiscence.
People responded to a number of triggers, helping meet the desire expressed in  to write more about reminiscence.
Allowing people to make diary entries by responding directly to the emails that contained the triggers was effective, reducing the effort required to write an entry and placing writing "in the moment" of reminiscing.
More generally, we suspect that embedding much of the interface into the everyday tool of email was an important aspect of Pensieve's success.
We could have done a better job with this.
Most of our design effort focused on the website,
One person reported linking Pensieve to multiple photo streams with the goal of finding creative inspiration.
Another linked multiple accounts from the same social media service in order to receive photos that family and friends had created.
As with culture, designers should be aware that people appropriate systems in unexpected ways--and should build features that support this kind of appropriation.
Exploit context to personalize reminiscence.
Although serendipity and random selection worked well enough, we think using context to intelligently choose triggers might be helpful.
Learning features of prompts individuals respond to would further support personalized reminiscing.
Other aspects of context might be useful as well.
For instance, a mobile system that supports reminiscence might try to send prompts related to a person's current location, activities, or nearby friends.
Several people reported that Pensieve helped them to reconnect with others when prompts incited them to contact old friends: "Thank you.
This prompted me to email Debbie.
The last time I talked to her was on a video chat at Christmas."
This, plus the tendency of responses to focus on people, suggests that Pensieve supports another positive purpose of reminiscence, maintaining social connections.
Explicitly supporting social aspects of reminiscence is a fruitful next direction to explore.
Such a system might leverage existing social network platforms, as one person suggested: "It seems likely that fully integrating into social sites and using the relationships people express in them to form groups will be helpful."
This aligns with findings from  about the key role of people as sources and objects of reminiscence.
Supporting social reminiscence also opens new questions around using context, such as choosing triggers for a group of people reminiscing or triggers about, e.g., a friend whose birthday is today and who you haven't spoken with in a while.
However, for some people reminiscence is a private experience: "The most important reminiscing for me is private, usually about my family or very close friends.
I wouldn't share it with others."
This suggests that social features would be good to include, but that they should not be forced on people.
Here, we considered including probing questions about people's experiences along with memory triggers, somewhat like a diary study.
However, we feared that sending questions along with prompts would confuse people and that sending questions instead of prompts might lead people to stop using the system.
Using social media to support reminiscing may also bias people toward reminiscing about recent or easily captured events.
In Pensieve, we hope that including nonpersonalized prompts that address all periods of a person's life mitigates this bias.
More generally, this may be hard to study in the short term: a well-studied phenomenon known as the "reminiscence bump"  says that people remember more from the period between the ages of 10 and 30, and since so many heavy social media users are in this age group, it may be hard to tease those effects apart.
Still, the general question of how systems like Pensieve and SenseCam affect the things we remember and the ways we remember them is an interesting issue for future work.
We hope to have made a number of contributions through this work.
We show that people value even a simple system designed to support everyday reminiscence.
People's use of the system supports existing findings about the nature of reminiscing in a new context that includes computer support.
By deploying two separate but related systems with somewhat different design characteristics, we offer a number of observations, design ideas, and future directions for work around the study and support of reminiscence with some claim to generality.
Generality matters, because supporting reminiscence is an area where HCI can make a valuable contribution to society.
Reminiscing to know ourselves, to think about the present, to maintain our relationships, and to construct our identities has value for everyone, every day, while the traces of our lives that are recorded and made accessible through technology pose privacy risks and technical challenges but also provide designers and researchers with new opportunities.
We should make the most of them.
Our analysis focused primarily on people's responses because this is the main data we had access to.
It would have been wonderful to explore people's beliefs about and experiences of reminiscing more directly, since writing about the past is only a small part of the larger activity of reminiscing.
