We present MorePhone, an actuated flexible smartphone with a thin-film E Ink display.
MorePhone uses shape memory alloys to actuate the entire surface of the display as well as individual corners.
We conducted a participatory study to determine how users associate urgency and notification type with full screen, 1 corner, 2 corner and 3 corner actuations of the smartphone.
Results suggest that with the current prototype, actuated shape notifications are useful for visual feedback.
Urgent notifications such as alarms and voice calls were best matched with actuation of the entire display surface, while less urgent notifications, such as software notifications were best matched to individual corner bends.
While different corner actuations resulted in significantly different matches between notification types, medium urgency notification types were treated as similar, and best matched to a single corner bend.
A follow-up study suggested that users prefer to dedicate each corner to a specific type of notification.
Users would like to personalize the assignment of corners to notification type.
Animation of shape actuation significantly increased the perceived urgency of any of the presented shapes.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Thin-film electrophoretic displays  , flexible organic light emitting diodes  , and surface mountable thin film bend, pressure and touch sensors have resulted in a surging interest in exploring the possibilities of flexible, more organic  computer interfaces, such as Gummi , PaperWindows , PaperPhone  and Nokia's Kinetic .
A number of benefits have been attributed to flexible interfaces in literature, including: increased mobility, flexible screen real estate, better ergonomic fit to the body, increased robustness, lightweight multi-display operation for multitasking, and natural support for haptics.
While one might debate the benefits provided by thin-film flexible computer prototypes over rigid form factors, the usability of flexible computer interfaces has become an active topic of research in HCI over the past few years .
A common problem with auditory notifications is their general disruptiveness, both in terms of single user attention and in terms of interference with social interactions .
Visual notifications can be distracting  and easily missed when the user is not actively attending to the display.
For this reason, vibro-tactile feedback has become a popular way of notifying users .
However, like visual notifications, vibro-tactile notifications are easily missed when the user is not in direct contact with the device.
By contrast, actuated shape notifications provide a means for tactile notification that does have a distinct visual correlate .
Actuated shape notifications also provide a design space in between visual and tactile methods of feedback that is potentially rich in terms of communicating various states of the system.
Vibro-tactile notifications effectively limit notification to one's own personal space.
Brown and Brewster  evaluated vibro-tactile notification cues and their appropriateness to convey information when visual displays are not available.
However, it is not always easy to distinguish between various vibro-tactile alerts, as they are invisible, thus hard to interpret, and their design space has been mostly limited to time-based vibration patterns .
Vibro-tactile notifications are also invisible to social contexts, increasing the risk for misinterpretations of a user's actions.
Actuated shape notifications provide silent yet public notification cues that are visible to others.
Because they offer a richer repertoire of visible shapes, they may also provide a larger semantic space for interpreting the type of notification.
In this paper we present MorePhone, a prototype smartphone that uses shape deformations as its primary means of both haptic and visual notifications .
We present a study of the semantics of a shape notification design language through a participatory study, matching urgency and notification types to full screen, 1 corner, 2 corner and 3 corner bends.
An informal follow up study ascertains if shape actuation requires pairing with visual cues to convey information.
We conclude with design recommendations for the presentation of actuated shape notifications on smartphones.
While research in the domain of ambient user notifications has been extensive, we find few projects where actuated notifications where seamlessly integrated in a shape changing mobile device.
Dynamic Knobs  evaluated the concept of a rigid mockup phone capable of changing shape in a small extension on one of its sides.
We believe actuated notifications in flexible mobile devices might also be useful for displaying this type of notification.
Horev  investigated the use of actuated pixel matrices in mobile phones.
Although these can provide the user with simultaneous tactile matrices, the interpretation requires high tactile attention, drawing on abstract languages that users need to learn how to decode.
Coelho and Maes  presented Surflex, a programmable surface for the design and visualization of physical forms.
Surflex provides a notification platform that inspired our design.
Note that none of the above projects included a high resolution display in the actuation surface.
Auditory notification cues can be attention demanding, intrusive, and often perceived as inappropriate.
According to Shell et al.
Hansson  describes attention overload as being obtrusive not only to the owner of the device, but also those in her vicinity.
Visual cues are useful in contexts that demand no disruption.
However, they can be easily missed, as their effectiveness relies on users active engagement with the display device .
According to McCrickard , visual cues demand a high cognitive load and critical notifications may be lost over the users current activity.
Actuated 3D displays serve to provide 3D graphics by dimensioning the actual display through actuation.
Lumen used light and shape memory alloys to lift pixels in the z dimension of the screen to display 3D movement and simple 3D shapes.
Similarly, ShadePixel  demonstrated a foam skin actuated by solenoids to produce shadow effects that visualize pixels using ambient light.
By contrast, Leithinger and Ishii 's Relief's main purpose was to allow high resolution images to be visualized in 3D.
Their system uses a series of rods that actuate a fabric display that is top projected with 2D images.
In this study, users designed bend gestures for common computing actions deployed on a flexible E Ink smartphone.
They identified the most frequently used bend gesture pairs and observed that bend gestures that take directional cues into account are more natural to users.
In this study, participants were given 11 specific interaction tasks, such as zooming or navigating, and were instructed to deform the displays in ways that would execute these tasks.
They found that users preferred pairings of closely related but opposite actions and gestures.
To inform our design of the semantic mapping between actuated shape changes and specific notifications, we designed a participatory study that allowed users to indicate the perceived urgency of various changes in shape, and associate them with common smartphone notifications to find patterns of semantic relationships.
In general, we hypothesized that gross shape changes would be perceived as pertaining to more urgent notifications, such as phone calls.
We also hypothesized that different shapes might convey different meanings to users in terms of their appropriateness for a particular notification.
We were interested in understanding if the curling of more than one corners of the display would be perceived as indicating multiple, less urgent, simultaneous notifications.
We were also interested in understanding whether users would prefer to dedicate a particular corner of the display to a particular notification, or whether they would prefer to use a single corner for notifications in conjunction with visual notifications.
This question is particularly relevant in the case of multiple simultaneous notifications.
We designed a second, more informal, study with a fully functional prototype to determine appropriate design recommendations in this regard.
Vibro-tactile notifications provide minimal means of distinguishing between different notifications.
As such, they often require visual notification to contextualize the semantics of the notification.
Actuated shape notifications may offer a potential for exploring the sweet spot between visual and tactile notification design.
Before we discuss our first study, we will discuss the implementation details of our shape changing smartphone prototype.
MorePhone  is a 14.4 x 9 cm flexible smartphone prototype that actuates its display as a means of providing user notifications.
MorePhone bend and actuation layers are tethered to an Arduino board  that is connected to a MacBook Air laptop running a simple Processing application allowing the laptop to send actuations to the prototype, and respond to user bend inputs.
The first layer of our prototype consists of an Arizona State University 3.7" Bloodhound flexible electrophoretic display  .
This display is driven by an E Ink Broadsheet AM 350 Kit  connected to a MacBook Air laptop running a Processing application that provides full screen gray scale images to the AM 350.
Figure 2b shows the second layer, containing 4 Flexpoint 2" bidirectional bend sensors  that are used to gauge user responses to shape actuation notifications.
These bend sensors are glued to a 14.4 x 9 cm 110 lbs cardboard substrate and soldered to a printed circuit.
Bend data is processed by an Arduino, and interpreted by a Processing application on the laptop to control actuation.
Figure 2c shows the third layer, which contains an actuation circuitry made of Flexinol  shape-memory wire.
Flexinol wire contracts upon heating, which is achieved by putting a current on the wire.
The wire was sewed with Kevlar threading to a second layer of cardboard substrate via small lasercut holes, allowing for its expansion and contraction  .
We used 0.006' low-temperature Flexinol wire using a current of 410 mA to produce a full contraction in 1 s. We controlled the degree of actuation as well as the velocity of actuation by altering the voltage via the Arduino board.
Use of a single 0.006' wire provides a maximum pulling force of 321 g, which is not enough to provide a noticeable change of shape in our flexible phone prototype.
We therefore used 2 parallel wires for each actuated section, allowing it to produce distinct and reliable curls of up to 1.5 cm at each of the four corners, as well as the entire display.
Figure 1 shows MorePhone actuating the entire screen up to 1.5 cm on each side.
MorePhone also can actuate each of the 4 corners of the display independently from one another, providing a total of 17 possible shape combinations .
Figure 4 shows MorePhone actuating the top right corner of the display.
To provide additional feedback on the type of notification, MorePhone can pop up a visual notification balloon in the actuated corner.
In the example shown in Figure 4, actuation of the top-right corner also pops up a notification balloon that contextualizes the notification as a text message.
Users can open the text message and cancel the notification by pressing the actuated corner.
Our first user study had a two-fold objective: First, we wanted to determine how users perceive the urgency of shape configurations provided by MorePhone.
Second, we were interested in determining whether and how users would relate particular shape configurations to specific types of notifications.
Our design was based on studies by Lee et al.
We used a within-subjects design for our study, in which each participant was asked to evaluate each shape in both conditions: where the device was handheld  and where it was on a table .
Shapes were presented in random order.
Condition order was counterbalanced between subjects.
The 9 shapes presented during the study, in addition to flat, are shown in Figure 5.
To limit the amount of time required per trial, we removed the 4-corner bend, and only showed one 3-corner bend and half of all possible 2-corner combinations.
The first shape was the baseline of a flat display with no actuation .
The second shape, Full Screen, was a bending of the entire display along its horizontal axis.
The next set of four shapes, 1 Corner Bends, curled each of the four corners of the device.
The next set of three shapes, 2 Corner Bends, simultaneously curled two opposing corners of the device.
In the final shape, 3 Corner Bend, three corners of the device were curled.
To ascertain the effect of visual-only versus visual-tactile feedback of MorePhone, shapes were presented in two different conditions, one where the prototype was held in the non-dominant hand, and one where it was placed on the table.
In the visuo-tactile condition, users were asked whether they could see and feel the shape after actuation.
The users held the prototype such that all shapes were able to touch the skin.
In the visual only condition, they were only asked if they could see the shape after actuation.
We selected notification types commonly present in standard smartphone devices: voice call, text message, email, voicemail, alarm/reminder, social notification and software update.
Prior to the session, users were asked to rate each notification type on urgency using a 5-point Likert scale , evaluating the statement "A  is urgent and requires my immediate attention".
They also ranked the urgency of calls, text messages and emails by specific people.
The goal of our experiment was to discover possible mappings between various shapes and various notification types, rather than comparing the efficacy of shape notifications versus visual, auditory or tactile notifications.
To avoid confounding effects of display design on the outcome of this experiment, the flexible display showed a neutral and static home screen in all conditions.
All subjects taking part in our study stated they were able to distinguish all 10 variations in shape that they were presented with, both with the device resting on a table  or handheld .
In the visuo-tactile condition, all participants indicated they were able to feel and see the shapes.
In the visual-only condition, all participants indicated they were able to see the shapes.
We analyzed results from our questionnaire data using a one-way Friedman's non-parametric analysis of variance based on ranked order of the questionnaire items, and with Bonferroni corrected one-tailed Wilcoxon Signed Rank post-hoc tests.
Bonferroni correction was applied by evaluating the standard alpha level of .05 divided by the number of comparisons.
To examine whether shape actuations might provide participants with associations of individual persons, participants were asked to evaluate the statement "I think this shape signifies an incoming email from someone specific" using the same Likert scale format, and were then asked to specify whom they were referring to.
There were no significant differences between shapes with two corner bends in the visual-only condition =.867, p=.648.
There was a small but significant difference between shapes with two corner bends in the visuo-tactile condition =9.091, p=.011.
To simplify analysis and reduce the chance of Type II errors upon posthoc analysis, we subsequently grouped shapes into five groups: Flat, Full Screen, 1 Corner Bend, 2 Corner Bend, and 3 Corner Bend.
Because we focused on the visual-only condition for further analysis, the significant difference between 2 Corner Bends in the visuo-tactile condition did not affect further results.
After completing the information and consent forms, participants were shown a subset of random shapes to allow them to become familiar with the MorePhone prototype.
We demonstrated these actuations asking participants to "Imagine this is your future phone: it does not just notify you by ringing and vibrating - but by changing shape."
We instructed users to avoid folding or twisting the device, due to the fragile nature of the prototype.
We guided the participants to hold the display as if it was wireless, and to ignore the single connector cable.
Aside from this, we did not instruct participants on shape changing notifications.
Since results were very similar between VT and VO on all measures, we chose to present further statistical analyses for the visualonly condition only.
There appeared to be little effect of tactile feedback on the choice of notification style.
This limitation might be caused by the usage of an actual display.
Alternative methodologies and materials could lead to different results.
The flat condition was rated the lowest on all items, with a mean score of 1.3 across items.
We subsequently discarded this flat baseline condition from further analysis, so as to avoid biasing results between shape groups.
This means all subsequent comparisons were between shapes other than flat.
Table shows the means and std.
When Bonferroni corrected, there were no significant differences in urgency ratings between any other shape groups.
Differences between shape groups in appropriateness ratings for Alarm/Reminder notifications were highly significant  =18.139, p<.001.
Figure 6 shows the results for matching animated shapes with notification types.
Results show a significant and strong correlation  between the notification type matching scores for animated shapes, and the pre-session notification type urgency scores.
By contrast, correlations between non-animated shape group matching scores and pre-session notification type urgency scores were not significant for any of the shape groups.
All participants were enthusiastic about animating the phone, but the majority mentioned the desire to personalize these animations: "Pulsing very gently would be more suitable for secondary notifications.
Participants commented on the shapes presented, mentioning an affinity for the shapes that moved one corner, and the shape that actuated the full-body of the device: "The single corners are very clear, they're simple; I would want to assign a notification to each one.
Simultaneous corners are a bit confusing: it's more like it's saying I've received two or three notifications.
But it did get my attention.
Participants said the actuated shape notifications would be useful in situations where silence is necessary.
Scenarios mentioned included: meetings, movies, or when concentrating.
Another benefit identified is the ability to receive notifications in noisy environments.
If this was beside me while I worked I would notice my phone moving, and probably respond to people a lot more frequently.
Results suggest that generally speaking, tactile feedback appears to have little effect on the appreciation of particular shapes for various types of notifications.
We believe there are a number of explanations for this.
Firstly, all deformations of the device were away from the hand .
While users reported to be able to feel these deformations, this meant there was no positive pressure exerted on the hand during the presentation of any of the shape notifications.
Secondly, the forces exerted by this MorePhone prototype are insufficient to provide significant kinesthetic cues.
Thirdly, comments indicated that participants considered shape deformation as a means of visually drawing their attention .
The latter can be explained by the fact that movement in the user's peripheral vision upon shape actuation provides a powerful yet subtle and ambient means to signify a status change in the phone's notification state.
Although there was a significant difference between notification type matching scores for various 2 Corner Bends in the visual-tactile condition, this was not significant in the visual-only condition, and this was not significant in either condition for 1 Corner Bends.
We believe that, while subtle, this effect was due to participants perhaps experiencing more of the shape change through tactile sensations in 2 Corner conditions.
A common useful feature participants noted was the ability to receive notifications from a distance.
Due to the device's capacity to hold shape, participants noted they could identify the notification and decide whether to attend to this notification or ignore it, without ever going to the phone.
Participants commented that shape notifications would not be useful if the phone was in another room: "I would want to pair the movement with the sounds phones have now."
The addition of sound was a popular comment among participants, as: "For really demanding notifications, I do not think movement would be enough."
Our hypothesis that different shapes would be rated with different urgency was partially confirmed.
While there were significant differences in urgency ratings between Full Screen, 2 and 1 Corner bends, there was no significant correlation between pre-study urgency and notification type match for shape groups.
While Table suggests a small but insignificant trend between urgency rankings and surface area of shape groups, this is not substantiated by a clear association between pre-study urgency scores and notification type matches for shape groups.
Our hypothesis that different shapes convey different meanings to users in terms of their appropriateness for a particular notification was confirmed.
Participants, however, indicated no particular preference of any one shape group for text, voicemail, social or email notifications.
Comments by participants suggested that all message notifications were best matched with a single corner bend, using multiple corners for multiple simultaneous notifications.
As such, for these categories, we believe they interpreted the shapes differently, and rather than using shape to identify what message type they would receive, they were more interested in determining how many simultaneous notifications there would be.
In our second, more informal study, we used MorePhone with an active display providing visual popup notifications in two corners of the flexible display: top right and bottom right.
6 participants volunteered for this study .
The purpose of this follow-up study was to ascertain if users would require visual notifications to ascertain notification type, and whether they would touch the actuated corner to attend to the notification.
We were also interested to know whether they wanted to dedicate particular corners of the display to particular notifications, as suggested by their comments in the first study, or whether they would prefer to have the entire display signify the notification type.
We used the same apparatus as in the first study, but with active graphical notifications.
Results from the follow-up study showed 4/6 participants touching the display on the curled tip to address the notification.
The remaining participants simply touched the display.
After having been shown which corner pertained to which notification, all participants were able to determine the notification type based on shape-only notifications.
5/6 participants preferred notifications in a dedicated corner as they found arbitrary corners confusing.
4/6 Participants indicated they saw little to no value in determining the type of notification by the shape of the screen.
Results clearly point in the direction of the use of customizable dedicated corners with visual notifications for actuated shape notifications.
All participants wanted to be able to personalize in which corner each notification type would appear.
There were also benefits identified for using shape notifications without visual cues.
I don't like keeping my phone face up in public as I don't want people to be able to read every text I receive."
We first showed a shape actuation in the top right corner, with a visual notification popup of a text message, and asked participants where they would touch the display upon a shape notification.
We subsequently also actuated the bottom-right corner with a visual notification popup of a Facebook update.
After this, we showed them the same sequence, without visual notification, and asked participants what they thought these notifications meant, and whether they thought the visual popup was helpful.
We again repeated the sequence with visual notification, this time reversing the corners for each visual notification type.
We subsequently asked them if they preferred dedicating corners to a notification type, and if so, whether they wanted to personalize which corner.
Flexible smartphones support new notification paradigms that can use deformation to convey information.
While more research is needed to ascertain the efficacy of shape actuation for tactile feedback, the capacity to actively change shape provides an extra design vocabulary that fits between current visual and vibratory notification methods.
While we expect future MorePhone prototypes to be highly customizable, allowing users to design their own actuated shape vocabulary, current hardware limitations prevented such customization.
The current prototype is limited in terms of the amount of force it can exert on the body which constrained the expression of shape actuation for kinesthetic feedback.
These limitations may be due to present display technology and results may vary with different actuation or display methods and materials.
There appears to be a tradeoff between visual and tactile actuated shape notification design: in order for shapes to be clearly visible, they are best actuated outwards.
Haptic perception is, however, best served through inward actuation.
Our results may, as such, be limited by the choice for our prototype to actuate outwards.
We aim to reduce the need for power cables in future designs.
In this paper, we presented MorePhone, a prototype flexible smartphone that changes shape to provide notifications.
We studied how users perceive the urgency of full screen, single corner and multiple corner shape notifications.
Results suggest full screen notifications are best used for the most urgent notifications, such as phone calls and alarms.
Single corner notifications were best matched to notifications that were ranked as less urgent, such as emails and messages.
Users preferred using multiple corner actuations to service multiple notifications, dedicating each corner to a particular notification type.
