GOMS models of telephone toll and assistanceoperators  are being constructed in an effort to provide theoretical predictions of expert performance on several dedicated workstations.
This applied effort has pushed the developmentof GOMS modeling techniquesinto the areaof speechinput and output, and into a task where information is not always available when it is required by the TAO.
This paper describesthe task, heuristicsfor constructingthe GOMS models, and parameters for making quantitative predictionsof performance time.
This strategy producesbehavior that can be analyzed into a sequenceof perceptual, cognitive, and motor processes.
A second strategy involves looking ahead for information, as when a typist looks aheadof what his or her fingers are typing.
This parallel strategyleadsto observedbehaviordominatedby the duration of motor responses,with the perceptual processes always in the background.
A strategywhere the userovertly recordsinformation for future useis explicitly U predicted.
Such a strategy would be inefficient in a task where information is always available, and it is not observedin actualtask performance.
Although the tasks analyzed with GOMS to date include a large portion of HCI tasks, there are other important task characteristics that are not represented in these analyses.
Even staying within the traditional GOMS domain of errorfree, expert performance, there are HCI tasks with other perceptual input and response modes and qther dynamic characteristics of perceptualinput.
The taskdescribedin this paper has fleeting auditory and visual input, that can occur before or after the information is neededin the task.
It also includes speechinput and output.
In the remainder of this paper, the task will be described,heuristics for conducting the GOMS analysis will be presented,and new parameters will be introduced.
A recent review of cognitive modeling in human-computer interaction  indicates that GOMS analyseshas been used to model many tasks in a diversity of domains .
These tasks have severalcommon characteristics.Most of the stimuli are presented with a static visual display.
Editing tasks were presentedas red marks on a paper copy, choice reaction time stimuli were presented at a single position on a CRT screen, spreadsheet formulae and databasequeries were described on hard-copy, and typing tasks primarily involved transcription from hard-copy or from a well known position on a CRT screen.
Also, the user was free to work at his or her own pace;the userdid not have to wait for critical information to appear and critical informationdid not disappear.
These common task characteristics lead to very simihu GOMS analyses.
Because the input is primarily visual, static, and availabIebefore it is neededin the task, the user can employ strategies that take in information whenever necessary.Two strategies havebeenpredictedand observed.
The first strategy is sequential, where information is perceived right before it is needed for the next task.
This leadsto the unit rusks proposedby Card, Moran 8zNewell,
The task under examination is that of a telephonecompany toll and assistanceoperator  responding to customer requests for assistance.
The TAO sits at a dedicated workstation specifically designedfor thesetasks.
He or she has had explicit training in the most efficient call-handling procedures,and has had sufficient practice to becomeexpert at the task.
There is typically no problem solving involved; the TAO simply recognizes the call situation and executes routine procedures associated with that situation.
Some types of calls involve substantial system response times .
A customer dials 0 plus the desiredtelephonenumber, A "Call Arrival Tone"  soundsat the TAO's workstation.
Permission to copy without fee all or part of this material is granted provided that the copies are not made or distributed for direct commercial advantage, the ACM copyright notice and the title of the publication and its date appear, and notice is given that copying is by permission of the Association for Computing Machinery.
To copy otherwise, or to republish requires a fee and/or specific permission.
CHI 90 proceedings greetings for different types of calls, so he or she must scan relevant information automatically displayed on the screen to choose an appropriate greeting.
In this example, 0+ appears on the screen and the TAO says "New England Telephone, may I help you?".
The customer says, "Make this a collect call from Ann".
The TAO presses the appropriate keys on the workstation keyboard, writes down the customer's name for future reference, and waits for verification that this number can accept collect calls.
When the call is put through and the called party says, "Hello", the TAO says "I have a collect call to anyone from Ann.
Will you pay for the call?".
In this case, the called party says "Ah.
Babe, do you know an Ann.... Yeah, we'll accept it.
The TAO thenpresses a key to release the workstation and make it ready to accept the next call.
The TAO also crosses out the name, in preparation for the next call.
The most striking difference between the TAO tasks and previously studied tasks is the use of the auditory channel.
The temporal nature of speech makes the information fleeting; if the TAO is not attending to the customer when particular content words are voiced , then the information is missed.
The visual input channel is also different from previously studied tasks because system response time makes some of the visual input unavailable when the TAO is ready to use it.
April 1990 necessaryto complete a call, the sequence in which they are performed, and the performance time parameters associated with each operator.
Each behavior is represented as an event box with an associated duration and information flow dependencies .
The information flow constraints, depicted by lines drawn between the event boxes, are the substance of the task analysis and reflect the analyst's knowkdge of the task.
Heuristics for building GOMS schedule charts have emerged in the course of examining several specific calls.
Most of these heuristics have theoretical foundations beyond the scope of this paper.
Developing heuristics has been, and continues to be, an iterative process, with initial assumptions proved incorrect by observations of performance, or unanticipated observations leading to new assumptions.
In order to provide a coherent explanation of how to build these charts, the iterative process has been suppressed.
Examples of the schedule chart representations of these heuristics can be found in Figure 1.
It is assumed that the TAO is an expert and can anticipate likely call situations from preliminary information.
Given the TAO's goal to complete the call quickly, it is assumed that the TAO will perform as many activities as possible in preparation for the arrival of expected information.
For instance, the TAO will move his or her eyes to the field on the CRT screen where information will appear before it appears, and the TAO will move a finger to the next most likely key to be pressed before confirmation of the appropriatenessof that key is received.
System response time  is the time it takes for the system to provide information to the TAO.
For instance, the time between the end of the downstroke of a key and the initiation of the display of that key name on the CRT screen is considered to be system RT.
TAO call handling is being analyzed using a GOMS approach, in an effort to provide a theoretical prediction of performance time that can be used in the evaluation of different TAO workstations .
We are in the early stages of using GOMS models for this task and have developed a tentative set of heuristics for use in the analyses.
A GOMS analysis of TAO tasks consists of defining the goals, operators, methods, and selection rules used to handle calls.
These are inferted from detailed knowledge of the task obtained from real-time observation of expert TAOS, videotapes of expert TAOS handling calls placed by experimental confederates employed by the telephone company, and knowledge of the training undergone by new TAOS.
The overriding goal of the TAO is to complete all calls as efficiently as possible.
Training material presents this as answering three questions: who pays for the call, at what rate, and is the call complete?
TAO training teaches the most efficient method for completing each subgoal; each keystroke, each phrase to be spoken, each keyword to listen for, is explicitly taught.
Since only the most efficient method is taught, there are no different methods to choose between and hence no selection rules.
System RT has always been a component of GOMS modeling , but it has not played a major role in previously studied tasks and only one system has been involved in any one task.
There are three systems in TAO tasks and each RT is recorded separately.
CHI 90 Prwxedngs the call-handling system and provides verification of billing to the CHS.
The CAT event box immediately follows from this dummy start box, with a duration set from the videotape.
Parallel to the CAT, a CHS RT event box follows the dummy start box and ends when information begins to be displayed on the CRT screen.
A SDT event box stems from this CHS RT event, beginning when the information begins to be displayed, with a duration set to the time it takes to become fully visible.
Information from the CHS is assumed to be sent simultaneously to the TAO workstation and to the BVS.
When auditory input is anticipated, the TAO performs a cognitive operator called "attend-to-x", where x is either the CAT or a customer's voice.
Subsequent perceptual operators depend upon the completion of this operator.
The only non-speech auditory input necessary to the TAO tasks is the CAT.
This tone is assumedto be perceived by a single, generic perceptual operator and verified by a cognitive operator .
It is assumed that the TAO recognizes key-words in the customer's speech as soon as they are uttered.
The perception of customer speech is represented as perceptual operations on phrases that end with key w0rds.l In the example, "Make it collect from Ann" is parsed into a "Make it collect" perceptual event box and a "from Ann" perceptual event box .
The temporal dependency of this statement is preserved by making the duration of the perceptual operators equal to the observed duration of the phrases and by drawing a dependency line from "Make it collect" to "from Ann".
However, actions that may be appropriate from information in a phrase can begin after the perception and cognitive verification of that phrase, without waiting for other phrasesto complete.
The TAO must avoid interrupting the customer, so it is assumedthat the TAO waits an appropriate length of time to make sure the customer has stopped speaking.
Then there would be a separate perceptual operation for that auditory information.
Since it is assumed that the perceptual operation is coincident in time with the physical presentation, this parallel representation is awkward in MacProject, and totally redundant, so I prefer to represent only the perceptual operations, as described in the body of the text.
Information presented on the CRT screen is assumed to be well known to the TAO.
Predictable information is presented in predictable fields.
The task of the TAO is to recognize the information presented, as opposed to deciphering unexpected information.
Given the task situation, the next most likely piece of information can be anticipated, so the TAO can prepare for its presentation.
The TAO then directs his or her eyes to that field with a cognitive operator to initiate eye movement and a motor operator to move the eyes to the appropriate field.
If the TAO has received visual information in that field immediately prior to the current situation, with no intervening visual or auditory perception or cognitive activity, then it is assumed that the eyes remained fixated on the appropriate field and these operators are not necessary .
After the eyes are fixated on the appropriate field and the information is completely displayed on the CRT screen, a perceptual operator takes in the visual information.
Finally, a cognitive operator verifies the existence of the expected information.
Observations of TAOS in a real work situation revealed that keys are pressed primarily with the right hand.
The only exception is POS REL, the key that releases the workstation after a call is complete.
POS REL is located on the extreme left of the keyboard and is almost exclusively pressed with the index finger of the left hand.
This information, combined with the GOMS Model of Expert Transcription Typing  form the basis for the GOMS model of hand movements in TAO tasks.
Hand movement motor operators are described at the lowest level for which previous GOMS research provides performance parameters .
Keystrokes are further separatedinto three parts: horizontal movements to position the finger above the key, a down-stroke to press a key, an up-stroke to release a key.
These movements are not predictable from the task goals or the TAO training, so are outside the realm of the GOMS analysis.
However, as predicted by the assumption that the overriding goal of the TAO is to complete the call as efficiently as possible, such movements are observed to occur while the TAO is waiting for information and rarely have an effect on the duration of the call.
The small chart stretching acrossthe bottom third of the page is the complete schedule chart for the collect call usedas an example in the text.
It includes all perceptual, cognitive, and motor operatorsnecessaryto complete the call, and the system RT inherent in the call.
Each operator is representedby a box; each information flow dependency,by a line connecting two boxes.
All operators of the sametype appearin the samehorizontal row, as labelled at the extreme left of the chart.
The estimateddurations  appearaboveeach blown-up box.
Figure la demonstratesthe heuristics for initial system RT and the perception of a simple auditory stimulus.
Figure 1b demonstratesthe heruistics for parallel system RT and the perception of visual information.
Figure lc demonstratesthe heuristics for the production of well-practiced speech.
Figure Id demonstratesthe representationof hand movements.
Figure le demonstratesthe heurisitics for the perception of customer speech.
Each hand movement chunk is initiated with a cognitive operator and implemented by one or more motor operators.
The size of the movement chunk is determined by knowledge of the call situation.
For instance, the POS REL key releases the workstation, making it available for the next call .
This key cannot be pressed until the Thus, the POS REL-down hand call is complete.
However, the end of the call can be anticipated well before this acknowledgement, so the finger can be positioned over POS REL before the completion of all the acts necessary for the downstroke.
Thus, the hand movements to press POS REL separate into two chunks: the horizontal movement to position the finger above POS REL, and the press and release of the key.
Other situations do not allow anticipation , so the movement chunk includes the horizontal movement, the down-stroke and the up-stroke.
If pressing the key dependson additional information being presented to the TAO, then place another cognitive operator before the downstroke motor operator.
The up-stroke motor operator immediately follows the down-stroke motor operator with no intervening cognitive operator.
Cognitive operators initiating movement are dependent on the completion of all previous cognitive operators and previously initiated motor operators using the same hand.
However, motor operators for the right and left hands can work in parallel.
The phrases used by TAOS are taught during training.
It is assumed that these phrases are well learned and require no problem-solving or unique speech generation.
However, there is substantial literature of patterns and parameters of human speech that provide estimates for duration.
GOMS assumes this pause to include the silence signalling the end of the speaker's turn, the verification of that silence by the listener, and the cognitive initiation of the listener's reply.
Estimates of operator duration provided by previous GOMS research ODerator Perceptual Simple binary signal Complex visual signal  Cognitive Motor Homing between devices Horizontal movement within function keys Horizontal movement within numeric keys Down-stroke Up-stroke Eye movement Card, et.
After all the operators assumed necessary to complete the task are placed in a schedule chart, and all dependency lines are drawn, the time course of events can be predicted if durations can be assigned to each operator.
Estimates of duration come from several sources: previous GOMS research, independent research done in other domains, the videotapes of TAO call handling, and aggregate data about actual calls.
Estimates From Previous GOMS Research.
Previous research involving the Model Human Processor and GOMS modeling provides estimates of the duration of several operators used in TAO tasks.
Although different researchers have come up with slightly different estimates of some of these operators 171they are in the same ballpark.
Where possible, we have chosen to use estimates based on experiments specifically designed to produce such values.
3 John & Newell record 340 msec for perception of a 6-letter word.
Here, we separate this perception into two parts: a perceptual operator  which perceives and encodes the information, and a cognitive operator  that verifies the information.
Here, we separate this action into two parts: a cognitive operator  that initiates the action, and a motor operator .
5 Card, Moran Rr Newell record 230 msec for eye movements.
Here, we separate this action into two parts: a cognitive operator  that initiates the action, and a motor operator .
CHI 90 Ptwxeditqs Table 2.
Estimates of speech-related operations provided by speech research.
Process to make estimates of customer conversation time Estimates From Videotapes Of Sample Calls.
We have recorded TAOS using existing workstations and systemsto handle twenty different types of calls placed by an experimental confederate employed by the telephone company.
Thesevideotapescan verify estimatesgotten by other means.
For example, the speech duration rnles-ofthumb statedabove,overpredict the duration of the specific phrases spoken in the example call by an average of 7% .
These videotapesalso supply estimatesof times unavailableiiom other sources.
The examplecall showed actual SDT to be about 50 msec, CHS RT for display of relevant information to be between 50 and 500 msec with a median value of 300 msec, CHS RT to initiate ringing to be over 3OCKImsec,and BVS RT to be 770 msec.
These estimates will bc continually updated as more videotapesegments are ~alp?d.
Estimates From Aggregate Data Of Actual Calls.
Some elementsof actuaI calls cannot be estimatedon the basis of abstracttaskanalysisor recordingof controlled experiments.
Most obvious is the duration of customer conversation.
However, the range and distribution of customer conversationcan be estimatedby analysisof the distribution of time for actual calls .
If all other durations have been determinedby means described above, they can be subtracted from the distributions of actual calls to leave an estimate of the distribution of customerconversationtime .
This distribution can be used to make estimates akin to the FastMan, MiddleMan and SlowMan parameters used by Card, et.
Figure 1 gives the schedule chart resulting from the task analysisfor the collect caIl situation, heuristicsand duration estimates describedabove.
The first is to act as a check on the task analysis and duration estimates implicit in the chart.
When actual start and end times observedon the.videotapeare enforcedin this schedulechart, some times may be impossible to meet.
This usually indicates that there is something wrong with the task analysis.
In this example,one impossible date emerges.
For this call handled by this TAO, the TAO crossesout the name "Ann" before the called party gives any indication that he will accept the call.
Thus, the assumption in the task analysis that the TAO requires confiiation of acceptancebefore crossing out the name is incorrect.
This may be due to a general misconception about the use of the written name.
The original assumptionwas that the name was written for future referencein casethe call was rejected and the calling party wished to place another collect call, but it may be the case that the name is written only to allow the TAO to unerringly remember it for the announcementof the first call.
Another explanation is that the original task assumption is correct in general, but this TAO is idiosyncratic in her use of the written name.
Either explanation can be checked with subsequent analysis of videotapes of this and other TAOS handling similar calls.
For example, the duration of a single ring is a well known quantity in telephony, which servesas a lower bound on the duration of ring time.
The second use of this schedule chart is to provide a theoretical explanation for the time course of events.
If all durationsare estimatedand no startor end timesare enforced beyond the initial starting time, then the schedule chart gives an estimate of the total performance time for a call, and for the start times of intermediate events.
This procedure yields an estimate of 21350 msec for the total performance time, 10%under the observedperformance time of 24040 msec,and an averageabsolutepercenterror of 14% for the anchor times of 15 observableintermediate events .
Lastly, zero-parameter predictionsam being madeabout what would changein total performancetime if a new workstation was used.
These predictions will be checked against call performancedata collected in a field study comparing the existing and proposed workstations.
In addition to the accuracy of the predictions, the relative cost of doing the GOMS modeling versus the cost of conducting the field study arebeing recordedto allow cost/benefitanalyses.
It is our hope that the promise of GOMS modeling that has been demonstratedin severalacademiclaboratorieswill be fulfilled in this transferto industrial use.
This paper represents a preliminary stage in an ongoing project to demonstrate GOMS modeling to be a viable technique for system evaluation in the real world.
To that end, work continuesin severaldirections.
Other call types are being analyzed to test the heuristics detailedaboveand to discovernew heuristics.
The heuristicsare being taughtto severalresearchers familiar with TAO operations and independently developedGOMS models are being compared to evaluate inter-analyst reliability.
This will measure the amount of training necessary beforeacceptable reliability is obtained.
This researchrepresentsa collaborative effort between the author and the Intelligent Interfaces Group at the NYNEX Science and Technology Center.
Support from that organization, specifically Wayne Gray and Mike Atwood, and from New England Telephone, specifically Karen O'Brien, is gratefully acknowledged.
Special thanks to Allen Newell and Sandy Esch for their comments on the contentof this paper.
Jaffe, J., & Feldstein, S. Rhythms of dialogue.
John, B. E. Contributions to engineering models of human-computer interaction.
John, B. E. & Newell, A. Cumulating the science of HCI: From S-R compatibility to transcription typing.
To appear in Human Computer Interaction.
That is, the GOMS models are manipulated to show the impact of different changes to the task.
For instance, if the CHS RT was decreased by 20%, the impact on total performancetime for different call types can be predicted.
Suchanalysescan lead to recommendationsabout where to most profitably invest time and money: changing the systemsor the workstation hardware, or perhaps mounting a massive advertising campaign to get customers to be more succinct in stating their desires.
