In many educationalsettings, manipulative materials  play an important role in children's learning, enabling children to explore mathematical and scientific conceptsthrough direct manipulation of physical objects.Our group at de MJT Media Lab has developed a new generation of "digital manipulatives"-computationallyenhancedversions of traditional children's toys.
Thesenew manipulatives enable children to explore a new set of conceptsthat have previously been considered"too advanced" for children to learn.
In this paper, we discuss four of our digital manipulatives-computationallyaugmented versionsof blocks, beads,balls, andbadges.
Keywords Bducation, learning, children, ubiquitous computing INTRODUCTION Walk into any kindergarten, and you are likely to see a diverse collection of "`man.ipulativematerials."
You might seea set of CuisenaireRods: brightly colored woodenrods of varying lengths.
The colors and lengths of the rods are carefully chosen to engage children in explorations of arithmetic conceptsandrelationships.Children discoverthat eachbrown rod is de samelength as two purples--or four reds.
On the next table, you might see a set of Pattern Blocks.
Children can use these polygon-shaped tiles to create mosaic-like patterns-and, in the process, learn important geometric concepts.
As children build and experiment with thesemanipulative materials, they develop richer ways of thinking about mathematicalconceptssuchas number,size, and shape.
But there are many important conceptsthat are very difficult  to explore with these traditional manipulative materials.
This paper discusses a new breedof manipulative materials that we call "digital manipulatives."
These new manipulatives-with computational power embedded inside-are designedto expand the range of conceptsthat children can explore through direct manipulation, enabling children to learn conceptsthat were previously considered "too advanced"for children.
The paper begins with a brief history of the educational uses of manipulative materials, then discusses several digital manipulatives that our research grouphasdeveloped.
LEARNING WITH MANIPULATIVE MATEXIALS The idea that physical objectsmight play an important role in the learning processis a relatively new idea.
Until the 19th century, formal education focused almost exclusively on lectures and recitations.
One of the tirst advocatesfor "hands-on learning" was the Swiss educator Johann Heinrich Pestalozzi .
Pestalozzi assertedthat students need to learn through their sensesand through physical activity, arguing for "things before words, concrete beforeabstract".
Friedrich Froebel,who createdthe world's fh-stkindergarten in Germany in 1837, was very influenced by Pestalozzi's ideas.
Froebel's kindergarten was filled with objects for children to play with.
Froebel developeda specific set of 20 "gifts'-physical objects such as balls, blocks, and sticks-for children to use in the kindergarten.
Froebel carefully designedthesegifts to help children recognizeand appreciatethe commonpatterns and forms found in nature.
Froebel's gifts were eventually distributed throughout the world, deeplyinfluencing the developmentof generationsof young children.
Indeed, Frank Lloyd Wright credited his boyhood experienceswith Froebel's gifts as the foundation of his architecture.
Maria Montessori extended Froebel's ideas, developing materials for older children and inspiring a network of schoolsin which manipulative materials play a central role.
In an effort to create an "education of the senses" , Montessori developednew materials and activities to help children develop their sensory capabilities.
Montessori hopedthat her materialswould put children in control of the learning process,enabling them to learn through personal investigation and exploration.
PAPERS Jean Piaget provided an epistemological foundation for theseeducationalideas.Piaget theorized that children must first construct knowledge through "concrete operations" before moving on to "formal operations" .
During the past decade, a new wave of research has suggested that Piaget, if anything, understated the importance of concrete operations.
Sherry Turkle and Seymour Papert, for example, have argued for a "revaluation of the concrete," suggesting that "abstract reasoning"should not be viewed asmore advancedthan  concretemanipulations.
Today, manipulative materials are well-established in the classroom, especiallyin the early grades.
Educationjournals are filled with papers on ways of using manipulative materialsin the classroom-papers with colorful titles such as "Lima Beans, Paper Cups, and Algebra"  and "Activities to Grow On: Buttons,Beads,andBeans" .
Diierent manipulativematerialsengage children in different types of thinking.
According to an old saying: "Give a person a hammer, and the whole world looks like a nail."
Similarly, give a child Cuisenaire Rods, and arithmetic relationships become more salient for the child.
Give a child Pattern Blocks, and geometric relationships become more salient.
Our goal in designing new "digital manipulatives" is to make a new set of conceptssalient for children.
Our basic strategy is to embed computational and communications capabilities in traditional children's toys.
By using traditional toys as a starting point, we hope to take advantage of children's deep familiarity with  these objects.At the sametime, by endowing these toys with computational and communications capabilities, we hope to highlight a new set of ideas for children to think about.
In particular, we believe that children, by playing and building with these new manipulatives, can gain a deeper understanding of how dynamic systems behave.
Until recently, dynamic systemshave been studied primarily at the university level, using advanced mathematical techniques like differential equations.
We expect that digital manipulatives will make these ideas accessible to even younger students,enabling studentsto explore theseideas through direct manipulation of familiar physical objects.
Such explorations would not be possible with traditional  manipulative materials.
Computation and communication capabilities play a critical role: they enable physical objects to move, sense,and interact with one another-and, as a result, make systems-related conceptsmore salientto  children.
Our development of digital manipulatives can be seen as part of a broader trend within the CBI community.
It is only in recent years that CHI researchers haveshifted attentionto physical objects.In researchefforts variously describedas "ubiquitous computing," "computeraugmented environments," and "things that think,%' researchesarenow exploring ways of addingcomputational capabilities to everydayobjectsranging from notepadsand desktopsto eyeglasses and shoes.
Our researchon digital manipulatives is part of this trend, but it focuses explicitly on the use of objects to support learning and education.
Our primary goal is not to help users accomplishsometask faster or more effectively, but rather to engagethem in new ways of thinking.
In short, we are interested in Things That Think only if they also serveas Things To Think With.
This research can be viewed asan extensionof our previous work on LEGO/Logo , a robotics construction kit commercialized by the LEG0 toy companyand now usedin more than 20,000 schools in the United States.
With LEGO/Logo, children can write computer programs to control their LEG0 constructions.
Elementary-school students haveusedLEGO/Logo to build andprograma wide assortment of creativemachines,including a programmable pop-up toaster, an automated amusement park, and a machinethat sortsLEG0 bricks according to their lengths.
In these projects, students build with an enhancedset of LEG0 parts ,connect their constructionsto a personal computer , then write Logo computer programs to control the actionsof their constructions.
In LEGO/Logo, wires are both a practical and conceptual nuisance,limiting not only what children can build but also how they think about their constructions.In our new work with digital manipulatives, we get rid of the wires and embed computational capabilities directly in the toys themselves.
We continue to use Logo as the primary programming environment.
But Logo programs can be downloaded directly into these new toys , so that the toys function autonomously.
The next four sections describe digital manipulatives that we have createdby adding computation to four traditional children's toys-blocks, beads,balls, and badges.
These projects are .in varying stages of development.
Some of thesenew manipulativeshave alreadybeenusedextensively by children; othersare still in the early prototype stage.
BLOCKS We beganour work on digital manipulativesby embedding computation in LEG0 bricks-creating Programmable Bricks .
Each ProgrammableBrick has output ports for controlling motors and lights, and input ports for receiving information from sensors.To use a P-Brick, a child writes a Logo programon a personalcomputer,then downloadsthe program to the P-Brick.
After that, the child can take  the P-Brick anywhere;the program remains stored in the P-Brick.
PAPERS general principles about communication.
When a child programs a Cricket-basedcreature to communicate with a secondcreature,the child must have a good model of what the secondcreaturealready "knows."
The generallesson:to communicate well, you must develop a model of your audience.
This idea might seem obvious, but it is often ignored in interactions among people, and thus is an important lessonfor children to learn.
Recently, we have begun a new science-education initiative using Crickets .
Many science-education researchers emphasizethe importance of children developing their own scientific investigations .
We go a step further, encouraging studentsto use Crickets to createtheir own scientific instruments to carry out their investigations.
For example, two elementary-school girls used Crickets to build a bird feeder that keepstrack of the birds that visit.
When a bird lands, it pushesa touch sensor, which triggers a LEG0 mechanism, which depressesthe shutter of a camera,taking a picture of the bird.
Our initial studies indicate that students, by building their own scientific instruments, not only becomemore motivated in science activities, but also develop critical capacities in evaluating scientific measurementsand knowledge, make stronger connections to the scientific conceptsunderlying their investigations, and develop deeperunderstandingsof the relationship betweenscienceand technology.
Two elementary-school studentstest the behaviorsof their Programmable Brick "creature."
In our initial work in schools, students have used Programmable Bricks to createautonomous"creatures" that mimic the behaviors of real animals  For example,one group of fifth-grade studentscreateda LEG0 dinosaur that was attracted to flashes of light, like one of the dinosaursin JurassicPark.
To make the dinosaurmove toward the light, the students neededto understandbasic ideas about feedback and control.
The program compared readingsfrom the dinosaur's two light-sensor "`eyes.
But with the right tools, fifth graderswere able to explore theseideas.
Were their LEG0 creatures more like animals?
Bricks, called Crickets, are Our newest Pro,-able roughly the size of children's Matchbox cars and action figures .
Each Cricket contains a hficrochip PIC processorandis capableof two-way infrared communications.
Children can use Crickets to create communities of robotic creatures that interact with one another.
In recent years, beads have becomeincreasingly popular among children, especially young girls.
There are entire storeswith nothing but bins of beadsof varying colors and sizes.
Children string beads together to create colorful necklaces andbracelets.
With traditional beads,children create colorful but static patterns.Our Programmable Beads are designed to engage children in creating dynamic patterns.
Each Programmable Beadhasa built-in microprocessor andlightemitting diode , and it communicates with its neighboring beads by simple inductive coupling.
String beads together in different ways and you get different dynamic patterns of light Somebeadspassthe light to the next bead along the string, other beads reflect the light back, still others "swallow" the light.
Somebeadspassthe light with a particular probability.
A slight changein the behavior or placement of one of the beadscan lead to an entirely different pattern of activity in the overall collection.
Children can work with the beadsat two different levels.
For starters,they can string togetherpre-programmed beads , and observe the dynamic lighting patterns that arise from the interactions.
More advanceduserscan write new programsand downloadthem into the beads.
A string of Programmable Beads can be viewed as a physical instantiation of a one-dimensional cellular automata .
In cellular automata,each cell changesits state basedon the statesof its neighboring cells.
Cellular automatahave proved to be a rich frameworkfor exploring "emergentphenomena";simple rules for eachcell can lead to complex and unexpected large-scale structures.
But cellular automata seem best suited as a tool for mathematicians and computeraficionados,not for children.
The idea of writing "transition rules" for "cells" is not an idea that most children can relate to.
Programmable Beads allow children to explore ideasof decentralized systems and emergentphenomenain a more natural way, through the manipulation of physical objects.
We believe that Programmable Beads can provide a meanin,ofl and motivating context for children to begin thinking aboutprobabilistic behaviors.Imagine a bead that passes the light to the next beadhalf of the time but reflects the light back to the previous bead the other half of the time.
By stringing a set of these beadstogether, children can explorerandom-walkbehaviors.What if you then add a bead that passesthe light three-quarters of the time and reflects it just one-quarter of the time?
How will that changethe overall dynamicpattern?Most children  have poor intuitions about such systems.Our hypothesis is that children who grow up playing with ProgrammableBeads will develop much richer intuitions aboutprobabilistic behaviors.
Programmable Beadsalso provide a context for children to learn about "programming paradigms."
There are two very different ways to think about programming the beads.
Paradigm 1: Children can program the behaviors of the beadsthemselves,telling each bead to turn its light off or on basedon its neighbors' lights.
Paradigm2: Children can program a "process" that jumps from bead to bead .The important point is not for children to learn which of these paradigms is better .
Rather, the important lessonis that there areoften multiple approaches for describingbehaviors,each with its own advantages.
Probably the most popular of all children's toys is the ball.
How could computationpossibly improve the ball?
We are exploring that question with our BitBall-a transparent, rubbery ball  with a Cricket, accelerometer, andcoloredLEDs embedded inside.
To customizea BitBall , a child writes a program on a desktopcomputer, then downloads the program to the BitBall via infrared communication.A child can program a BitBall to turn on its LEDs based on its motion, as detected by the accelerometer.One child, for example, might program a BitBall to flash its red light wheneverit undergoesa sharp accelerationor deceleration.
Another child might create a ball that "wants" to be played with: If the ball doesn't experience any sharp accelerations for a certain period of time, it begins flashing its lights in an effort to attract someoneto play with it.
We have found that children are quick to attribute intentionality to the BitBall, even when it is running the simplest of programs.When children program the BitBall themselves, they develop a better understanding of how seeminglyintentional behaviorscan arisefrom just a few simple rules.
Since the BitBall  can send and receive infrared signals, children can also program BitBalls to communicatewith other electronic devices.
For example, students have programmed the BitBall to send its accelerationdata to a MIDI synthesizerin real time, in an effort to "hear the motion" of the ball .
PAPERS BADGES Many children like to wear badges  and buttons with slogans.
Our Thinking Tags are based on these traditional badges, but they have built-in electronics so that they can communicatewith one another -and also change their displaysbasedon thosecommunications.
We first developed the Thinking Tags  for a conference  at the Media Laboratory.
The Thinking Tags served as name tags, but each tag also contained information about the interests and opinions of its wearer.
When two people met, their badgesexchanged information and turned on lights to show how much the two people had in common.In this way, the badgesactedas a conversational prop to get people talking with one another.
Other research labs have also developed "smart badges" , but our Thinking Tags are different in an important way: While other badges are designed to support interaction between people and machines , our Thinking Tags are designed to facilitate communication amongpeople.And, indeed,the Thinking Tags haveproved successfulas a catalystfor conversation.
More recently, we have begun to use Thinking Tags in educational applications with pre-college students.
Some students start as the  carriers of the disease, while others are immune to the disease.
Over time, more and more students become "infected" with the disease.
The challengeis for the students to develop theories to explain the spreadof the virus.
Does the disease have a latency period?
Are some people more susceptible than others?As part of their analysis,studentscan get additional data from their Thinking Tags, which keep track of who each person has interacted with and when.
Often, the students "rerun" the simulation, resetting their badges to their initial statesand testing a different set of interactions.
Students,of course,could do similar explorations with onscreen computer simulations.
But we have found that the first-personnatureof the Thinking-Tag activities provides a more meaningful framework for students to investigate systems concepts .
In particular, the Thinking-Tag activities encourage "cohaborative theory building," in which groups of students work together to developand testnew theories.
We have run similar activities using somewhat different metaphors.
In one case, we explained that ideas  could jump from one badge to another.
Some peopie were "resistant" to new ideas; others were active carriers.
The goal was to help people develop a better understandingof how ideas spreadthrough a populationand also to engagethem in thinking about the similarities  betweenthe spreadof disease andthe spread of new ideas.
BitBalls can also be used in scientific investigations.
A BitBall can store its acceleration data and later upload the data to a desktop computer for analysis.
For example, studentshave dropped a BitBall from the top of a building, then used the acceleration data to figure out the height of the building.
Such investigations can lead to a deeper understandingof kinematics.
One group of students threw a BitBall in the air and graphedthe accelerationdata in an effort to find the top of the trajectory.
They discoveredthat there was no changein accelerationwhile the ball is in flight, so it was impossible to determinethe top of the trajectory from accelerationdata alone.
The students had previously studied gravity and acceleration in physics class, but they were not able to apply their classroomknowledge to this real-world context.
We believe that experience with the BitBall will help studentsdevelop an understandingof accelerationthat they can more easily transferto new contexts.
It is important to note that the BitBall is significantly different from most commercial toys with embedded electronics.
Some companies,for example,sell yo-yos that turn on a light while they are moving.
We believe that such toys are different from the BitBall along an important dimension.
The light-up yo-yo is pre-programmed to always do the exact samething.
It is a one-trick toy.
The BitBall gives much greaterflexibility and creative power to children.
With the BitBall, children themselvesdecide how the toy should behave.
PAPERS Our latest version of the Thinking Tag has a built-in twoline display, so that people can display text messages on their badges.In one of our participatory simulations, each personwas able to store up to sevenmemeson their badge.
When you met anotherperson,your badgeinteracted with the otherperson'sbadgeand"`decided"which of your memes to display to the other person-based on which memesthe other person had previously seenand selected.Meanwhile, if you saw a meme you liked on another person's badge, you could simply push a button on your own badgeand add the memeto your personalcollection.
The badgescollected data so that students could later analyze the patterns of social interaction and memepropagation.
Social scientists have long been interested in these types of patterns, but they have lacked the tools needed for rigorous data collection and analysis.Thinking Tags fill that gap.
This type of activity is very diierent from traditional science-educationactivities.
Scienceis usually taught as a processof detachedobservationof phenomena,not active participation within phenomena.
We believe, however,that role-playing canplay a powerful role in scienceeducationespecially in the study of systems-relatedconcepts.
LOOKINGAEEAD We view thesenew blocks, beads,balls, andbadgesnot asa set of separateprojects, but as an integrated family.
The same underlying software environment is used for programming all of these new toys, and the toys are designedto communicateand interact with one another.A BitBall, for example,can sendinformation  to the Thinking Tags-in effect, using the Thinking Tags as a remote display peripheral.
Our goal is to create a unified "community of things" that children can use in a wide variety of explorationsanddesignactivities.
Our work with digital manipulatives is still in the preliminary stages.Our plan is to conduct more in-depth empirical studies of how and what children learn through their interactions with digital manipulatives.
In particular, we plan to investigate: What types of programming paradigms andinterfaces areneeded to help childrenprogram digital manipulatives?Are children able to understandhow and why patternsarise from interactions among the digital manipulatives -and, if not, what new tools and supportmaterials should we provide to help children makesense of thosepatterns?
In what ways do the "surfacefeatures" of our digital manipulatives influence how children usethem?
In what ways do we needto rethink classroomorganization and practices if we want to use digital manipulatives in classroomsettings?
We expectthat thesestudieswill yield ideasfor the redesign of our current digital manipulatives-and the designof new ones.More broadly, we hope that thesestudieswill help us to developa richer theoreticalframeworkfor understanding the role of physical objects  in the learning process.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The Programmable Bricks andCricketshavebeendeveloped primarily by Fred Martin, Brian Silverman, and Robbie Berg.
The Programmable Beads have been developed primarily by Kwin Kramer andRick Borovoy.
The BitBalls have been`developedprimarily by Kwin Kramer, Robbie Berg, Fred Martin, and Brian Silverman.
The Thinking Tagshavebeendevelopedprimarily by Rick Borovoy, Fred Martin, Vanessa Colella, Brian Silverman, and Kwin Kramer.
Mitchel Resnick has supervisedthe projects and developed the conceptual framework of "digital manipulatives."
This research has been supported by generous grants from the LEG0 Group, the National Science Foundation , and the MIT Media Laboratory's Things That Think andDigital Life consortia.
Things that blink: Computationally augmented name tags.
Pianos Not Stereos: Creating Computational Construction Kits.
Beyond Black Boxes: Bringing Transparency and Aesthetics Back to Scientific Instruments.
Proposal to the National Science Foundation.Available from MIT Media Laboratory.
Resnick, M., and Wilensky, U.
Diving into Complexity: Developing Probabilistic Decentralized Thinking through Role-Playing Activities.
