Tablet PCs are gaining popularity but many older adults still struggle with pointing, particularly with two error types: missing, landing and lifting outside the target bounds; and slipping, landing on the target, but slipping off before lifting.
To solve these problems, we examined the feasibility of extending and combining existing techniques designed for younger users and the mouse, focusing our investigation on the Bubble cursor and Steady Clicks techniques.
Through a laboratory experiment with younger and older adults, we showed that both techniques can be adapted for use in a pen interface, and that combining the two techniques provides greater support than either technique on its own.
Though our results were especially pertinent to the older group, both ages benefited from the designs.
We also found that technique performance depended on task context.
From these findings we established guidelines for technique selection.
Pen-based interaction, pointing facilitation, older adults, error prevention.
Unfortunately, many older adults encounter difficulties when using a pen for input .
As with all input devices, selection errors can be costly and overly frustrating .
Although most modern programs offer extensive undo functionalities, these do not necessarily address all costs associated with making an error.
For example, selecting the wrong item from the Windows Start menu is easily corrected by closing the undesired program and reselecting the intended one, but the user must first wait for the unwanted program to load, which can be time-consuming.
Techniques that reduce errors can have a large positive impact for those users who, like many older adults, are easily confused and discouraged by them.
This is often lost in laboratory studies as it is impossible to encapsulate the true cost of recovery time even when penalties are included.
In a previous study , we identified two main sources of general pen-based target acquisition difficulty for older adults:  Missing, landing and lifting outside the target bounds; and  Slipping, landing inside the target bounds, but slipping out before lifting the pen.
Missing was common to both older and younger adults and remained relatively constant across age.
Slipping, in contrast, was unique to the older users and accounted for almost half of the errors for that group.
To address the needs of older individuals using a pen, we explored the feasibility of extending and combing existing techniques for younger users and mouse interaction.
Specifically, we focused on two promising mouse-based techniques: Steady Clicks  and Bubble cursor .
Furthermore, as these two techniques address different aspects of target acquisition, we also assessed the feasibility of combining them to capitalize on each of their strengths.
Steady Clicks is a mouse-based technique designed to help in situations where the user successfully clicks down on a target but slips off before releasing .
It works by freezing the cursor at the button down location until either it is released , or the mouse is moved beyond the freeze threshold .
An evaluation of Steady Clicks found that it enabled motor-impaired participants to select targets using significantly fewer attempts, and for those with the highest slip rates, to select them significantly faster .
Technology is increasingly being promoted as a means of addressing age-related cognitive and sensory impairments and enabling seniors to live more independently .
Pen-based devices such as Personal Digital Assistants and Tablet PCs are appealing platforms for these endeavors because they are small, mobile, and powerful.
They also allow users to take full advantage of their handeye coordination skills in a familiar form of interaction .
When compared to a mouse, pen input has been shown to be particularly beneficial for older adults .
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Steady Clicks was originally designed to address mousebased slipping errors.
Although slipping is common to both mouse and pen interaction, with a mouse, it is generally attributed to an inability to hold the mouse still while clicking .
Tap selection does not have an analogous button clicking action, so it is not immediately clear that techniques designed to reduce slipping for the mouse will directly translate to pen interfaces.
One potential barrier to using Steady Clicks with a pen is that it alters the ratio between mouse and cursor movement.
The direct mapping between the cursor and pen tip makes this less ideal.
The Bubble cursor is a dynamic area cursor , in which a circular cursor grows and shrinks to capture the nearest  target .
Prior evaluation showed that it was faster and more accurate than a standard point cursor, and that its performance could be predicted by Fitts' Law by using the size of the cursor as the target's effective width .
Although this technique was not designed to address slipping, it essentially makes targets bigger in motor space, which should reduce the likelihood of a slip movement resulting in an error.
Bubble cursors have not been evaluated with older adults, but the static area cursors upon which they are based have been shown to improve mouse-based pointing performance for older adults , suggesting promise.
Bubble cursor and Steady Clicks each target different aspects of pointing.
The Bubble cursor mostly helps ease the initial positioning of the cursor, while Steady Clicks is designed to help keep it steady once it is in place.
Thus, it seems feasible to combine them into a single technique that fully captures the advantages of each.
For our combined Steadied-Bubble approach, a circular Bubble cursor grows and shrinks to capture the nearest target while the pen-tip is within the hover-range of the display.
Once the pen-lands on the screen, the cursor is frozen in both its location and size; that is, it is locked onto the last target captured before landing.
If the pen moves beyond the freeze threshold, the Bubble cursor returns to its normal operation: the center of the area cursor tracks the tip of the pen, and the cursor grows and shrinks to capture the nearest target.
Note that the freeze threshold is constant, but for any particular freeze, it may be larger or smaller than the radius of the Bubble cursor, depending on the target layout and density.
Each of the Steady Clicks, Bubble cursor and SteadiedBubble approaches has inherent benefits and drawbacks.
The Steady Clicks approach is cognitively simpler, but the mismatch between the cursor's position during freezing and the physical pen tip may be confusing to some users.
Another disadvantage of this approach is that if the user misses the target on landing, it is harder to correct the selection by sliding the pen along the surface, as the user must first break the freeze threshold.
An advantage of the Bubble cursor is that it could potentially address both slipping and missing.
That is, when targets are dense, errors are more likely to activate unwanted functionality, and such errors are more costly than selections on inactive space.
Another disadvantage of the Bubble Cursor technique is that it depends on knowing the location of all targets, which is not always possible.
The combined Steadied-Bubble cursor seems most promising.
The strong visual feedback provided by the Bubble cursor should help ease the mismatch caused by freezing, and overall it should offer the most support.
However, it is more complicated than either technique on its own, which some users might find overwhelming.
To evaluate these tradeoffs, we conducted a laboratory experiment comparing the Bubble, Steady, and SteadiedBubble cursors to each other and to standard point and tap, with 12 younger and 12 older adults.
We found empirical evidence demonstrating that  Bubble was effective at reducing both slips and misses, but only when targets were not directly adjacent;  Steady was only effective at reducing slips, but its support was independent of target spacing; and  combining them into a single technique, Steadied-Bubble, successfully integrated the benefits of each--Steadied-Bubble prevented misses when targets were not adjacent, and slips independent of spacing.
The main contribution of this work is these empirical results.
They demonstrate that both the Bubble cursor and Steady Clicks techniques can be successfully adapted for use in a pen-based interface, and that they are particularly helpful for older adults.
They further establish that these techniques can be successfully integrated to address multiple sources of target acquisition difficulty across a range of task contexts.
Finally, we draw on these contextspecific findings to establish guidelines for techniques selection.
We begin our coverage of the literature with an overview of the general effects of aging on motor skill to highlight the reasons for age-related differences in targeting ability.
We then describe research investigating novel pen techniques.
There is a considerable body of literature that has examined the negative effects of aging on the aspects of motor control that pertain to general targeting ability, both with respect to mouse use and interaction in the physical world.
Research has found that older adults use different strategies for the speed-accuracy tradeoff involved in movement control.
Older adults tend to be more conservative, and make more corrective submovements once inside the target .
They have also been found to cover less distance with their primary movement , to make more submovements en route , to make less smooth movements , and to have difficulty staying on the target while clicking .
In addition, slower selection speeds have been attributed to lower peak velocities , longer deceleration phases , and more pauses while homing in on the target .
The most extensive evaluation of pen-based interaction to date is work by Ren and Moriya .
They constructed a state transition model for pen-based target selection and using that model derived six selection strategies.
They found that for targets smaller than 1.8 mm, Slide Touch  was best in terms of speed, accuracy, and preference.
However, they cautioned that this technique would not be suitable for dense displays, for which they recommended either Direct On , or Direct Off .
Both require good hand-eye coordination; thus, it is unclear whether they are suitable for older users.
Beyond pointing, other researchers have investigated alternate mechanisms that may be better suited to pen input.
Mizobuchi and Yasumura compared tapping to circling for a multi-target selection task .
They hypothesized that circling would be faster and more accurate than tapping, but found that it was only better in the specific situation where multiple targets formed a cohesive group with low shape complexity.
Accot and Zhai compared tapping to crossing and found crossing was at least as fast and had similar accuracy .
Though not outright better, they suggested there may be specific situations in which crossing has advantages.
Others have expanded on their ideas; for example, by investigating fluid multi-action sequences , and their use for supporting motor-impaired users .
To date, very little work has examined the use of pen-based interaction with older adults.
They found that the pen outperformed the mouse for all ages and reduced the performance gap between ages, but that the mouse was rated as being more acceptable and easier to use .
However, this work was done with a light-pen on a vertical monitor, which required the pen to be held up unnaturally.
Modern Tablet PCs are designed to be more comfortable, and thus, should result in higher satisfaction.
More recently, Hourcade and Berkel compared two penbased selection techniques, tapping and touching , across three adult age groups, and found that for the smallest target size examined  the oldest group was more accurate using touch, but found it more tiring .
One limitation of this technique is that when targets are directly adjacent, it degrades to tap.
The software was coded in Python using the Pygame SDK and the Wintab wrapper of the Python Computer Graphics Kit; it recorded all timing and error data.
The Cintiq was inclined to 25 degrees from horizontal using its built-in stand, to position it at a comfortable viewing angle.
Participants were encouraged to adjust the position of their chair and the computer for comfort and most did.
We examined the following four cursor types .
Steady and Steadied-Bubble filtered movement below a threshold of 60 px .
That is, while the pen remained within 60 px of its initial landing position, the cursor remained fixed at this position, and lifting the pen resulted in a selection event at the initial landing position.
Once the pen moved more than 60 px away, the cursor returned to normal operation, tracking the tip of the pen; lifting resulted in selection at the lift position.
The 60 px threshold was chosen to be larger than most of the slips observed in .
For Bubble and Steadied-Bubble, the cursor was rendered in a light semitransparent grey.
We enforced a maximum diameter of 100 px  based on the suggestion by Grossman and Balakrishnan .
We recruited 12 participants from each age group , for a total of 24 participants.
Aged 65-86  The younger participants were recruited through campus postings.
They received $15 for participating and completed the study in 60-80 minutes .
The older participants were recruited though community postings and word-of-mouth advertisement.
On average, they took longer than the younger participants , and received $20 for their participation.
Participants were right-handed and free of diagnosed motor impairments to their hands.
Additionally, they all had normal or corrected-to-normal eyesight.
To control for biases between age and Tablet PC experience, all were novices to pen-based computing.
Within and across each age group, participants had a wide range of computer experience.
Nonetheless, there were some notable differences: younger participants were more frequent users, used a greater number of applications, and were familiar with a greater number of advanced tasks.
Their self-rating of expertise was also higher.
However, the older participants had been using computers for longer.
We conducted a controlled laboratory experiment with younger and older adults to compare the individual and combined effectiveness of the Bubble cursor and Steady Clicks techniques for reducing pen-based targeting errors.
For the experiment, we used a Wacom Cintiq 12WX pen tablet, and a 2.26GHz Duo Core laptop with 2 GB of RAM and Microsoft Windows XP.
DEN=0 reflects no distracter targets , DEN=0.5, a moderate target density , and DEN=1, a high target density.
For complete details on the distracter placement, see .
At the start of each new cursor condition, participants were introduced to the cursor and given 10 practice trials.
Participants then completed four blocks of trials with each cursor, with a short break between blocks.
Each block consisted of 81 trials representing one of each possible combination of WID, AMP, EWR, and DEN, for a total of 324 trials per cursor condition.
The order of presentation of trials was consistent with  and was as follows.
Each combination of WID, EWR, and DEN was presented in a random order.
Within each of these combinations, all three levels of AMP were presented together .
This was done to provide some sense of continuity between trials.
Our early pilot runs of the experiment also found that having all four factors change every trial was disorientating.
We used a 2x4x3x3x3x3 mixed factorial design, with AGE as a between-subjects factor, and CT, WID, AMP, EWR, and DEN as within-subjects factors.
Cursor type  was a within-subjects factor to increase the power of the design.
Each participant was assigned to one of four presentation orders, following a balanced Latin square.
The experiment was designed to fit into a single 120-minute session.
We began with a series of standardized tests of sensory-perceptual and motor skills.
Next, participants were asked to complete a brief questionnaire about their background and computer experience.
They were then introduced to using the pen-based device, and shown that  they can rest their hand on the screen during input,  the computer tracks the pen both when it is touching the screen and when it is slightly above it, and  an onscreen cursor provides feedback of the current cursor location.
Once participants were comfortable using the pen, the Cintiq was calibrated using the built-in utility.
Participants then completed the experimental tasks.
Following each condition, participants completed a short questionnaire about that condition.
Between conditions, participants completed short verbal distracter tasks.
These tasks were chosen to engage participants mentally, but not physically to rest their arms.
At the end of the experiment, participants were asked to rank the interfaces on a number of factors and encouraged to make additional comments.
Our task is shown in Figure 1, and was modeled after that used by Grossman and Balakrishnan .
Participants selected a series of goal targets, appearing at unpredictable locations.
To control the inactive whitespace around the goal target, four distracter targets were equidistantly placed around the goal, in the line of and perpendicular to the axis of approach.
Additional distracter targets were placed in the scene to create varying levels of overall target density.
The goal target was rendered as a solid green circle, and distracter targets as grey outlined circles of the same size.
Visual feedback was provided by changing the appearance of targets:  when the pen tip hovered over a goal target it turned a deep red , and  when the pen tip touched a goal target it turned a brighter red with a dark red border .
We provided the latter form of feedback to help participants determine how much pressure was needed.
Consistent with Grossman and Balakrishnan's study design , we varied the following factors.
Target Width  specifies the diameter of the goal target.
These sizes are in line with previous studies , and roughly correspond to the following common widgets: the height of a text link, the size of a small toolbar icon , and the size of a larger icon .
Amplitude  is the distance to the goal target from the starting position of the trial .
Effective Width Ratio  specifies the amount of inactive whitespace surrounding the goal target .
Target spacing is particularly important for Bubble and Steadied-Bubble.
Thus, we express it as the ratio between the effective target width  and the actual target width .
We used three values for this factor: 1, 2, and 3.
When EWR=1, the goal target is directly adjacent with its neighbors.
Distracter Density  refers to the number of other targets on the screen.
For accuracy, we measured errors individually as the total number of slips and the total number of misses in each condition.
We additionally included trial time as a measure, to provide an overall indication of performance.
However, we note that while it is helpful in terms of motivating a balance between speed and accuracy, this penalty underestimates the true cost of errors as it treats errors on distracter targets the same as errors on inactive whitespace.
In real-world tasks, selection of an unwanted feature typically requires additional corrective action.
After each condition participants gave Likert scale ratings and at the end of the study, they ranked the cursor techniques on speed, ease, frustration, and preference.
This hypothesis is based on our previous finding that older users make both slip and miss errors, whereas younger users predominantly miss .
A greater proportion of errors in Bubble and SteadiedBubble will land on a distracter target.
Although Bubble and Steadied-Bubble will both result in fewer errors than Control, when errors do occur, they will be more likely to hit a distracter target.
For Steady, we do not predict an increase in distracter hits.
For each of our main measures , we performed a repeated measures ANOVA.
For trial time, we performed a full analysis across all factors.
For misses and slips, we focused our analysis on just those factors for which we had hypotheses , collapsing across the other factors.
Initial analysis of the data did not suggest any main or interaction effects for AMP and DEN, and with only four trials , the error data was too sparse to measure the differences in which we were interested.
In our reporting of F-statistics, where df is not an integer, we have applied a Greenhouse-Geisser adjustment for nonspherical data.
All pairwise comparisons were protected against Type I error using a Bonferroni adjustment.
Along with statistical significance, we report partial eta-squared , a measure of effect size.
Table 1 provides a summary of the error rates for the younger and older groups.
Consistent with other research , the majority of errors in this study occurred on the smallest target .
For the larger widths, error rates were low and skewed towards zero, suggesting a floor effect.
Skewed data can invalidate the results of an ANOVA analysis; thus, we focus our statistical analysis on just the trials with WID=12.
We do note, however, that while the largest differences, and correspondingly the most practically significant ones, occur at WID=12, a similar but highly attenuated pattern is evident for the other widths, as shown in Figure 2.
To motivate quick and accurate performance, an additional $10 incentive was awarded to the top 1/3 performers in each age group.
The 1/3 ratio was chosen to encourage participants to believe they had a reasonable chance of succeeding.
To help participants gauge their performance, graphical feedback was presented during the breaks between blocks.
This feedback included a graph of the participant's speed for all blocks completed with that cursor, and a text summary of total time and errors for the most recent block.
Our hypotheses are all relative to Control.
Bubble will reduce both slips and misses, but only when the surrounding targets are not directly adjacent.
That is, when EWR=1, there will be no difference between Bubble and Control, but when EWR>1, Bubble will result in both fewer slips and fewer misses.
Independent of target spacing, Steady will reduce slips, but it will not affect misses.
That is, we predict that for all EWR, Steady will result in fewer slips, but not fewer misses, than Control.
Combined with H1, Bubble will reduce more errors overall than Steady, for EWR>1.
Steadied-Bubble will reduce slips when targets are directly adjacent, and both slips and misses when they are not.
That is, it will fully integrate the individual benefits of Bubble and Steady.
Correspondingly, it will be the most effective technique at reducing errors.
Even after filtering out the larger widths, some of the error rates were floored.
This is not entirely unfortunate; all cases corresponded to instances where an experimental cursor substantially reduced one of the error types .
However, to ensure that these measures do not bias the statistical results, we additionally relied on confidence intervals to aid our interpretation of the ANOVA results.
Specifically, we only report those significant pairwise comparisons between cursors from the ANOVA, where confidence interval analysis also found a significant difference.
1 One participant in the younger group had unusually high error rates.
His performance was outside the 1.5 interquartile range and more than two standard deviations from the mean.
Although analysis with and without him yields the same conclusions, we exclude him to better reflect the performance of the younger group as a whole.
Bubble and Steadied-Bubble significantly reduced misses when targets were not adjacent.
Pairwise comparisons revealed that Bubble and Steadied-Bubble both resulted in significantly fewer misses than Control and Steady for EWR=2 and EWR=3 , but not for EWR=1.
Steady was not significantly different from Control for any EWR.
The older adults missed significantly more.
These results simply mirror the other findings.
For EWR=1, both groups incurred roughly twice as many misses as they did for EWR=2 and EWR=3 because Bubble and Steadied-Bubble were not effective at reducing errors at EWR=1.
Moreover, because the older adults missed more in general, this doubling at EWR=1 resulted in a greater increase for them, which explains the interaction.
Steady and Steadied-Bubble reduced slips and performed consistently across target spacings.
Bubble also reduced slips, but only when targets were not adjacent.
Pairwise comparisons of the CT x EWR interaction  revealed that Bubble resulted in significantly fewer slips than Control when EWR=2 and EWR=3 , but that it was not significantly different from Control at EWR=1 .
A confidence interval is an indication of the reliability of a measured estimate.
It is more conservative than an ANOVA analysis because it does not pool variances; thus, a floor effect in one level of measurement does not affect the confidence intervals of other levels of measurement.
To aid the reader, 95% confidence intervals are included as error bars in all our graphical results.
Nonoverlapping error bars represent significantly different results.
Though this last comparison is somewhat inconsistent with our hypotheses, we note that as shown in Figure 4, it is mostly a reflection of lower than expected slip results for Control at EWR=2.
The older adults benefited more from the experimental cursors.
Pairwise comparisons revealed that the experimental cursors reduced the performance gap between ages: For Control, the older group slipped significantly more than the younger group , but there were no significant differences between the groups for any of the other interfaces.
As with misses, this mirrors the main results.
Errors in Bubble and Steadied-Bubble were almost four times more likely to hit a distracter target.
As shown in Figure 6, almost 100% of the errors in Bubble and Steadied-Bubble landed on a distracter target, while for Control and Steady the percentages were much lower: 28% and 23%, respectively.
Pairwise comparisons confirmed the percentages were higher for Bubble and Steadied-Bubble than for Control or Steady .
A greater proportion of errors in Bubble and SteadiedBubble will land on a distracter target.
This study established the individual benefits of Steady Clicks and Bubble cursor for pen-based pointing with younger and older adults, and furthermore, showed that the two techniques can be successfully combined to provide the benefits of each.
Our Steadied-Bubble cursor reduced misses when targets were not directly adjacent, and slips independent of spacing.
Though our error analysis is limited to the smallest target size examined, we did see similar patterns for the larger target sizes.
Moreover, our analysis of the movement time data found differences for all target widths.
The pattern of results for movement time was similar to the one observed for missing.
The results for slipping were not reflected in the movement times, which is not surprising since missing was the dominant error type.
Though the experimental techniques were beneficial to both age groups, they especially helped the older adults.
For slipping, they worked so well that they reduced the performance gap between ages such that the older group was no longer significantly different from the younger group.
For missing, both groups benefitted equally from the experimental cursors, but the older group missed almost three times more often.
Thus techniques that reduce missing should have greater practical significance for them.
We note this finding was not predicted, and it contrasts the results of our prior study that did not find an effect of age for misses .
One difference is that in , the smallest target was 38% bigger than in the current task.
Although slips were generally less frequent than misses , slipping presents an important problem for older adults.
During a slip, the pen initially lands on the target.
This activates the visual feedback associated with a selection, and indicates to the user that their selection should be successful.
As a result, slip errors are particularly confusing.
Many older users are unaware of the cause of their difficulty, hindering self-correction strategies.
Thus, both slip and miss reductions are important for older users.
The techniques we evaluated in this paper, and particularly the Steadied-Bubble addressed these two most common pen-based pointing problems.
Importantly, none of our techniques hindered the younger participants .
Thus, inclusion of these techniques should make it easier for older adults to interact with the same software as younger adults, reducing the need for specialized software.
Specialized programs generally try to make interaction easier by making targets bigger, often at the expense of aesthetics or features.
However, they require each individual program to be adapted.
Thus one major benefit of a pointing technique approach is that it provides older adults with access to a much broader set of applications.
We summarize our results for WID=12 according to our hypotheses.
Recall, we were unable to test our hypotheses for the other target widths.
Bubble will reduce both slips and misses, but only when surrounding targets are not directly adjacent.
Independent of target spacing, Steady will reduce slips, but it will not affect misses.
Steady resulted in significantly fewer slips than Control, except there was no statistical difference at EWR=2.
Steadied-Bubble will reduce slips when targets are directly adjacent, and both slips and misses when they are not.
Our finding that the older adults exerted 50% more force than the younger adults is important.
Older adults often report finding pen interfaces tiring .
Older adults are known to have lower maximum force capabilities , and at first glance, this seems to explain why they might find them more tiring.
However, our results suggest that the problem is not with exerting sufficient pressure, but rather with determining how much pressure is needed.
In this study, we included visual feedback indicating contact.
This type of feedback is not common; thus, our results may even underestimate the extent of the problem.
Devising ways of teaching older adults to use less pressure is thus an important area for further investigation.
An additional finding was that although the two techniques based on the Bubble cursor reduced errors relative to the Control cursor, when errors did occur, they were almost four times more likely to result in selection of a distracter target.
In contrast, a comparable effect was not observed for the Steady cursor.
This tendency for the Bubble cursor to shift errors onto unwanted functionality has not been discussed in the literature to date, and it has important practical implications as selection of an unwanted target typically requires corrective action, and thus has a much higher cost than selection of inactive whitespace.
This is particularly important for older adults as they tend to find error correction more difficult.
The impact of Bubble and Steadied-Bubble's higher proportion of distracter target errors is likely not reflected in our preference ratings.
Though we differentiated between hits on a distracter target and hits on inactive whitespace in our analysis, from the user's perspective these errors were the same.
This may have contributed to the strong preference for the Bubble and Steadied-Bubble cursors over Steady and Control.
One place where our hypotheses were not fully met is at the medium level of target spacing examined , where Steady did not result in significantly fewer slips than Control.
Inspection of the means for Steady and Control suggests it arose from Control performing slightly better at that spacing.
Steady's performance remained relatively constant across spacings.
Though the differences between levels of spacing for Control were not significant , it is possible that EWR=2 represents a balance between visual complexity at EWR=1 and overconfidence at EWR=3.
It is interesting that in our study we did not see a relationship between overall target density and performance for the Bubble cursor, while Grossman and Balakrishnan reported a negative effect of low density on performance .
One possible explanation is that limiting the maximum size of the Bubble cursor was effective as hypothesized by Grossman and Balakrishnan .
However, it is also possible this difference reflects a deeper distinction between mouse and pen interaction.
With a pen, users can remain above the detectable range of the screen until late in the interaction.
Finally, though we focused on Bubble cursor and Steady Clicks, many other mouse techniques have been developed, including target expansion , Sticky Icons , and Object Pointing  .
Some of these may also have applicability to pen interaction, and there may be additional opportunities to combine them, as we have done here for Steady Clicks and Bubble cursor.
Our results show clear support for the experimental cursors and illustrate the particular task contexts in which it performed best.
Thus, we conclude by reflecting on our findings to propose design guidelines for cursor selection.
We found that the biggest benefits were realized when targets were small; specifically, when they were comparable to the height of a text link.
Even for the next biggest size examined  the differences were weak and difficult to interpret.
However, small targets abound and facilitating their selection is important.
To be effective, the Bubble cursor requires that targets are not directly adjacent.
Thus, techniques based on it are particularly well suited to applications or tasks that have many small, but spaced targets.
Such applications include interacting with large data visualizations, or selecting features in a drawing application.
However, small targets are often coupled with high target density, such as with word or character selection in a text editor.
In these situations, the Bubble cursor is not helpful, but techniques such as Steady Clicks are.
The Steadied-Bubble provides a useful balance between these factors.
For example, some web pages have links tightly clustered in one area, whereas other pages have sparser links.
The Steadied-Bubble supports a seamless transition between these cases, providing the best possible support for each.
Overall, the Bubble and Steadied-Bubble cursors were more effective than the Steady cursor.
However, because the Bubble cursor assigns inactive whitespace to nearby targets, it results in a higher proportion of errors landing on an unwanted target.
In some cases, unintended selections are easily and efficiently corrected.
However, it is important to consider the cost of error correction when choosing a technique.
When the cost is high, it may be better to choose a technique that has more but less costly errors.
As noted earlier, an important limitation of the Bubble cursor is that it must be target-aware; that is, it needs to know where targets are to expand the cursor.
The Steady cursor is instead target-agnostic since it functions independent of target location.
Thus, technique selection also depends on whether or not it is practically possible or computationally feasible to track target locations.
The experimental cursors reduced the errors types we examined to differing degrees.
In particular, Steady only provided support for slipping, and even with the Control cursor, the younger adults demonstrated relatively little slipping.
As a result, interfaces targeted exclusively to younger users may not warrant a Steady or Steadied-Bubble approach.
However, none of the techniques hindered the younger participants, and both slip and miss reductions are important for older users.
Thus, when targeting older individuals--or a range of users--techniques that address both error types should be adopted.
Older adults form a growing demographic of computer users.
Pen-based interfaces are an appealing platform for this group, but despite a multitude of advantages, many older individuals find pen interaction challenging.
Error reduction is important because errors can carry a high cost for recovery and are overly frustrating for some users.
We found that by combining existing techniques designed for younger users and mouse interaction, we substantially reduced the two most common types of pen-based error over a range of task contexts.
We then drew upon these findings to identify guidelines for technique selection.
These guidelines may also serve as a starting point for additional research in this area.
We thank L. Findlater, E. Murphy-Hill and T. Tang for comments on the paper and NSERC and CIHR for funding.
More than dotting the i's-- Foundations for crossing-based interfaces.
CrossY: A crossingbased drawing application.
Age differences in reactions to errors in computer-based work.
Light pen use and practice minimize age and hand performance differences in pointing tasks.
Improving the acquisition of small targets.
Statistical Power Analysis for the Behavioral Sciences.
Object pointing: a complement to bitmap pointing in GUIs.
