We contribute Permulin, an integrated set of interaction and visualization techniques for multi-view tabletops to support co-located collaboration across a wide variety of collaborative coupling styles.
These techniques  provide support both for group work and for individual work, as well as for the transitions in-between,  contribute sharing and peeking techniques to support mutual awareness and group coordination during phases of individual work,  reduce interference during group work on a group view, and  directly integrate with conventional multi-touch input.
We illustrate our techniques in a proof-of-concept implementation with the two example applications of map navigation and photo collages.
Results from two user studies demonstrate that Permulin supports fluent transitions between individual and group work and exhibits unique awareness properties that allow participants to be highly aware of each other during tightly coupled collaboration, while being able to unobtrusively perform individual work during loosely coupled collaboration.
Many more mixed coupling styles exist in-between these two ends .
Different coupling styles require different visualization and interaction support.
Pioneering research has introduced first, promising principles for multi-view tabletop interfaces, which overlay additional private information on a shared view .
Compared to classical tabletop interfaces, this provided additional personalized support during tightly coupled collaboration.
Inspired by this previous work, we aim to provide support for a considerably fuller spectrum of collaborative coupling styles with multi-view tabletops, covering both ends of the spectrum.
Moreover, we set out to support fluent and seamless transitions between these styles.
This paper contributes Permulin, an integrated set of novel interaction and visualization techniques for multi-view tabletops.
Permulin leverages on multi-view display technology to offer support for a wide spectrum of coupling styles and to support fluent and seamless transitions between them.
In more detail, Permulin makes the following sub-contributions: 1.
In co-located collaboration on digital tabletop systems, collaborators usually interact on one common shared view.
Working on different views requires spatial partitioning of the screen into several smaller views .
In contrast, multiview tabletop hardware can display two or more different images at the same spatial location .
This allows for rendering personalized views for different users at the same location on the very same screen.
For this reason, multi-view tabletop hardware seems highly promising to support fluid transitions between different coupling styles  in mixed-focus collaboration .
Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
By performing a simple grabbing gesture, the group view can be divided into two private views, which each cover the full screen.
The private views provide high-resolution personal workspaces, to conduct independent work unobtrusively, as recommended by .
Support of mutual awareness and coordination in private views: We contribute two techniques that allow collaborators  to quickly share their private contents, as well as  to peek into their collaborator's private view.
This tighter coupling supports mutual awareness and coordination while users work in their private views.
Reducing interference in the group view: While collaborators can effectively work in parallel on content that is juxtaposed on the shared group view, overlapping content is problematic.
The resulting occlusion is disruptive and can prohibit other collaborators from accessing occluded elements.
We contribute techniques that reduce such interference stemming from overlapping content in shared views.
They allow collaborators to individually control the layering of shared contents.
For instance, in a pile of photos, each collaborator can focus on a different photo and see the respective photo as the topmost element.
Multi-touch interaction on multi-view tabletops: All techniques directly integrate with conventional multitouch input by providing personal input for each user.
This stands in contrast to previous work on multi-view displays that did not use touch input for controlling views, but required specific head  or body movement  or tangibles .
As a proof of concept, the techniques are implemented in a working prototype system with two example applications.
This allowed us to conduct a user-centric evaluation, the first user study of collaboration on multi-view tabletops.
Results from an exploratory study and from a controlled experiment show:  Permulin supports mixed-focus collaboration by allowing the user to transition fluidly between loose and tight collaboration.
Amongst others, this is reflected by participants occupying significantly larger interaction areas on Permulin than on a tabletop system.
Group work on interactive surfaces usually requires coordination of group activities, especially in mixed-focus collaboration.
Analogously to Tang et al., we define workspace coordination as "the management of access to and transfer of shared resources" .
Insufficient support of workspace coordination on one interactive surface frequently results in interference, "the act of one person hindering, obstructing, or impeding another's view or actions on a single shared display" .
One example is access conflicts on a shared surface, when access to a particular interface element is disputed .
However, this requires collaborators to coordinate their interactions through e.g.
Although this partitioning alleviates interference, it constrains each user in both interaction and screen space.
Thus, the use of single-view tabletops due to scaffolding only static workspace awareness , is likely to lead to either interference or limited space when the collaboration is loosely coupled.
One approach to overcome these limitations is secondary screens.
WeSpace  and Caretta  are good examples which combine interactive surfaces for group work with personal devices for private interaction.
However, these approaches require the collaborators to switch their attention between the surface and the secondary device.
Furthermore, increasing the size or number of displays is not necessarily an advantage .
Multi-view displays provide different views to each collaborator in the same spatial location.
However, except the shutter solutions, all constrain the collaborators to a fixed position or require additional tracking systems.
These display techniques have been integrated into interactive tabletop systems, leading to multi-view tabletops, e.g.
These overlays allow collaborators to transition from tightly to mixed-coupled collaboration.
Overlays that depend on the collaborator's position can be implemented with optical film, which is either opaque or transparent, depending on the specific viewing angle.
Lumisight  and UlteriorScape  provide distinct views for up to four collaborators, that allow for personal overlays.
Each collaborator can enable and disable these overlays with gestures or tangible objects.
Similarly, PiVOT  enables personal overlays depending on the user's viewing angle through a combination of optical films and a display mask.
As in Lumisight, tangibles can be used to enable and disable the overlays.
Users have then to lean forward to be able to see the personal overlay.
While all of the above systems provide private output, they do not allow for simultaneous personal input in overlapping personal areas due to conflicting tangible objects.
Moreover with respect to PiVOT, the collaborators have to lean forward to view the personal overlay.
In summary, many papers have contributed hardware solutions for realizing multi-view displays and techniques to enable and disable the display of additional information within a group view.
We add to this body of research by contributing to CSCW research in several aspects:  to support fluid transitions between coupling styles.
In this paper, we contribute interaction and visualization techniques for all three aspects.
As it is the case for most screens, the display used in Permulin emits linear polarized light, matching the linear filter of the glasses.
In consequence, the display would appear black when seen from its short side.
We added a diffusion film on top of the screen , scattering the light and enabling an angle independent  view on both private and group views.
The higher mounted one caters for user tracking, the lower one detects hands using a contour-based blob tracking approach combined with skin detection.
Each newly detected hand is mapped to nearest user.
This mapping is kept as long as the hand is visible to the system, thus leading to personalized hand detection, which is in turn used to assign each touch input to individual users by mapping each touch to the hand contour enclosing it.
Touch points are recognized by an infrared multi-touch overlay, supporting up to 32 parallel points.
The central concept of Permulin  is a tabletop interface providing  a group view for common ground during phases of tight collaboration,  private views to each collaborator to scaffold loosely coupled collaboration and  interaction and visualization techniques to share content in-between these views for coordination and mutual awareness.
Both group and private views provide personalized multi-touch input to all collaborators, enabling them to interact simultaneously.
These views are completely independent of the user's location and orientation.
This is in contrast to previous work that required the user to look at the display from a specific angle to reveal private views .
The display can alternatively switch between different full screen images due to its refresh rate of 120Hz.
At the same time active shutter glasses that switch between transparency levels at high frequency are wirelessly synchronized with the display.
An increasing number of such glasses  and of compatible 3D display sets are available.
The screen refresh rate defines how many separate views can be offered .
Our current implementation offers two views.
Displays with high refresh rates and corresponding glasses for more than two personal outputs have already been demonstrated .
In the following, we present an integrated set of interaction and visualization techniques that support the dynamics of mixed-focus collaboration on multi-view tabletops.
All techniques rely on multi-touch gestures, which directly integrate with existing gestures on interactive surfaces.
Views and transitions are controlled by multi-touch alone and are fully independent of the user's position and the head and body orientation.
All techniques provide support for the main types of contents on interactive surfaces: fullscreen contents and free-floating elements, as well as combinations of both.
The techniques are also demonstrated in the video that accompanies this paper.
The following two techniques support an easy and seamless transition between a group view that provides common ground during group work, and fully independent views during individual work for each collaborator.
We contribute two techniques, which support awareness and coordination through sharing and peeking.
Quickly and easily share private content: To share any portion of her private view with collaborators, the user performs a pinch gesture with both of her hands simultaneously, i.e.
This frames a shared viewing area, which becomes immediately visible to all collaborators as a window that is overlaid on their view.
All collaborators can fully interact with content in this area.
The owner can resize the area or maximize the shared view to full screen for sharing her private view in its entirety.
Peek into a collaborator's private view: In the reverse direction, a user can take a peek at another collaborator's private full-screen view  to e.g.
Figure 4  illustrates the technique: the three-finger gesture is inspired from temporarily pushing one's own view aside.
This reveals the collaborator's view.
If more than two users are present, the collaborator has to choose the target user in her private view.
Permulin provides awareness thereof to the other collaborator by displaying an eye icon in her private view.
A three-finger gesture in any horizontal direction brings the user back to her private view.
Divide View: This technique transitions the group view to a private full screen view only for the user performing the gesture.
Others remain in the group view.
Our implementation for two users creates a private full-screen views for each collaborator, each marked with a usercolored border.
If necessary, the view is automatically rotated and oriented to the collaborator.
Each private view can be seen and interacted with only by the respective collaborator.
Initially, the private view is an exact copy of the group view.
Subsequently, when collaborators individually modify their views, they become different.
In consequence, all private views are fully independent and constitute high-resolution workspaces to conduct independent work unobtrusively and loosely coupled.
Merge View: A private view can be merged back into a common group view to support tightly coupled collaboration.
To merge a view anyone of the collaborators performs a gesture that is inspired from releasing the view.
The performing user then re-adopts the group view.
Hereby private changes are integrated back to the group view.
From now on, all manipulations of the corresponding user are again mapped to the group view.
Our implementation for two users transitions both users back from their private views to the group view when one of the users performs the gesture.
The filters are visualized as resizable lenses on the map.
A user can place a flag onto the map, indicating the starting position of a route, by tapping and holding.
Placing further flags onto the map will create a route that connects all flags in a row.
In case collaborators divide the group view, the maps in the private views are oriented towards the respective users and, together with both filters and flags, can be manipulated individually.
Private Focus on overlapping shared elements: This technique allows users to concurrently interact with overlapping contents without losing the focus on the user interface element.
Figure 5  illustrates this: to enforce a private focus on an element, a user touches and holds the element.
The element is then visualized in the foreground in her private view.
If multiple users perform this technique on overlapping elements, each of them sees the element they touch in foreground in their respective private view.
In-place Access: When content in the background is occluded by shared layered interface elements in the foreground, e.g.
Figure 5  illustrates the technique: spreading out three fingers across a pile of foreground elements hides them and reveals underlying elements.
The elements are only hidden in the user's private view, not in the group view.
This way, collaborators are not disturbed.
The reverse action, a threefinger pinch, brings hidden elements back to the fore.
The photo sorting application visualizes a set of pictures as stackable elements laid out on the tabletop.
They can overlap and can be individually manipulated through conventional multi-touch gestures to move, rotate and scale them.
An empty frame, visualized on the group view, serves as a frame for a photo collage.
Pictures can be dragged into and removed from the frame.
Collaborators can then either work tightly coupled with all pictures being visible.
Or they can transition the group view to a private view, where the visibility of the pictures can be toggled through a button on each picture.
We conducted a user-centric evaluation to assess the impact of the interaction and visualization techniques on mixedfocus collaboration on multi-view tabletops.
The evaluation was a two-step process: 1.
A qualitative study was conducted  to explore how participants used Permulin in different collaborative coupling styles and what their user experience was, as well as  to investigate physical interferences that might occur when users simultaneously perform touch input in overlaid private views.
These results informed a controlled experiment.
Permulin was compared to a tabletop system and a split screen tabletop regarding  collaborators' use of space,  their ability to work in parallel and  mutual awareness; all across different coupling styles.
Two example applications have been implemented to illustrate and evaluate the interaction and visualization techniques.
The first one is a full-screen map application which provides route-planning functionality inspired by .
The second is a photo sorting application that enables users to co-create a photo collage.
Both example applications constitute two highly relevant interface themes: interaction with  spatially fixed data, and  free-floating interface elements.
Both interfaces are illustrated in Fig.
The map application displays a full-screen interactive map in the group view that can be explored using conventional pan and zoom multi-touch gestures.
Next,  they started with split views and were asked to coordinate their planning activities from the prior tasks.
Afterwards, they had to fulfil a new planning task, starting on the group view .
Last, they had to freely plan a city trip, again of their choice .
We chose a within-subject design.
For each task, participants were given time to familiarize themselves with the system until they felt confident.
Each group session lasted about 2.5 hours .
After each session we transcribed the data, selected salient quotes and coded them using an open coding approach.
P5 asked P6 to peek into her view, stating: "can you look at my view?
I want to show you something".
However, three participants expressed some uncertainty about what their collaborator was able to see: "I didn't realize that you could see that " .
Throughout the study, participants stressed that the private view helps them focus on individual tasks; as P3 put it: "I don't have to wait, I can just do my own things  and the system helps me to focus on them".
This is underlined by a strong sense of possession: participants described the surface as "my territory" , "my virtual space"  and "my map, and you  have your own map" .
Despite long periods spent in the private views, participants expressed a strong feeling of cooperation: "it was always about cooperative work"  and "although we worked individually, we still worked together" .
The sharing technique was frequently used to let the other user know about one's own activities, e.g.
P7 commented: "it's easy to synchronize different views ; it's just there, in front of you".
The peeking gesture was used by 7 users frequently, when the functionality was provided .
Participants particularly appreciated the unobtrusiveness of the technique: "it does not end my individual work and does not interfere with my collaborator's work" .
We observed that participants frequently interacted in close proximity on the tabletop while they were working on their separate private views.
Surprisingly, this did not lead to any notable physical interference, i.e.
Participants stated, they "faded out the other participant's fingers"  and that "fingers are not problematic, I didn't realize them" .
We assess the results of the explorative study as very promising: the overall user experience was that of a personal device during individual work and that of a highly cooperative device during group work.
In particular, the phenomena identified in the analysis of the first study indicate that participants  quickly and easily switched between private and group views , allowing them to work in parallel, and  had a strong feeling of collaboration, also when working in the private views, and  experienced only little physical interference while using nearly the entire screen for interaction.
The three major observations derived from the first study provide the basis for a more in-depth investigation of mixed-focus collaboration on multi-view tabletops.
In particular, we investigated the following hypotheses: H1: In co-located mixed-focus collaboration, Permulin provides a larger interaction area than conventional tabletops.
H2: Permulin supports highly parallel work, comparable to a split screen tabletop.
More during mixed than during loose coupling.
H4: A user's awareness of where and what the other collaborator is interacting with and working on H4.1: does not considerably vary across coupling styles on a multi-touch tabletop with a single view.
H4.2: does considerably vary across coupling styles on Permulin, enabling to transition between high awareness during group work and low awareness during independent work.
Photo Collage: The participants were asked to create a photo collage using the example application introduced above.
At the beginning of the task, the participants were given one or two pre-defined sets of photos , visualized as a stack.
The photo collage was considered finished when participants were satisfied with their results.
Route Planning: The participants had to plan a route using the implemented map application.
Each participant had a lens that augmented the map with additional information .
The task was considered completed, when the participants had found a route.
Table 1 gives a detailed overview over the concrete tasks for each coupling style.
The coupling style determined the starting situation, i.e.
We crossed both device type and coupling style for each application scenario.
In a pre-study, participants considered the use of a split screen setup in a tightly coupled collaboration unnecessary and equal to the traditional tabletop setting.
Based on this feedback, we removed this condition from the main experiment, resulting in 8 subtasks per main task.
The order of the tasks was counterbalanced using a balanced latin-square.
Each of the groups was only assigned to one of the application scenarios due to time constrains.
During each task, the participants were facing each other  and standing.
All interactions were logged and video-recorded.
After each task users were asked to fill out a questionnaire.
Each session lasted 2.5 hours in average.
Task: Participants had to plan a trip together and find a compromise route between predefined start and end points, while planning to stop twice on the way for sightseeing.
Task: Participants had to plan a trip together and find a compromise route between predefined start and end points, while planning to stop twice on the way for sightseeing.
Each participant had his own constraint that he was asked to follow .
Task: Each user had to plan a route separately between predefined start and end points, while planning to stop twice on the way for sightseeing.
Both of the routes started or ended in the same area.
We controlled for three independent variables: the application scenario, the utilized device type and the coupling style between two collaborators.
As application scenarios, we used the two example applications described above.
The example applications constitute two highly relevant interface themes: first, the map is a full-screen interface that contains spatially fixed data; moving the data implies moving the map which is likely to generate interference and second, the photos are free-floating interface elements that can be moved, rotated and resized on the screen and likely to be stacked.
Moreover, we distinguish between three different coupling styles: Tight Coupling , working on the same problem; Mixed Coupling , working on the same problem with different starting points or constraints e.g.
Task: Participants had to design one photo collage together.
Data: We provided a different set of pictures for each participant.
Each set had a predefined topic.
Task: Participants had to design together one photo collage while each focusing on their specific topic.
Data: We provided a different set of pictures for each participant.
Each set had a different topic.
Task: Participants had to design their own photo collage by themselves, while focusing on their own set of pictures.
In both tasks, the differences between the Tabletop and the Permulin condition were statistically significant, as shown by a repeated measures ANOVA with Bonferroni post-hoc correction  = 21.5, p < 0.01, Map: F = 26.4, p < 0.01.
In case of the photo task, the effect size is small .
However, the large differences between Permulin and Tabletop in the route planning task constitute a large effect size .
We analyzed how participants utilized the techniques for workspace coordination , as well as for transitioning between coupling styles  on Permulin.
Sharing photos was only possible in mixed and loose collaboration, since all photos were shared by default in tight collaboration.
Participants shared 14.3  photos on average during loose collaboration.
However, the photos were 99.2%  of the time only visible in their private views on average.
For mixed collaboration, participants shared 26.1  photos on average, with being 94.55%  of the time only visible in their private views, on average.
Divide and merge: In loose collaboration, participants spent 100% of the time in divided views.
In both mixed and tight collaboration, we identified two dominant collaboration themes: either groups spent most of the time in merged views or in divided views.
The interaction area was measured as the average percentage of screen space each user was touching, accumulated and normalized over the task durations.
It was calculated from the interaction logs.
Across all conditions, the personal area was situated in front of each user with most interaction happening in its center and decreasing linearly towards the border of the screen.
Bonferroni corrected post-hoc tests revealed that the differences between Permulin and Tabletop are statistically significant  in both tasks, the difference between the Permulin and Split screen condition was only significant in the photo task .
The amount of time spent in divided views correlates  with the amount of workspace coordinations .
Figure 9 illustrates the collaboration of one of the groups using Permulin in tight collaboration.
Most of the time was spend in divided views.
The collaboration started with a phase of division of labor, then transitioned to a phase of individual work.
During this phase, sharing and peeking techniques were used to scaffold workspace awareness.
Finally, the participants merged their working states using coordination and transitioning techniques.
The awareness was assessed through a questionnaire after each experimental condition, inspired by .
The questionnaire consisted of two main parts: the first part  assessed the participant's awareness of where and what the other collaborator was interacting with and working on.
The second part  asked the participant to estimate the awareness the other collaborator had of the participant herself.
We thus interpret the results as the average amount of awareness cues a device provided to the user.
The average results are shown in Table 4.
During loose collaboration, Permulin generated the least awareness cues in both tasks.
Both Permulin and Tabletop generated a high amount of awareness cues during tight collaboration.
However, the difference is not significant.
The performance is comparable to that of the split screen tabletop.
In the photo task, participants interacted more often in parallel on the tabletop.
However, the differences were only little and the effect size small.
Particularly notable is that participants frequently used Permulin's interaction techniques for dividing and merging views, as well as for workspace coordination .
This lets us assume that Permulin allows users to easily transition between the coupling styles, e.g.
The latter is particularly apparent, since participants shared photos frequently during loose collaboration though being only visible in their private views most of the time.
The awareness does not considerably vary across coupling styles on the tabletop  and is high for all conditions.
The results further show that Permulin provides unique awareness properties: Permulin provides high awareness during group work and unobtrusive work with low awareness during independent work .
When collaborating in a mixed or loosely coupled style, Permulin indeed provides significantly larger personal interaction spaces to the tabletop .
This holds even for tight collaboration on a shared full-screen element like a map.
In turn, Permulin provides a more open and free interaction space on the very same screen.
In this paper, we contributed Permulin, an integrated set of interaction and visualization techniques for multi-view tabletops to support co-located collaboration across a wide variety of collaborative coupling styles.
Results from two user studies demonstrate that  Permulin supports mixedfocus collaboration by allowing the user to transition fluidly between loose and tight collaboration.
The studies show that participants frequently used Permulin's interaction techniques for dividing and merging views, as well as share content to coordinate workspaces.
This is reflected by users occupying significantly larger interaction areas on Permulin than on a tabletop system, as well as performing highly parallel collaboration, particularly on shared full-screen contents.
Multiview user interfaces with an automultiscopic display.
Mediating group dynamics through tabletop interface design.
IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications.
Dynallax: solid state dynamic parallax barrier autostereoscopic VR display.
Exploring the effects of group size and table size on interactions with tabletop shared-display groupware.
Visibility control using revolving polarizer.
In IEEE Workshop on Horizontal Interactive Human Computer Systems, 161-168.
Territoriality in collaborative tabletop workspaces.
Single Display Privacyware: Augmenting Public Displays with Private Information.
Caretta: a system for supporting face-to-face collaboration by integrating personal and shared spaces.
Collaborative coupling over tabletop displays.
Avoiding Interference: How People Use Spatial Separation and Partitioning in SDG Workspaces.
WeSpace: the design development and deployment of a walk-up and share multi-surface visual collaboration system.
Temporal Psychovisual Modulation: a new paradigm of information display.
The two-user Responsive Workbench: support for collaboration through individual views of a shared space.
A comparison of competitive and cooperative task performance using spherical and flat displays.
Co-located collaborative visual analytics around a tabletop display.
Going beyond the display: a surface technology with an electronically switchable diffuser.
PiVOT: Personalized View-Overlays for Tabletops.
What Do We Know about Proximity and Distance in Work Groups?
Hinds & S. Kiesler , Distributed work.
Enabling concurrent dual views on common LCD screens.
A display table for strategic collaboration preserving private and public information.
Interactive stereoscopic display for three or more users.
C1x6: A Stereoscopic Six-User Display for Co-located Collaboration in Shared Virtual Environments.
Permulin: Collaboration on Interactive Surfaces with Personal In- and Output.
Lumisight Table:A face-to-face collaboration support system that optimizes direction of projected information to each stakeholder.
