In this paper we propose and evaluate Marasim, a novel Jigsaw based graphical authentication mechanism using tagging.
Marasim is aimed at achieving the security of random images with the memorability of personal images.
Our scheme relies on the human ability to remember a personal image and later recognize the alternate visual representations  of the concepts occurred in the image.
These concepts are retrieved from the tags assigned to the image.
We illustrate how a Jigsaw based approach helps to create a portfolio of system-chosen random images to be used for authentication.
The paper describes the complete design of Marasim along with the empirical studies of Marasim that provide evidences of increased memorability.
Results show that 93% of all participants succeeded in the authentication tests using Marasim after three months while 71% succeeded in authentication tests using Marasim after nine months.
Our findings indicate that Marasim has potential applications, especially where text input is hard , or in situations where passwords are infrequently used .
Their actions in turn, can compromise the security of entire system.
This problem is evident in knowledge-based authentication systems like passwords.
Today, static passwords are the most widely used authentication mechanism.
Passwords are simple, easy to use, inexpensive and familiar to most users.
They require no special hardware or training and can be distributed, maintained and updated by telephone, fax or email.
But then, passwords are also the source of many security weaknesses, because they are often used inappropriately .
For example, most users struggle to come up with strong and secure passwords that they can easily remember and recall without an external support.
In effect, they choose simple dictionary words as passwords which are highly susceptible to guessing and theft .
On the other hand, when users are forced to use strong passwords, they either write passwords down or frequently forget them .
Either outcome defeats the purpose of passwords which is to be secure and memorable at the same time.
Graphical passwords were introduced to overcome the drawback of text passwords.
They are based on recall and recognition of visual information  instead of alphanumeric strings.
The interest in graphical passwords is driven by the Picture superiority effect .
According to this effect, humans have vast, almost limitless visual memory and images are better remembered than the text and for a longer time.
Since images are easily remembered and can be chosen from a potentially large set of images, it was conceived that users would select and remember graphical passwords that are stronger than the text passwords they typically select .
However, this assumption is quickly falling apart as recent user studies on known graphical password schemes  have shown predictable patterns in the user choices of graphical passwords.
For example, users choose attractive, personal and semantically meaningful images as passwords which are easy to guess given some knowledge about the user .
On the other hand, system generated random images are proven to be difficult to remember .
Therefore, designing a graphical password scheme involves the same tricky tradeoff between security and usability that affects the text passwords.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
In this paper, we present, Marasim, a cued recognition based graphical authentication scheme, which blends together the security benefits of system chosen random images with the memorability gains of personal images using a unique semantic Jigsaw based authentication design.
During enrollment, user provides tags for a personal image of her choice and then utilizes those tags to create a portfolio of random images.
At the time of login, user recognizes those images amongst the set of decoy images and her identity is verified.
The intuition behind Marasim is that a personal image and its associated tags will aid in the recognition of random images.
In this paper, we describe the complete design of our scheme and discuss the potentials attacks on Marasim.
We conducted a longitudinal user study with 30 participants for the period of nine months.
Results show that, users had high success rates, with 93% of all participants succeeded in the authentication tests after three months while 71% of all participants were able to successfully login after nine months.
Participants rated the system positively.
A comparative laboratory study on Marasim shows that a tagging based approach helps users to remember their portfolio images better than otherwise.
We also did an introductory laboratory study to study the effect of multiple passwords interference on recall.
Results show that 71% the participants were able to successfully recall all their passwords after two weeks.
Even though we found some positive results about Marasim in this study, there were some limitations in our research - our study methodology could have been better, study participants were not representative to the actual users of the system.
We plan to address these in future studies that we are conducting around Marasim.
Before delving into the specifics of our approach, we catalogue the existing proposals on graphical passwords design focusing on the user choices of password images.
Based on the cognitive activity required to remember the password, we divide the graphical password schemes into four different categories : Pure Recall, Cued Recall, Recognition and Cued Recognition.
Pure recall is considered to be the most difficult task for memory, since user must remember and reproduce the password from memory without any assistance or cues given by the system.
Traditional text based passwords fall in this category.
Notable example of recall based graphical authentication scheme is Draw-A-Secret  .
DAS scheme requires user to remember and repeat visual drawing on predefined grid cells.
However, results indicate that users prefer to draw symmetric images with less number of strokes which reduces the overall password space .
Users often make mistakes in remembering the order and precise grid location, while repeating the drawing.
In a cued recall authentication scheme, user is given a cue that aids the recall of password from memory.
Best example of cued recall scheme is PassPoints , where password is constructed with series of random clicks on predefined region of an image.
To login, user must repeat clicking on the same location  and in correct order.
However, PassPoints scheme is vulnerable against dictionary attack as users chose distinct and semantically meaningful regions of an image  as click points .
InkBlot authentication is another cued recall based scheme .
It uses images as cue for text password entry.
However, no longitudinal user study has been reported as yet, to measure the level of allowed abstractness and liability of the scheme.
In cued recall schemes, the design of a cue becomes vital because an attacker can see what the user can see and can also understand what the user can understand.
Ideally, the cue should only help the legitimate user and not the attacker.
Recognition is an easier task than recall .
In a recognition based authentication scheme, the user typically memorizes a portfolio of images during enrollment and must distinguish those images from the presented decoy images to login.
Some of the known recognition based graphical password schemes are: PassFaces , DejaVu  and VIP .
PassFaces scheme uses portfolio of faces while DejaVu scheme uses images of abstract art.
VIP on the other hand, is based on the recognition of simple natural photographs.
Although, initial memorability results for most of these schemes are encouraging, evaluations indicate common predictable patterns in user selected portfolio images  which make them susceptible against dictionary attacks.
For example, in PassFaces, users choose attractive faces over plain ones and the faces of the people of same gender and race .
Recognition based schemes discussed earlier, however do not allow the use of personal  images.
The idea of using personal pictures as passwords was investigated in the work of Pering et al.
Since these schemes do not employ any filtering on images, these images remain closely related to the person and thus are insecure in real life setting.
A cued recognition is an interesting approach to graphical passwords design, where a cue helps the user in the recognition of portfolio images.
An example of such a scheme is a Story scheme by Monrose et.al.
Preliminary evaluations indicate that Story scheme offers better resilience against guessing attacks when compared to Faces .
However, users had problems in remembering their story passwords correctly and they often forgot the order.
Instead, they picked images that looked attractive and tried to remember them .
ImageShieldTM  is another cued recognition based authentication scheme.
In ImageShieldTM, user memorizes a set of semantic image categories and recognizes images that belong to those categories from the set of presented images.
The set of images changes with every login.
However, no user study has been reported for this scheme.
The success of any graphical password scheme  largely depends upon the type of images used for authentication .
The images can be of two types: Random images and Personal images.
Random images: These images are pieces of information created and used specifically for the purpose of authentication.
Generally, they do not share any relation with the individual or events of her life, hence they are more secure.
For example, randomly selected images from a public image database are more secure.
However, since they are not related to user's life in any meaningful way, they are often difficult to remember .
Personal images: These images on the other hand, are pieces of information that are intimately associated with the user and her life.
Such images are highly meaningful and often unforgettable to their owners .
Psychological studies confirm that self- generated or personal images are better recognized than those that are not .
However, such images are insecure in practical settings because of their vulnerability against guessing attacks .
Another problem with them is of privacy, as most individuals do not wish to reveal their personal images to others  .
In an ideal case, the authentication scheme should offer the best of both the worlds.
That is, it should have the memorability of personal images as well as the security of random images.
In order to achieve this ambitious goal, we looked into semantic jigsaw based design using tagging.
Tagging  is an emerging approach of organizing information using keywords  contributed by ordinary users.
Tagging is popular because it is open ended and has nonhierarchical structure, which means that users can assign tags freely based on the cognitive connection they share with the tagged object.
Tagging is used in photo sharing websites like Flickr  and in CAPTCHAs  to restrict automated bot  attacks.
However, to the best of our knowledge, ours is the first attempt of leveraging tagging for the purpose of user authentication.
It appears that many images from the presented set can be related to each other.
For example, images of cute girl with rose in hand , birthday sticker, rose flower and toys together form a birthday theme.
Another relation can be of a family or people where the individual members are shown in the four corner images .
Now, let us attempt to find the relation among the images shown in Figure 2.
On the first glance, images in Figure 2 do not seem to be related at all.
However, after a careful examination, we can define a relation such as: a mother and a daughter went to see an art exhibition .
Notice that these images are also present in Figure 1.
This relation however, is overshadowed by other superior relations like the ones described earlier.
Let us try, if we can somehow make this relation to stand out amongst the existing relations with the help of an external image.
So, let us turn our attention to the image in Figure 3 and try to describe its content in the form of tags.
Figure 3 is an image of a cute girl sitting in an art exhibition.
We can also see the painting of an Indian actress Nargis and a mirror on the wall.
Therefore, a possible set of tags for this image are: cute girl, art exhibition, Nargis and mirror .
Notice that these tags are also valid for the four images we see in Figure 2.
In fact, the images in Figure 2 recreate the scene we observe in Figure 3.
Therefore, if we knew the image or the given tags for the image in Figure 3 earlier, then we could have easily described the relation between the images in Figure 2.
The idea of semantic jigsaw based authentication design stuck to us with this cognitive experiment.
Let us reverse the experiment to understand it better .
Start by describing the image in Figure 3.
Let us say, we described it as: cute girl, art exhibition, Nargis and mirror.
This step is analogous to breaking the image into pieces.
However, unlike any typical jigsaw puzzle , we break the image into semantic concepts  occurred in the image.
Find equivalent images for the entered tags from step 1.
Assume that the found images were the ones shown in Figure 2.
Finally, mix the four images with decoy images as shown in Figure 1.
Present the complete set to user and ask her to identify the correct four images that describe the predefined relation.
It is like giving a Jigsaw puzzle to solve.
She then picks p number of images  from the set of retrieved images and registration is completed.
During login, the same p images are presented along with n decoy images.
User then must identify the correct p images in order to login.
In the present prototype, the value of  is kept as  respectively.
Figure 5 summarizes the sequence the operations.
The entered tags are then used to create the portfolio of passimages.
In the present prototype, we ask the user to upload an image.
However, instead of uploading, a set of images can also be presented to the user and she then picks an image from the presented set for tagging.
The user is welcomed to describe the associated memories with the photo .
There is no restriction on the language or the words used to describe the concepts.
Although, we encourage the use of simple English words of which specific pictorial representation is possible.
For example, for the image shown in Figure 6, apple tree is better tag than a tag like dark.
The user who knows the original image and the assigned tags can solve the jigsaw by doing a visual search for the tags.
Here the original image and the tags act a cue and aids in the assembly of correct images.
However, for someone who has not seen the original image and the tags, finding the correct set of images is difficult in limited attempts, provided the set of decoy images is properly chosen to reflect multiple overlapping relations .
Marasim is a novel Jigsaw based authentication scheme using tagging.
Marasim is an Urdu word which means relations or affinity.
Within our context, it denotes the association among the pictures.
Our idea is to leverage memories associated with a personal image in creating a portfolio of random images.
We call these random images as Passimages .
Doing so, will actively involve the user in the password creation process, thereby leveraging the action event memory, which is much stronger than the recognition memory .
User must select four images that correspond to the four tags.
Each image carries a number with it.
To select a particular image, user should enter the associated number in the textbox below.
For example in Figure 7, to select first image from first three rows and third image from the fourth row, user should enter 1113 in the textbox.
If the user is not satisfied with the presented set of images, she can ask for replacing them with a new set of images.
User also has the option of going back and altering  the entered tags.
Once the user has submitted her choices of four passimages, a confirmation message is displayed about successful completion of registration.
Once the user is successfully registered to Marasim, postprocessing begins in which we create a unique challenge set of images for the legitimate user.
The challenge set consists of 4 passimages and 21 decoy images.
In the current prototype, we have used images from Google Image search results  to build the image set.
In future versions of Marasim, we are planning to use proprietary images.
In Marasim, the four passimages share a semantic relationship with respect to the original secret image .
The passimages can be vulnerable if this relation is directly visible to the attacker.
In order to avoid this, we add confusion by overriding this relation with other relations.
There are two ways of doing it.
One way is to find all the tags that are related to the entered tags and add images for each of them.
For example, raincoat is a related tag to umbrella.
Another way is to choose decoy images that already exhibit some relation.
In the present prototype, we select the second option and add decoy images from the images chosen by other users.
Once the Image challenge set for the particular user is created, it remains consistent for all login sessions .
At the time of login, system presents the challenge set of 25 images randomly placed in a 5x5 grid as shown in Figure 8.
Each image has a number  associated with it.
To login, the user should not click on her passimages.
Instead, she must identify her passimages and enter the corresponding number in the textbox below.
User can enter those numbers in any order.
In this section, we discuss the possible attacks on Marasim and how we can defend them.
Simplest of the attacks against any authentication scheme is to randomly guess the password.
In Marasim, an attacker can try to randomly guess the one time access code.
The access code is a combination of four digits .
Therefore, if the ordering constraint is kept, the one time access code will have 10,000 combinations.
Without the ordering constraint, the overall combinations reduce by a factor of 24 .
However, brute force for one time access code is not economical, as it changes with every login session.
Alternatively, the attacker can try to randomly guess the four passimages.
In the current prototype, Marasim presents a challenge set of 25 images.
Therefore, the probability that a single random guess will succeed is 1/12650.
If ordering constraint is kept, the probability of a single random guess to succeed becomes 1/390625.
Marasim offers a password space comparable only with 4 digit PIN security.
Therefore, Marasim is suitable for systems where PIN based security suffices and where usability is the main concern.
In Dictionary based attacks, instead of random guessing, an attacker tries to crack the password using a dictionary of most commonly used passwords.
Marasim presents a login image grid of 25 images that are unique per user.
Therefore, the dictionary attack on Marasim needs to be dedicated one .
Secondly, the four passimages are related to each other with respect to one secret image, which is never revealed to the attacker.
And as explained in the post registration processing step, the challenge set of images is carefully constructed with images of overlapping relationships to confuse the attacker.
Therefore, without the prior knowledge of the image and the given tags, guessing the passimages is difficult .
However, it is possible that users might define tags such as dog, cat, puppy, kitten that might have nothing to do with the secret image, but entered only in order to get related images as passimages.
This is problematic because an attacker can easily build an image dictionary for such popular tags and use it to crack the passimages.
Therefore, to address this problem, we plan to use a password strength meter , which shows the relative strength of the password , at the time of the registration and which do not allow tags that are directly related to each other.
We argue that even if the attacker is successful to capture the one time access code using any of the popular social engineering techniques , she gains nothing about the actual passimages because of the following reasons.
Therefore, attacker cannot use the same code to login in next session.
One time access code yields no direct information about the passimages, because the same numbers corresponds to multiple images in the grid.
In such cases, the attacker must find all possible combinations and correlations among the numbers and the images in the grid to correctly identify the four passimages.
To illustrate, the numbers 3, 6 and 5 from the one time access code 3650 repeat thrice and the number 0 repeats twice in the grid , which means the attacker would require 3 x 3 x 3 x 2 = 54 attempts to find the correct four passimages.
In general, an attacker needs a x b x c x d attempts to find the actual password from the captured one time access code, where a, b, c, d denotes the frequency of occurrences of four numbers from the one time access code within the login grid.
Social engineering includes any technique used to trick people into divulging their credentials or private information to untrustworthy parties.
Some of the popular social engineering techniques are: Shoulder surfing, phishing and malware attacks.
Most authentication schemes are vulnerable against social engineering attacks because user has to explicitly enter her password each time she wants to login and the password remains consistent  across all login sessions .
One solution to this problem is to generate a new password token every time the user logins without changing the actual password.
In order to do that, we employ the probabilistic one time password scheme  .
It involves association of single number with multiple images to confuse the attacker.
Explaining the theory behind POTP is beyond the scope of this paper.
So, we illustrate the use of POTP in our scheme with a login example as shown in Figure 8.
In Marasim, user never enters the password by clicking on her passimages.
Instead, she must enter the four numbers that correspond to her passimages.
These four numbers form the one time access code for that particular login session.
The expected success probability of guessing, depending on the number of captured images per one time access code is 2.6% .
The worst case occurs when all four numbers from the one time access code repeat twice, giving the success probability of 6.25%  while the best case occurs when all four numbers repeats thrice, giving success probability of 1.23% .
However, if an attacker is able to record multiple login sessions then she can predict the passimages with little effort.
We conducted a longitudinal user study to evaluate the effectiveness of Marasim scheme in environments where users rarely login and from their point of view, the security is not a major concern .
However, passwords used on these sites can become bottleneck and a source of security breaches  if users start reusing them on high-security websites .
Ideally, there should be a clear separation between the passwords used for low-security websites and high-security websites .
If Marasim is found effective in situations where passwords are rarely used  then our scheme can be used as a standard authentication mechanism for low-security websites, thereby helping to build the separation and avoiding attacks based on password reuse.
Another goal of the study is to learn the characteristics of the user chosen passwords.
We recruited 30 participants by sending invitation mails and posting flyers.
All participants were students  from the university campus with their age ranging from 20 to 28.
Twenty three participants were male while seven participants were female.
None of the participants have used graphical password scheme before.
Monetary incentives were kept to encourage participation.
Our usability test consisted of six sessions that span nine months.
A web based prototype of the Marasim was created and an email was sent to all the participants containing the URL of the site and instructions for the usage of the website.
Table 1 shows the details of all the sessions.
We consider authentication to be successful, if the participant is able to login by correctly identifying her password images.
Each participant was given a maximum of three attempts to login.
Table 2 shows the numbers of successful logins along with the mean time needed to login.
The numbers inside the parentheses are:  where m denotes the number of successful participants and n denotes the total number of participants.
The first session  happened in the lab where we introduced Marasim scheme to the participants.
Each participant required on average two minutes to register.
The training involved two back to back login sessions to get the user familiar with the authentication process and image challenge set.
We intentionally avoided the use of real accounts, because we wanted to test the memorability of Marasim in an isolated environment .
In the remaining five sessions , we asked participants to login to Marasim by sending them a reminder mail.
Most participants tried logging into Marasim within an hour of sending the email.
We requested users not to login between sessions.
If users fail to recall their password after three or more attempts, we revealed the password on request before the start of next session.
At the end of the fifth session , we requested participants to fill out questionnaires for the sake of qualitative analysis.
Results show that, all the participants were able to successfully login for the first four sessions.
After three months, seven users made mistakes in login but eventually succeeded while two users failed to login within the given limit of three attempts.
There were no dropouts till the fifth session .
However, only fourteen participants took part in the last session of the study  1.
Ten out of these fourteen participants were able to successfully login to their accounts while seven participants required more than one attempt to login.
Table 2 also reports the details of the time required to login.
The maximum delay occurred in the first session when participants were using the scheme for the first time and in the fifth session which was after three months gap.
Although, the mean login time of more than 20 sec seems inappropriate for practical applications, we argue that following simple countermeasures can help in locating the password images faster in the login grid, thereby reducing Twenty out of the 30 students who participated in the study graduated after 6 months and only 4 out of the 20 graduated participants tried to login to Marasim by the deadline.
Comparison of Marasim with long term trials of some of the existing graphical password schemes 2 offers good evidences of increased memorability.
For example, Valentine  did a five months user study on PassFaces scheme  and found 72% login success rate by third attempt.
In comparison, Marasim reports a login success rate of 93% after three months and 71% after nine months.
Zviran and Haga  report a 35% login success rate after three months at the first attempt, while, Marasim achieves 80% login success rate after three months by first attempt.
At the end of three months, we requested users to answer a set of questionnaire providing feedback about the scheme and to write down any specific comments.
Available responses to these questions were Yes, No and Neutral.
Figure 10 shows the responses of the participants to these questions.
We were interested in knowing the categories of the uploaded images and the relatedness of the assigned tags.
These findings are important to determine the predictability of the passimages.
None of the image categories was dominant in the password selection.
The most frequent categories were Nature scenes and Everyday objects while the least frequent category was of abstract art images.
We also tried to manually identify the relatedness of the tags used in creation of passimages.
If the tags are closely related to each other, then the relation among the passimages is easy to predict.
The knowledge of one tag can easily expose other tags since they are related.
For example, tags like cake, candles and balloons can be tried along with the tag birthday.
Therefore, related tags should strictly be avoided.
Our study found that the majority of the passwords  have at most two tags that are related to each other, whereas only 10% of passwords have all tags related to each other.
In the current prototype, users have tagged images that may not have a predefined set of tags.
As we can see in Figure 10, all questions had median value of neutral or higher, showing high levels of satisfaction.
We also asked the users about how they were able to remember their passwords, Figure 11 summarizes their responses.
Forty three percent of users said that the original image and the tags helped them to recognize their passimages.
Twenty seven percent of users said they simply recognized the four passimages, while rest thirty percent users nodded for a combined effect of recalling the original image and recognition the four images.
None of the participant said that they wrote their tags down or stored their passimages.
To summarize, results of the user study show good improvements in terms of memorability with only 2 out of 30 participants  failed to remember their password after three months and 10 out of 14 participants  were able to successfully login to Marasim even after nine months.
We believe these evidences are good indications of the viability of the proposed scheme.
We conducted a supervised laboratory study to test the hypothesis: tagging aids in the recognition of password images.
We recruited 20 participants from the university campus by sending invitation mails.
All the participants were students with their age in the range of 19 to 28 .
There was no overlap between participants from earlier studies.
A simple recognition based scheme tVIP was built for the evaluation purpose.
The tVIP scheme is similar to VIP  scheme where user directly creates and recognizes a portfolio of four images from the presented set of 25 images .
Our usability test consisted of two sessions that span two weeks.
In the first session, users created two passwords: one with the Marasim scheme  and another with tVIP scheme .
To counterbalance, we randomized the order in which the conditions  are presented to the participants during both registration and login.
Therefore, half of the participants learned and used Marasim before tVIP and vice versa.
In the second session which happened after two weeks, we asked the participants to login to their accounts using both the schemes.
Table 3 shows the login success rate for both the schemes along with the results of one tailed Chi-square test.
Marasim and we tested whether the recall for all of their passwords after two weeks.
Table 4 shows the login success rates after two weeks.
The numbers inside the parentheses are:  where m denotes number of successful participants and n denotes the total number of participants.
Results show that, all the participants were able successfully recall all three passwords after two weeks and 71% of users recalled them in first attempt.
However, in real life, users are unlikely to create three passwords simultaneously and to recall them one after the other.
In fact, an average Internet user has about 25 accounts that require passwords .
Therefore, our findings should only be considered as an important starting step towards understanding the effects of multiple password interference on human memory.
We sincerely thank everyone associated with this work.
In this paper, we presented Marasim, a simple-yet-strong authentication system, which is easy enough for users to grasp - but offering good security to keep the fraudsters at bay.
Its strength lies in its simplicity and unique Jigsaw way of working.
The novel contribution of this work is in the construction of image portfolio, bridging the security benefits of system-chosen image together with memorability gains of self-chosen images.
We designed and tested a web based prototype of Marasim.
Empirical studies of Marasim provide good evidences of increased memorability.
We admit that, our participants are not representative of all users who could potentially use such a system, but since this was only an exploratory study, we used convenient sample.
In future, we plan to do the study with a more representative sample .
We also plan to remove some of the design flaws in data collecting that we had in this paper.
Users are not the enemy.
Ames, M. and Naaman, M. Why we tag: motivations for annotation in mobile and online media.
Theory of Probabilistic One-Time Passwords, Proc.
Results show that, 19 of 20 participants were successful in login to Marasim while only 13 out of the 20 participants were able to login with the tVIP scheme after two weeks.
In the one-tailed Chi-Square test, the differences in login success rates were in the predicted direction and were statistically significant.
We conducted a small-scale supervised laboratory study to examine the effects of multiple password interference on performance.
We recruited 7 participants  from the university campus with their age in the range of 24 to 28.
Bonneau, J., and Preibusch, S. The password thicket: technical and market failures in human authentication on the web, In Proc.
Are PassfacesTM more usable than passwords?
Cranor, L., and Garfinkel, S. Security and Usability: Designing Systems that People can use.
Davis, D., Monrose, F., and Reiter, M. K. On user choice in graphical password schemes.
