According to a 2012 NHTSA report , 17% of all traffic accidents involve at least one distracted driver, and 3% of those happen because the driver is manipulating a control device integrated in the cockpit.
Especially in the onset of automated driving, there will be a variety of distracting situations for drivers, in which warnings on displays in their peripheral vision will not even be noticed.
A prominently displayed warning perceivable in all situations could not only be of great value when manipulating an integrated control device, but also in moments when the driver's attention is turned to the side window, the glove box, the cup holder or a passenger.
One unique property of head-mounted displays  is that content can easily be displayed at a fixed position within the user's field of view .
We examined this strategy with a physically and visually distracted driver.
We ran two consecutive studies in a driving simulator, comparing different warning visualizations in a head-up display  and a HMD.
In an initial study, we found no significant effects of warning type or display technology on the reaction times.
In a second study, after modifying our visualization to include a visual reference marker, we found that with only this minor change, reaction times were significantly lower in the HMD when compared to the HUD.
Our insights can help others design better headstabilized notifications.
When using head-mounted Displays , there are three different types of content stabilization: Depending on the reference system, content can be head-, body- or worldstabilized .
In prior work, head-stabilized content has mainly been used to display fixed menus for interaction with an augmented reality scene .
However, there is another advantage of head-stabilized content: It is always within the user's field of view, independently of where the user is turning his/her head.
Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Publication rights licensed to ACM.
Initially, it seemed obvious that the driver's attention could be more easily captured if a warning was displayed within the HMD's field of view.
Nevertheless, we wanted to examine whether the stabilization technique itself would influence the driver's reaction time.
Our work builds on prior studies of critical situations in the car, respectively warning the driver of potentially dangerous situations.
Their first study indicated that an exocentric top view visualization of the car's surrounding has benefits over a car-stabilized 3D arrow, pointing directly at the source of the danger.
In a later study, they again compared different visualization techniques in combination with sound .
In this study, the visualization within the driver's frame of reference outperformed other concept variations.
Their technique was successfully used for evaluating a system, which supports drivers in evasion maneuvers .
Using a HMD as a HUD replacement has also been considered in the field of aerospace cockpits .
It is argued that HMDs are more flexible to use than HUDs or even head down displays.
The visualization of critical information, such as warnings in the HMD has also been proposed in this paper, but has not been thoroughly evaluated.
They explained the increased total task time in the HMD condition with divided attention effects and an increased effort of refocusing between the task and the HMD visualization.
The first study was conducted in a driving simulator .
A high fidelity car mockup was placed in front of three 50" plasma screens, displaying a realistic driving scene.
Two 8" LCD panels on the sides of the car mockup simulated rear view mirrors.
For displaying secondary tasks, a 10" LCD screen was built into the car mockup's center stack.
A semi-reflective glass panel  on top of the mockup's hood simulated a HUD.
This glass panel reflected the content of an accordingly positioned LCD screen  to make it seem to hover in front of the driving scene.
The resulting image  had a 10.1 diagonal field of view at a distance of 2.8 m. For the HMD test condition, we used a binocular optical see-through HMD  with a resolution of 1280 x 720 px., a 40 diagonal field of view, the virtual image appearing at a distance of 3m.
Interaction was realized through a rotary control device located next to the driver's seat at the bottom right side in the mockup's middle console.
Scrolling the selection bar meant turning the device, pushing it meant selection.
The periods of distraction were used to simulate situations, in which drivers interact with the onboard infotainment system and thus are not entirely focused on the driving scene.
During the test run, the test coordinator observed the subject's behavior via video surveillance in an external control room.
After approximately 3 minutes, in a moment when the test coordinator could assure that the subject was fully occupied with the secondary task, he manually triggered the leading vehicle to abruptly halt.
Simultaneously one of two possible warnings was displayed , in order to trigger a respective reaction of the driver.
Depending on the warning symbol, subjects were asked to either brake or perform an evasion maneuver.
This sequence of just following the leading vehicle, following it while performing the secondary task and finally being confronted with the next critical situation, was repeated another two times.
We used a straight motorway route as the driving scenario.
To ensure a fixed distance of 50 m, the leading vehicle adjusted its speed automatically depending on the current distance.
After having reached the target position behind the leading vehicle, subjects followed the vehicle for 2 minutes until an acoustic signal indicated the start of the secondary task.
We used the surrogate reference task , a standardized task designed to provoke situations of visual-manual distraction .
We applied a version of the SuRT, in which an array of 18 colored circular and square symbols appears on the screen in the center stack, circles in blue and squares in red.
Using a within-subjects design, each subject was asked to perform the scenario twice, once using the HUD, once using the HMD.
Immediately before the actual test runs, the two warning types were introduced to the subjects, using the HUD or the HMD .
The warning type was permuted for each display condition.
In order to avoid obvious sequences, we introduced a third warning situation as a distraction item, which was excluded from evaluation.
In the beginning of each test, subjects were instructed in the driving scenario, the SuRT, the critical situations they would be confronted with, as well as about the different warning types and the appropriate reaction.
After the first instruction, each subject performed an extensive training phase to get accustomed to the driving task itself and to performing the SuRT as a secondary task.
Besides demographic data, they were asked to estimate the quality of perception, recognition and reaction on a 5-point Likert scale.
After having completed both test runs, subjects filled out a final questionnaire.
In this questionnaire they were asked to state in which condition  they felt their attention was directed faster to the danger , in which condition they could decide faster, which type of reaction would be appropriate  and in which condition they could cope faster with the situation .
To compare different reaction times as well as the subject's behavior, we logged the driving data  during the test runs with a frequency of 50 Hz.
We calculated reaction times as the time difference between the first occurrence of the critical event and the time when the pressure of the braking pedal was larger than zero  respectively when the steering wheel angle exceeded 10 degrees .In the first study, we did not provide any additional visual reference: The HUD/HMD either displayed nothing , or exclusively the appropriate warning.
The warning symbol was displayed for 4 seconds, either in the HUD or in the HMD.
In order to make warning sizes comparable, we scaled the graphics in order to match the portion of the field of view they covered.
Thus, the displayed warnings covered 94 x 65 px.
Subjects also stated that they were surprised how few advantages head-stabilized warnings provided.
They identified the spatial unawareness as one possible reason for this .
De facto, warnings appeared well within the field of view, but not where the current focus of attention was, which may have provoked change blindness .
Based on the objective results of the study and on the assessments described above, we concluded that by enhancing this spatial awareness, we might also enhance the perception of warnings displayed in the HMD.
We hoped to increase spatial awareness by displaying an additional visual cue.
A constantly displayed visual marker was added to indicate the location in which a warning would potentially be shown.
In order to examine effects of the display type and warning type on the subject's reaction times, we analyzed the data with a two-way repeated measures ANOVA.
We obtained 88 valid data sets.
Our second study used the same apparatus, design and methodology as in the first study.
The only change we made was to introduce the marker to indicate the display position of the warning .
This marker was shown in both conditions  even when the warning itself was not displayed.
We thereby hoped to improve the subject's spatial awareness: even when there was no active warning symbol, subjects knew exactly where it would appear in case of a warning.
Out of the 104 measurements , we obtained 88 valid data sets.
Four data points were discarded as outliers , another 12 could not be included in the analysis due to technical problems with the HMD.
Reaction times were analyzed using descriptive statistics and a two-way repeated measure ANOVA.
With the revised visual design including the marker we could confirm our initial expectation: reaction times were now significantly shorter if the warning was displayed in the HMD than if displayed in the HUD .
Subjects' statements indicate that this led to improved visual guidance, which might have caused the significant effect.
To finally prove this phenomenon, a third study comparing HMD visualizations with and without visual markers will have to be conducted.
If the positive influence of visual markers can be confirmed, an important guideline for HMD visualizations could be derived.
Information should probably not just appear somewhere within the HMD's field of view.
Similar to the markers we used in the second study, fixed content might also be arranged around empty spaces and provide a similar type of visual guidance.
Warnings could then appear within these spaces.
Baber, C., Knight, J., Haniff, D. and Cooper, L. Ergonomics of wearable computers.
Billinghurst, M., Bowskill, M., Jessop, M. and Morphett, J.
A wearable spatial conferencing space.
Bock, T., Maurer, M. and Farber, G. Vehicle in the Loop  - A new simulator set-up for testing Advanced Driving Assistance Systems.
Situated documentaries: Embedding multimedia presentations in the real world.
Evaluation of an Active Safety Light using Virtual Test Drive within Vehicle in the Loop.
Mattes, S. and Hallen, A.
Surrogate Distraction Measurement Techniques: The lane change test.
Driver Distraction: theory, effects and mitigation.
Notice on Visual-Manual NHTSA Driver Distraction Guidelines for In-Vehicle Electronic Devices, Department of Transportation, Federal Register 77.37, 2012.
Rensink, R.A., O'Regan, J.K. and Clark, J.J. To see or not to see: The need for attention to perceive changes in scenes.
Shaw, Robert L. Helmet-Mounted Display  Interface Design for Head-Up Display .
Replacement Exploratory Development-NTL, Inc. NTI DAYTON, OH, 2002.
Tonnis, M. and Klinker, G. Effective control of a car driver's attention for visual and acoustic guidance towards the direction of imminent dangers.
Tonnis, M., Sandor, C., Klinker, G., Lange, C. and Bubb, H. Experimental evaluation of an augmented reality visualization for directing a car driver's attention.
As shown in figure 4, an analysis of the final questionnaire revealed that the percentage of subjects who felt their attention was captured faster by warnings in the HMD increased from ~40% to over 60% .
Subjective assessments after each of the test conditions again resulted in no significant differences between either display conditions.
In this paper we described two consecutive studies, comparing the visualization of warnings in HMDs and HUDs.
Whenever a warning was displayed, the driver was fully distracted by a secondary task.
Contrary to our expectations, the first study did not reveal any significant differences in reaction times between the HUD and the HMD visualizations.
However, after having augmented the displayed warnings with permanently visible markers, a second study revealed significantly shorter reaction times in the HMD condition.
Results show that in situations, when the driver's attention is turned away from the driving scene , HMDs can outperform traditional automotive displays  and improve the situation for drivers.
An interesting aspect is that the direct presentation in the HMD in this case outclasses the peripheral perception of content in the headup display.
This indicates that there is good reason to present critical information  in a head stabilized way, while other content such as navigational information or the current driving speed might rather be presented cockpit-stabilized.
