HCI research published 10 years ago pointed out that many users cannot cope with the number and complexity of passwords, and resort to insecure workarounds as a consequence.
We present a study which re-examined password policies and password practice in the workplace today.
32 staff members in two organisations kept a password diary for 1 week, which produced a sample of 196 passwords.
The diary was followed by an interview which covered details of each password, in its context of use.
We find that users are in general concerned to maintain security, but that existing security policies are too inflexible to match their capabilities, and the tasks and contexts in which they operate.
As a result, these password policies can place demands on users which impact negatively on their productivity and, ultimately, that of the organisation.
We conclude that, rather than focussing password policies on maximizing password strength and enforcing frequency alone, policies should be designed using HCI principles to help the user to set an appropriately strong password in a specific context of use.
Despite a growing number of graphical and biometric authentication mechanisms, passwords remain the most familiar and commonly-used form of user authentication in organisational settings.
In this paper, we investigate the impact of passwords, and their associated security policies, on individual users' productivity and experience.
Password policies govern not only construction and lifetime of individual passwords, but also work with other contextual factors to define the numbers of passwords users are expected to remember and the frequency with which they have to use them.
Over 10 years ago, Adams & Sasse  found that password policies that do not meet users' work practices caused high levels of dissatisfaction, and led to insecure practices and low security motivation.
Since then, we have seen studies of passwords using controlled  and survey methodologies , which provide some understanding of the policy factors that make passwords easier to generate, remember, and use, in ways which are appropriate to the situation.
So - has this understanding been applied in practice?
We investigated password use in two major organisations.
Our study combines two forms of methods: a highlystructured diary study to capture "what happens during the day", and retrospective interviews following up on the context around the passwords identified in the diary.
By focussing on the password as the object of interest, we have been able to "look around" instances of password use, to identify problems in using passwords governed by specific policies a specific context, and to understand how users cope with them.
We are not simply concerned with the extent to which users comply with policy, but to identify ways in which policy impacts - positively or negatively - on users' daily practice of password use.
In this way, we are able to understand more about contextual issues of password use: 1.
What specific aspects of password policy cause problems for users?
What coping strategies do password users adopt to overcome those problems?
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
How do those coping strategies affect productivity, the security of the specific systems, and organisation's risk management in general?
Are there unexpected password issues not covered by existing policy?
Although passwords are usually considered in terms of authentication for a service or a device, today they are encountered in many other ways in the workplace - and existing password policies do not cover these.
As a result, users adopt ad-hoc solutions, which are usually insecure.
Security depends on the context of use.
Context including virtual workstations, Single Sign-on, and home and mobile working - impacts not only the frequency of password use, but also on the risks associated with it.
Strong passwords - in the sense of password length and character set size - take many orders of magnitude longer to crack than shorter, simpler passwords .
But - given the choice - users tend to avoid non-alphanumeric symbols , and passwords which contain such symbols are significantly harder to recall and more likely to be written down .
Allan  calculates a "breaking point"; there is a maximum effective entropy - a pessimistic calculation puts this at about 18bits - for all types of password; exceeding this is likely to cause users to write passwords down, so that trying to increase password entropy by strengthening the policy will be counter-productive.
Another consideration is that strong passwords offer no protection against phishing or key-logging .
Frequent change and non-re-use of passwords across sites are the common password policy recommendations to mitigate such risks, but these measures are arguably of marginal benefit .
Being required to devise high-strength passwords, with high frequent changes, over many passwords which are required to be distinct from one another, combines into a heavy load for the user .
Organisational policy generally has no control over numbers of additional "private" passwords users may have, but organisations can reduce the need for multiple passwords within the workplace through technical measures, such as Single-Sign On , or use of alternative authentication mechanisms, such as biometrics.
The former has become more common over the past 10 years, but adoption of alternatives to passwords has been slow.
Organisations that continue to ignore HCI design principles and impose unusable password policies pay a price in the cost/benefit trade-off between the risk of loss versus the cost of complying with security .
Password policies should be as strong as needed, not more.
Forcing users to comply with policies which meet the maximum theoretical risk is a huge cost, not only in monetary terms but also in terms of the most valuable resource any organisation has the goodwill of organisation members.
Password policies are currently set at the organisational level, with them aim of preserving the confidentiality, integrity and availability of the organisation's systems and data.
There is a growing body of evidence that people cannot cope with the password policies imposed on them , and that, given the choice  users choose the weakest password they can get away with .
In this section, we examine the current guidelines on how to select password policies, and the user load results from different policies.
Recent draft guidelines by the US National Institute of Standards and Technology  organise aspects of password policy around identified risks in the compromise of password-based authentication systems.
Among the recommendations which impact on users, they cover: 1.
Factors in password policy that increase the user effort include: password strength, type ; numbers of passwords the user has to remember; and frequency of changing passwords.
Conversely, factors which can be expected to mitigate the load on users are: Single Sign-on ; password synchronization - a single password covering multiple services; and systems designed to help users cope with passwords in a secure way, such as local password management.
Construction of strong passwords, and a  limit on the frequency of guesses, to mitigate guessing and cracking; Password expiration and avoidance of recently-used passwords, to mitigate the use of compromised passwords; and Use of Single Sign-On and local password management, to enable stronger policies while reducing the load on the user.
Other points which a password policy should consider include: 1.
Timeouts and screen locking, to mitigate opportunistic mis-use of an unattended desktop; and Rules about sharing passwords - traditional advice  suggests that this is to be avoided, but others  found situations in which password sharing might be appropriate in the workplace  or for personal uses .
It is clear that, to be effective, security policies need to be written to balance the organisation's security requirements against the ability of users to perform security tasks .
To achieve this balance, those responsible for setting policies need to understand the users' primary task and context of operation, as well as the risks.
As the same time, it may not always be possible to produce an ideal solution; there will always be some conflict between security and the smooth working of users' primary tasks.
Password policies need to be understood in the concrete reality of daily use - which Dourish et al.
In this real-life context, password use is a secondary task, and an interruption to the user's primary task .
Moreover, password use does not occur in isolation, but works alongside other access control mechanisms and factors in the context of use.
Password policy sets out the constraints within which users must operate; users choose passwords within those limits, in ways which we aim to understand more.
For example, do they conform minimally or maximally to password construction rules?
It might be expected that people will choose a strong password for a sensitive application.
Evidence for this is mixed; Zviran & Haga , in a large quantitative analysis of password choice, did not find any association between password length and composition and data sensitivity, although they did find associations between sensitivity and frequency of changing and method of choosing.
However, we believe that there are issues around password choice which can only be uncovered by an in-depth study of password use in actual practice.
Choosing a weak password might be entirely rational, from a user's point of view; the direct costs of attacks might be small and uncertain, but the indirect costs of additional effort are immediate and certain.
Herley  provides important new insights into people's implicit cost/benefit calculations in deciding whether or not to follow security rule.
As he argues, e-commerce users understand the risks, and they judge the likely personal cost from password cracking or theft to be low.
However, in this paper we are specifically concerned with password use in organisations.
The costs of a password breach might include significant losses for the organisation, and serious consequences for the individual's continued employment.. Adams & Sasse  argue that most users within organisations are security-conscious; insecure practices are not the result of a relaxed attitude, but are the result of ad-hoc attempts to deal with an unmanageable load and conflicting demands.
We want to understand users' experiences of password use in organisational settings.
It cannot be assumed that organisational use has the same costs and benefits, for users or for the organisation, as in studies of individual performance with passwords or use of passwords by consumers.
From the organisation's viewpoint, passwords are subject to password rules and policies which are under their control, as decided by policy setters - Chief Information Security Officers or other senior managers.
From a detailed study of daily password use, we aimed to understand more about specific problems faced by users in conforming to password policies, and the strategies which they adopt to cope with these issues.
The research was conducted within the context of a large project to model different aspects of organisational security policies .
For that purpose, we sought quantitative data about how long passwords take to enter, how often different types of password are used, and an understanding of the context of use.
Our research is also a rich source of qualitative data, particularly the transcripts of voice recordings of debrief sessions following each participant's diary keeping.
Our approach differs from previous research in two ways.
First, by taking the password itself as the object of study, rather than the user and their experience with passwords in general, we were able to study the contextual factors that surround the password.
Second, we wanted to study users' daily experiences with those passwords.
We asked our participants to record actual password events that occurred in their working day; we hoped that this would record problems and their immediate impact, and provide a cue for discussing practices and lived experiences resulting from particular password policies in subsequent semi-structured interviews.
In retrospect, our approach was successful in identifying password practices, but less so in bringing to light specific events.
Organisation A A large research-intensive university; participants are administrators, and lecturers or researchers in disciplines removed from Computer Science and HCI, and teaching staff: Administrative staff Lecturing and research  Organisation B A large financial services organisation.
Participants are members of a security team and Human Resources administrators.
Capturing the situated actions of people interacting with technology requires detailed recording of events as they occur.
However, video recording was not an option due to the sensitive nature of passwords, and our initial attempt at shadowing with pencil-and-paper recordings was cut short because Organisation B thought shadowing staff was commercially too sensitive.
It was important for us to develop a methodology which interfered as little as possible with users' flow of work.
We thus adopted a combined approach, using diary studies to record users' actual use of passwords, as accurately as possible within the limitations of self-reporting, followed by an interview.
Diary studies are an established method to investigate technology in use in HCI .
It is important to be clear, however, that in contrast to those studies, in our case the diary was highly structured, apart from space for free-text responses where participants were asked to give the background task - such as starting work - and specific reason for password use - such as authenticating to a particular service.
The debrief interviews were structured around a questionnaire to capture details of users' passwords, but administered by the researchers and voice-recorded, with participants encouraged to discuss the reasons for their questionnaire responses in depth.
In this way, our method is between ethnography and quantitative methods.
Our diary study provides data which are amenable to quantitative analysis, for example around the frequencies of various kinds of password events.
Because we were concerned with organisational password policies, we recruited participants from among staff members within two organisations.
Over a period from December, 2008 to August, 2009, we recruited 32 participants who each kept the diary for 4-5 working days see Table 1.
Participants were all volunteers and were compensated with gift certificates.
We recorded 17.4 hours of interviews from these participants.
Although this is a relatively small sample size, it is appropriate for an in-depth analysis of diaries and qualitative data.
Where a participant kept a diary for more than 5 days, only the first 5 days were included in the quantitative analyses, although all days were nevertheless recorded for the information they provide for qualitative analysis.
4 participants kept a diary for only 4 days each.
All 4 were part-time workers, and the 4 days comprised their work days over the study period; we have included their entries.
For 2 participants, we felt that the diary data was unreliable and have discarded it from the quantitative results, but nevertheless used the debrief in the qualitative analysis.
This left 982 password events suitable for analysis.
As well as the paper record of password details taken during the interviews, we had the transcripts and recordings of the interviews, and so were able to double-check the questionnaire data.
We identified 26 passwords from 14 participants which were recorded in the diaries but for which details were not reported in the debriefs, due to error or for reasons such as an extension of the diary after the debrief.
We also noted 3 passwords recorded in the debriefs but not recorded in the questionnaire results.
These were excluded from the quantitative and qualitative analyses.
We collected 196 separate passwords in total in the diaries.
However, some passwords are fixed by the architecture to be identical to others, as a single password for use across many systems.
Some participants recorded these as separate passwords while others chose to record them as one.
This applies to 52 passwords, leaving 144 unique passwords.
Our analyses of daily practices around passwords, and their impact on users, produced findings that we can categorise under three headings: i. ii.
Conflict between password policies and the capabilities of users, and the problems this creates; The ways users find to cope with this conflict; and The impact on security of different contexts of use.
We examined users' perceived needs for compliance with secure practices, and found that users are cogent in their understanding of security needs, but nevertheless find the demands imposed by password policies too difficult.
We begin by showing some of the features of password policies that create burdens for users.
Later, we consider the strategies which users adopt to attempt to cope with these demands; however, each coping strategy introduces its own problems, as we shall see.
Our findings support those of Adams & Sasse  that the majority of users are security-conscious, and can understand the need for secure behaviour.
On the other hand, forcing them into behaviours which they perceive as too stringent creates a conflict between their perception and the enforced practice.
We analysed the data quantitatively and qualitatively in terms of different uses for each password, to understand specific triggers for password use.
The basic method was to identify common issues and correlations quantitatively, and to add depth by focussed qualitative analysis.
Our questionnaire and diaries used 5-point Likert-style scales, in some cases labelled.
The transcribed recordings were analysed using a variant of Grounded Theory .
We used Atlas TI  to aid our qualitative analysis.
Unlike classic Grounded Theory, we did not develop a single "core" code, but instead we identified common themes around each of the following clusters of codes: 1.
Sensitivity of passwords, and factors which affect it; Estimated strength of passwords and why participants consider passwords to be strong or weak; Coping with the demands of password policies, both for devising passwords and for remembering them; Similarity of passwords with other passwords used by participants; The "ecology", or context, surrounding each password.
Regular password changing is recommended by NIST  and mandated in both organisations, with the intention of mitigating the risk from compromised passwords: the risk of a password being compromised increases with its lifetime.
Users rarely change their password unless forced to do so.
We asked participants how often they change their passwords.
Apart from those passwords  for which change is enforced, only 10 of the 144 unique passwords are changed more than once per year, and even of those, 5 are only changed because the participants forget them.
In minimising password change, participants are being completely reasonable: changing passwords places a heavy burden on users, both in devising a new password and also in learning them.
Password policies are highly restrictive - but users are unclear about what the rules are.
In Organisation A, users changing a password were surprised that to find the system would not allow anything it deemed similar to the users' 12 previous passwords.
This meant they were unable to apply their usual method for constructing passwords: so it's got to the point where it's ... so difficult to make one up, and difficult to remember, that I have to write it down.
The effort and, more importantly, the time delay involved in resetting passwords raises a genuine fear of forgetting; considering the disruptions it causes to users' tasks and productivity; another participant reported: I get emails, think I'm too busy to open that, and then I did it yesterday and I was down to you've got 10 more days ...
I've just been too busy to risk forgetting the password or having two hours where I can't log in ... that's happened to me before.
Passwords which are used very frequently are remembered easily; 59 unique passwords were said to be remembered "automatically" in this way.
This is so, even for the complex passwords in Organisation A: no I don't forget my...
I never, I don't think I've ever forgotten my  one, not because I've got such a wonderful memory but just because you type it so often.
Thus, requiring strong passwords might be acceptable, if users were able to keep to one password which is used frequently for almost all uses within the organisation.
Unfortunately, this does not overcome the problem of remembering it in the first few days; this learning period can be especially challenging for part-time staff: one reported using a clue as a reminder on Monday mornings following a change.
Moreover, it is not always the case that the organisational password is used frequently, while others are used less often: in Organisation A, some departments have a local password, which means that the main organisational password is used only occasionally - this was the case for two of our participants.
Most users we observed had developed  strategies for generating passwords - such as using paired words from a cycle of non-English words.
Of course, if a strong password is mandatory, then users are forced to be imaginative.
Paradoxically, upper limits on password length or character set - which reduce the possible password strength -, as well as fixed passwords, also block users from using their preferred scheme.
This is notably the case for the main password in Organisation A, which must be 7 or 8 characters; bank passwords and some e-commerce  passwords also restrict the character set.
The most obvious scheme to generate passwords is to recycle an old one, perhaps making some small change.
Users see "good" passwords  as a "resource", which they continue to use for new applications even if the original use is no longer allowed.
Of the 144 unique passwords, we found 14 currently also used for other work-related passwords, 17 reused for personal uses, and 22 not identical but similar to other passwords - a total of 53.
This is in addition to the 52 passwords which are forced to be identical by the architecture of the system.
Re-use does not necessarily mean people are using the same or similar passwords for "everything"; only two of our participants admitted to doing so, even though in Organisation B that would be quite possible.
Forgetting a password is always an interruption; but, in some cases, "remembering by reset" might be a reasonable strategy in situations such as returning from vacation or for infrequently-used passwords.
Unfortunately, in the case of Organisation A, arranging a password reset is more complicated.
An obvious - and potentially risky - response to the demand to learn a new password is to write the password down.
Of the 15 participants in Organisation A, 9 admitted to writing down the main organisational password, either for the first few days of use or if, because of the nature of their work, they only use the organisational password occasionally.
It could be considered small progress since the findings of Adams & Sasse  that most users who write down passwords now do so apologetically, and keep it in some "safe" place, such as a diary.
Even though this is some progress, passwords in a "safe" place at home or work are still at risk from attackers , and, since wallets and diaries can be lost, the coping strategy is not always effective.
For comparison, none of the participants from Organisation B reported writing down their network or PC login password, and the reason seems clear - although forced to change their passwords as in Organisation A, small, easily remembered changes are allowed.
Unfortunately, this can lead to new problems - the user remembers the basic password, but may fail to remember the variations.
Context impacts the frequency and ease of password use and, consequently, on the ability of users to become familiar with complex passwords - as well as on the sensitivity of passwords and risks from security breaches.
We typically think of passwords as authentication for a PC or online service.
However, in daily use passwords encompass many other reasons for use, and the same password is often used for many services, by user choice or by the architecture of the authentication system.
For our questionnaire, we started with an a priori set of categories of password use, but from our analysis we expanded this to at least 14, including some which are not often considered when password policies are designed.
Space prevents us discussing each category in detail here, but notable categories are well-known uses such as access to company or third-party service and login to a local PC; emerging uses such as Single Sign-On and login to an online virtual desktop; and less-considered uses such as work-related social networking, access to personal HR information, and password-protecting shared files and other resources.
We have said that few participants showed a relaxed attitude, eg., using the same password for everything.
At the same time, users need to balance what they perceive to be reasonably strong passwords against the need to remember them, especially if they are not frequently used.
Yet choosing a reasonably strong, yet memorable, password is not easy.
At least 3 participants - out of 5 non-security specialist participants in Organisation B - described their SSO password in terms which show that they are very weak - for example "an item that is on my desk ... and then add a number to it" - even for what they admit are sensitive applications.
These participants nevertheless described the passwords as secure or fairly secure.
Whereas Organisation A frustrates users by enforcing an overly-strong policy, Organisation B appears to offer little guidance to nonspecialist users about appropriate password choice.
Such passwords are clearly guessable, but even apparently strong passwords might be guessable by someone with personal knowledge of the user - names or initials of relatives and significant dates are a popular scheme.
Such passwords pass the stringent checking used in Organisation A; this reliance on a technical approach of enforcement, then, not only does not help users to learn how to make better passwords, but also does not always detect poor ones.
The context of use is exemplified by the differences between use of Single Sign-On and single passwords.
Both organisations have password architectures which require the use of the same password for multiple services.
However, in Organisation A, this is a unified organisational password, not true Single Sign-On : users are required to reenter the password for each service - and also following timeouts of each service, a major source of frustration for those who have to work on a number of different online services.
Organisation B, in contrast, has true SSO in most instances.
This might be expected to reduce password use.
On the other hand, company policy is that staff should lock their PCs when leaving their desks, which generates an additional set of usages - 317 in the diaries, by far the largest number of usages, in fact, although each one requires only a password, not the userId - participants report that this is not a large interruption: they are not actually interrupted by the password entry, but are returning from getting a drink or some similar break.
Sensitivity - in the sense of "what bad things could happen from unauthorised access" - depends on what an attacker could actually do with a password; and that, in turn, depends on the level of access which the password gives.
If a password is used to logon locally to a PC, then whether this is sensitive or not depends, naturally, on the data stored on the computer and that, in turn, on whether the PC stores data locally or is essentially a front-end to a virtual online desktop - an increasingly common architecture which is widely used in both organisations.
Access to network filestore can be controlled - in Organisation B, a dedicated team ensures correct authorisation to shared and personal filestore.
The actual data which might be visible is therefore controlled, and also depends on the area of work - and can change, as people move onto different projects.
On the other hand, some staff have access to drives which are shared among other members of their department - and which therefore contain data which may need further protection, by passwords or other access control.
However, unlike many consumer transactions on the web, breaches such as the loss of student records or details of staff benefits could have incalculable costs.
Weak passwords are not a rational choice in those cases.
Our users understood this; if they continue to choose weak passwords, it is not because they are irrational or lax, but because devising and remembering a strong password is a considerable effort and an interruption to their primary task.
In our study, both organisations prevent users from choosing such weak passwords - at least for their main password.
However, this additional password strength comes at a cost, not only for the users but also for the organisation, in terms of time lost and, paradoxically, a potential loss of security.
There is one type of password which emerged from our findings that exemplifies unsophisticated security practices which create serious risks: passwords used for protecting shared files and shared web spaces.
Although file passwords account for a relatively small number of events in our password diaries, such passwords are used extensively among numbers of people.
Our research found situations in which shared passwords have become the de facto method of controlling access to shared resources.
There are two categories of shared password - long-term and ad-hoc ones.
Long-term passwords are shared among many recipients, and used many times - participants in both organisations reported this practice, even for access to sensitive information.
Where files are genuinely shared among users, this might be an appropriate practice ; however, at least some of the passwords we found shared in this way are extremely weak, and unchanged for years: the difficulty of distributing the new password to a number of users discourages changing.
With ad-hoc shared passwords, participants devise one-use file passwords which consist mainly of single words chosen at random ; the password is emailed to the intended recipient.
We found that shared passwords did not conform to the organisational password policies.
Adding the password is often the last obstacle to completing a timecritical task , and so users are keen to "just get it done".
We have shown that factors in password policy lead to frustration when users are unable to comply with password policies; such policies clearly do not meet their needs, and they are forced to adopt coping strategies.
We focus on Organisation A because it provides such a clear example of impact of an excessively strict password policy on the experience of users.
Because the policy is very restrictive in the passwords it allows, users are unable to use their normal password methods for choosing passwords.
However, if - as is likely - their normal methods for choosing passwords are weak, then this is not, in itself, necessarily undesirable.
Unfortunately, in the case of Organisation A, the checking is excessive; this does not guarantee that the password cannot be cracked , but it does guarantee that users are frustrated in quite reasonable password choices.
But once they have chosen a password which is strong enough, and have learnt it, users still do not have a password "resource" they can continue to use.
This is because, when change is enforced, unlike in Organisation B, small changes to passwords are not accepted.
Unless users can discover some unintended loophole to thwart the checking, the entire process of choosing has to start again.
Users then have a double load: both to choose a new password which is acceptable to the policy, and to learn it.
Thus, the unusability of the policy arises from the combination of the requirement for the password to be excessively strong and for it to be changed frequently and for the new password to differ significantly from previous passwords.
Adding to the emotional pressure on users, and impeding their primary goals, is their awareness that, should they forget their password, this will require a reset, with a delay of two hours during which their access to essential organisational services will be lost; in many cases they are unable to work during this time.
Faced with this conflict, it is not surprising that a majority of participants from Organisation A admit to writing these passwords down, not in disregard of security policies, but as the only workable coping strategy.
Indeed, writing passwords down is half-accepted by the Organisation A policy, which merely says "don't keep a record of your userid and password together".
This is not a solution; our point is that writing down is a response to an unusable policy.
We have looked in detail at a snapshot of events for a sample of password users; but every minute taken in unnecessary password use needs to be multiplied by orders of magnitude to account for all the password uses even within one organisation.
This is the true cost of unusable password policies.
Against the world-view that "if only  understood the dangers, they would behave differently" , we argue that "if only security managers understood the true costs for users and the organisation, they would set policies differently".
We conclude with some suggestions for how this might be achieved.
We have seen that Organisation A enforces passwords which are strong to the point that users are frustrated in their reasonable password choices.
However, the password strength may not be the most important factor in preventing unauthorised access.
For many personal mobile devices, the number of password attempts is limited, so that online cracking is unfeasible.
For almost all online applications, the number of attempts is also limited.
There remains, however, the risk of offline attacks, for example if the password file, even with hashed or encrypted passwords, has been captured.
But password strength does nothing to prevent phishing or key-logging .
The other key aspect of Organisation A's policy - password change - is designed to mitigate these risks, along with the risk of "brute force" attacks.
Whether a single-character change, as allowed by Organisation B, would be sufficient to deter a serious attacker is uncertain.
Clearly, if a computer is compromised by a key-logger, merely changing the password will not fix the problem.
What is certain is that requiring users to make major changes to their existing passwords creates conflict for the user, between their primary goals and the requirements of the policy.
Nor, as we have seen, does the Organisation A policy provide much protection from passwords being guessed by those with special knowledge of the user.
And, crucially, the Organisation A policy greatly increases the threat from passwords left written down.
Returning finally to the costs and benefits to the user and to the organisation, it might seem that an employing organisation gains all the benefits from strong password policies, while the staff members, as users, carry all the costs.
It should be clear from what we have said, however,
The vision of a holistic approach for security policies is not new; Sasse et al.
In moving to a holistic approach, there is no single ideal policy, as the ongoing debate about writing passwords down  indicate.
Focussing on frequency of password changing, or password strength, without considering the user in their context of work, is clearly not holistic.
Technical means can force people to change their passwords frequently; if this leads to weaker passwords, technical means can enforce strong passwords.
If users then forget those passwords, technical services can be provided to assist password resets - and the cycle starts again.
It becomes, as Herley  puts it, "an existing system  can only be kept going with constant patching".
This does nothing to encourage security awareness, but introduces usability problems which antagonise users.
This offers a positive way forward, since the organisation can manage users' compliance budget through good security design and a security-aware organisational culture.
In the age of cloud computing, it becomes technically feasible to brute-force passwords, but the cost is a constraining factor.
Simple lower-case passwords must be at least 12 letters long to keep within a cost of $US1million; if uppercase, numbers, and non-alphanumerics are added, 10 characters is the minimum needed to do so .
If policies continue in their current spirit, we can expect these longer and/or more complex passwords to become mandatory for everything.
This puts all the more urgency on reserving these strong password requirements for contexts in which brute-force cracking is a realistic risk.
Rather than a one-size-fits-all approach, we argue for a flexible password policy tailored to mitigate the risks users actually face.
This flexibility needs to extend beyond technical issues, to allow for the differing security needs of different work groups.
Alternatively, perhaps the cloud will provide the motivation to finally move to a different authentication mechanism.
The authors would like to acknowledge the contribution of Simon Arnell of HP Labs in the collection of this data, the assistance of the other members of the Trust Economics project , in particular Robert Coles, and the very helpful suggestions of four anonymous reviewers.
Sincere thanks to all participants for their time in keeping the diaries and discussing their password use so helpfully.
