If performed three times daily, people doing 10-minute bursts of physical activity could not only get the physical benefits of a sustained 30-minute block of exercise , but could also improve their focus, concentration, and mood throughout the day.
To make it convenient for people to exercise for only ten minutes multiple times a day, exercise activities must be accessible and require little time to set up, such as doing jumping jacks, or running up and down stairs; however, these short-duration activities are not much fun.
Casual exergames are computer games that players can learn easily and access quickly, using simple rules and special game mechanics, to motivate them to exercise at a moderate intensity for short periods of play .
Casual exergames are engaging, and have been shown to elevate players' heart rates to target levels for moderate-intensity aerobic exercise .
Because playing casual exergames is an enjoyable activity that requires little overhead to set up, people might be willing to play casual exergames multiple times per day, receiving the benefits of bursts of moderate-intensity exercise throughout the day .
What remains unclear is whether playing casual exergames can result in acute improvements in cognition and mood and whether the benefits produced are as pronounced as those produced by performing traditional exercise activities, such as running.
Investigations into the efficacy of exercise produced by exergame play have seen mixed results.
Some research suggests that the exertion produced by commercial exergames is not sufficient for physical activity guidelines , suggesting that cognitive benefits may not result.
To investigate the potential cognitive benefits of casual exergames, we conducted two studies examining the effects of casual exergame play on cognition and affective state.
We used a game that we previously developed, which was shown to produce moderate-intensity levels of physical activity when played using a Microsoft Kinect .
We compared our casual exergame to a sedentary version of the game played with a mouse, and to traditional exercise .
In a second study, we further explored the cognitive and affective benefits of our casual exergame compared to the mouse-based version.
Study 1 showed evidence of cognitive benefits of the Kinect and exercise conditions over the mouse condition, as measured by a Stroop test .
Acute cognitive benefits, such as temporary improvements in concentration, can result from as few as ten minutes of exercise; however, most people do not take exercise breaks throughout the day.
To motivate people to receive the cognitive benefits of exercising in short bursts multiple times per day, we designed an engaging casual exergame.
To determine whether there are cognitive benefits after playing our game, we conducted two studies to compare playing ten minutes of our casual exergame to a sedentary version of the game or exercise on a treadmill.
We found acute cognitive benefits of the casual exergame over the sedentary version , demonstrated by significantly improved performance on two cognitive tests that require focus and concentration.
Significant improvements were also found in participants' affective states after playing the casual exergame.
Finally, our casual exergame produces similar exertion levels to treadmill exercise, but is perceived as more fun.
Regular exercise has many physical and cognitive benefits.
Physical benefits, such as reducing the risks of coronary heart disease or diabetes  are well known.
Cognitive benefits of exercise are not as well known, but are as important as the physical benefits.
Regular exercise leads to the relief of symptoms of depression and anxiety , mood improvements , and improvements in memory, visual perception, and processing speed .
In addition to the general cognitive benefits produced by regular exercise, research has also shown acute  cognitive benefits in working memory , concentration , and mood .
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
In addition, significant improvements in participants' affective states were found in both studies after playing the casual exergame.
Finally, our casual exergame produces similar physical benefits to exercise on a treadmill, but is perceived as more fun.
Our work is the first to show that playing a casual computer exergame for ten minutes at a time can produce cognitive benefits.
Because these games are engaging, require little overhead to set up or time commitment to play, deployment in schools, workplaces, and homes for repeated play throughout the day might result in improved physical health of players, but also the cognitive health of players.
Research has shown general benefits that playing video games has on cognition and mood.
Playing video games has been shown to increase attentional capacity  and the ability to mentally manipulate multiple spatiallyrepresented objects .
Relaxing video games can produce overall mood improvements and make players more willing to help other people .
Also, playing casual video games, such as PopCap's Bejeweled 2, Peggle, and Bookworm Adventures can improve mood and reduce symptoms of depression and anxiety .
To obtain the benefits of exercise, people should do at least 30 minutes of moderate-intensity exercise a day; however, most people do not perform this suggested amount , citing issues such as a lack of time, not making exercise a priority, and being too lazy.
Physical benefits of exercise are well known and include reducing the risks of developing coronary heart disease, hypertension, high blood pressure, cancer, obesity, and diabetes .
Regular exercise also has psychological and cognitive benefits.
It has been shown that fitness through physical activity can enhance psychological well-being, such as decreasing depression, stress, cynical distrust and anger , and improving mood .
Also, aerobic fitness has been linked to cognitive benefits, such as fluid intelligence, general memory, visual perception, retrieval ability and processing speed .
Exergames  can motivate players to be more physically active by combining games and exercise together.
Some commercial games can be considered exergames, such as Dance-Dance Revolution or Wii Sports; we refer to these as active video games   to differentiate them from research-based exergames.
Researchers have designed a variety of exergames.
Some games use custom sensors, such as in Ping Pong Plus  and Breakout for Two .
Others have integrated standard exercise equipment, such as the bikes used in Life is a Village .
Exergames have also been developed that do not prescribe the type of exercise, but are based on the player's heart rate, such as Triple Beat  and Nenonen et al.
In addition to the general relationship between aerobic fitness and cognitive function, researchers have also shown acute  cognitive benefits after single bouts of exercise.
In these cases, performance on a cognitive task has improved directly following a short bout of exercise.
Acute improvements in cognitive function have been shown using a number of cognitive tasks, including the Working Memory Task , the Rey Auditory-Verbal Learning Test , which measures recall, and the Stroop test , which measures concentration.
In addition to acute cognitive benefits, short bouts of exercise have been shown to improve mood using the Physical Activity Affect Scale  , the Nowlis Mood Scale  and Profile of Mood Scale  .
Although most studies examining the acute benefits of exercise use longer bouts of activity, both cognitive benefits and mood improvements can be found after performing as few as 10 minutes of moderate-intensity exercise .
The goal of exergames is to create physically active play experiences.
In general, researchers have shown that their exergames are fun, but do they have the same benefits as regular exercise?
Research shows that many exergames can be utilized as part of an overall aerobic exercise program because in a 30-minute exercise session, a player's heart rate and caloric expenditure are both within the American College of Sports Medicine recommendations for daily physical activity .
However, in another study that investigated the relative efficacy of Wii games and their real life sports counterparts, it was shown that the energy that players used to play active Wii Sports games was not of high enough intensity to reach the recommended daily amount of exercise in children .
A meta-analysis of AVG play confirms that exertion is well below thresholds for vigorous-intensity exercise .
One main problem with exergames that use accelerometer-based input is that players can `cheat', by not exerting themselves to play, but simply moving the device in the appropriate pattern.
However, using a modified flanker task, O'Leary et al.
Neither WiiFit nor Wii Active are considered to be games in the traditional definition , but rather are interactive exercise applications, so it is still unclear as to whether exergame play yields cognitive benefits.
There are many definitions for casual games and the community has yet to converge on a final definition .
There is general agreement that for a game to be considered casual, it must: be easy to learn with limited instructions and simple rules and controls ; have short play times  and allow players put the game on hold ; and should not contain objectionable content  to appeal to a broad range of players .
Therefore, games such as Tetris and Bejeweled can be considered as casual games.
Our study had three conditions.
In the casual exergame condition, participants played the game using their body as the controller.
Movements were sensed using a Microsoft Kinect sensor.
In the sedentary condition, they played the game using a mouse as a controller.
In the exercise condition, they did not play the game at all, but ran on a treadmill.
In this condition, we checked their heart rate every minute and adjusted the speed and incline of the treadmill to keep them within 64-76% of their target heart rate, representing moderate-intensity activity .
Casual exergames apply the principles of casual game design to the design of exergames.
Specifically casual exergames are defined as computer games that players can learn easily and access quickly, using simple rules and special game mechanics, to motivate them to exercise at a moderate intensity for short periods of play .
Some argue that exergames developed for gaming consoles, such as Wii Sports, can be considered casual exergames because they are easy to learn, use simple controls, and are family friendly.
However, as previously described, many commercial exergames do not provide the required moderate-intensity exercise to be considered a casual exergame by our standards.
In addition, if casual games are to be played in short play periods, they must have minimal setup time .
If setting up a console game requires even five minutes to boot the system, navigate menus, and calibrate controllers, then it is not in line with the duration of play expected of a casual game.
Finally, the accessibility of gaming consoles, which are generally kept in domestic environments, limits their use as systems on which to play casual exergames during breaks at work or school.
Some smartphone games can be considered as casual exergames.
For example, Jog Hop  is played by jogging, hopping and ducking, is described as being able to be played anytime and anywhere for a quick workout, and is targeted at kids and their families.
However, like other accelerometer-based games, players can cheat the exercise aspect by moving the iPhone/iPad up and down instead of jumping and hopping to play the game.
In GrabApple , the goal is for players to pick up falling red and green apples and avoid touching the falling bombs.
Apples and bombs are picked and touched using a virtual hand on the screen.
We use game mechanics to motivate people to jump, duck and move around.
For example, players can get a bonus score by jumping or ducking to pick up the apples.
Also, if players keep picking up the same color of apple, there is score multiplier that encourages a lot of movement.
The hand can only hold five apples.
After that, players need to jump to put the hand into the apple bag.
In the mouse version of the game, we use a regular mouse to control the virtual hand on the screen.
The study took place over four consecutive days.
On Day 1, participants were introduced to the study, gave informed consent, and were screened for colour vision deficiencies  using an online version of the PseudoIsochromatic Plate Ishihara Compatible , because people with CVD perform worse on the Stroop test , which we used as a cognitive measure.
Participants were also screened using the Physical Activity Readiness Questionnaire  to look for risk factors that may be exacerbated by exercise.
After completing a demographics questionnaire, we introduced participants to two questionnaires used in our study: The Borg Rating of Perceived Exertion  , which is used to measure perceived exertion; and the Selfassessment Manikin  , a pictorial 9-point scale that is used to self-report affective states via valence  and arousal .
We also introduced them to the Stroop Color and Word Test  that we used to measure cognitive performance and had them complete a training version.
Finally, we explained the game rules and the experiment conditions, after which players trained in the Kinect and Mouse versions of GrabApple for one minute each.
On Days 2, 3, and 4, participants completed one of the three experiment conditions .
Order of condition was fully counterbalanced across all participants to minimize learning effects.
Participants completed the experiment at the same time each day and were asked not to perform exercise prior to the study each day or consume caffeine or smoke for three hours prior to each session.
Participants began each session by completing the SAM.
They then performed that day's condition for 10 minutes.
During the activity, they wore a heart-rate monitor  that measured their heart rate and the approximate number of Calories  burned.
Then, participants filled out the SAM and the Borg RPE scale.
After 5 minutes of recovery time, participants performed the Stroop test, then the post-condition questionnaire.
Task 3, the color-word test, has the color names of Task 1, but written in a color that conflicts with the color name .
In the last task, participants need to say the color that the word is printed in, not the word itself.
In all tasks, participants are required to read their answers out loud as quickly and accurately as possible.
The pattern of items is random except that no word is allowed to follow itself in a single column .
Participants were required to correct errors before moving on to the next item.
The experimenter would notify players that an error was made by tapping on the screen; however, players usually self-corrected without prompting.
A computer version of the Stroop Color and Word Test was presented on a 20-inch monitor.
Four versions of the test were created for this study; the first was used for training and the others were used on the three experiment days.
The four versions were presented in a single order to balance across the three experimental conditions.
The software recorded the time taken to complete each task.
Twenty-four participants , aged 19 to 30  were recruited from a local university.
Seven are native English speakers, whereas the rest speak English as a second language .
Thirteen of the participants played video games at least weekly; the others played only a few times per month or year.
None of our participants regularly played games using the Kinect.
When asked about exercise, 11 participants performed 30 minutes of sustained physical activity per day and 19 performed 30 minutes at least 2-3 times per week.
Half of the players said that they do not have time or are too lazy to complete the daily-recommended amount of exercise and 9 said that their lack of exercise was due to being tired from other activities .
When asked if they take regular breaks during the workday, half of our players said that they take breaks every half hour to two hours.
The others reported that they seldom took breaks.
Calories, and Stroop task completion time.
When the sphericity assumption was violated, Huynh-Feldt's method of adjusting the degrees of freedom was used.
Questionnaire responses  were analyzed with Friedman's Analysis of Variance of Ranks, with pairwise comparisons made with Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Tests.
We asked participants to rate six aspects of the game  on a 5-point Likert scale  after playing each version.
The results are shown in Figure 4.
Pairwise comparisons showed that the Kinect version was perceived as more fun  and less easy to learn  than the mouse version, and more fun  and more exciting  than exercise.
In addition, players were more likely to consider playing the Kinect version than the mouse version  or exercise , and were more likely to consider playing the mouse version than exercising .
Other pairwise comparisons were not significant.
The American College of Sports Medicine defines moderate-intensity exercise as 64-76% of maximum heart rate  .
The average %maxHR of our players is in Table 1.
These values are within the range of moderate-intensity exercise for the Kinect and Exercise conditions.
Pairwise comparisons showed that the Mouse game produced significantly lower %maxHR than the Kinect game  and Exercise , and that there was no significant difference between Kinect and Exercise .
The average Calories burned in the 10 minutes of activity are shown in Table 1.
If we assume play for three 10minute bursts/day, the average Calorie expenditure would be 291, 259, and 81 for the Kinect, Exercise, and Mouse conditions respectively, which exceeds the recommended 200 Calories per day that adults should burn through aerobic exercise  for the Kinect and Exercise conditions, but not the Mouse condition.
As with %maxHR, pairwise comparisons revealed that the Mouse game produced significantly lower Calories burned than the Kinect game  and Exercise , and that there was no significant difference between Kinect and Exercise .
The average Borg Rating of Perceived Exertion after each activity is in Table 1.
The Kinect game produced perceived exertion values within the recommended intensity for improving aerobic capacity  .
Participants rated their arousal and valence before and after each condition.
There was no significant difference in precondition arousal or valence but there was a significant difference in both post-condition arousal and valence .
Pairwise comparisons revealed that players felt most aroused after playing the Kinect game, followed by Exercise, then the Mouse game.
All differences were significant .
Players felt more positive following the Kinect game than either the Mouse game  or Exercise , and there was no difference between valence after the Mouse game or Exercise .
There are three tasks in the Stroop test.
We recorded the time that participants completed each task  .
As Table 3 shows, the variation between participants was very large.
In fact, the percentage of variance explained by the factor of participant was 97% for all three Stroop tasks.
Rather than increasing our sample size for the entire study to reduce the effects of individual variation, we investigated whether there is reason to consider that the Kinect condition would produce better performance than the Mouse condition through planned pairwise comparisons using two-tailed paired-samples ttests.
Although our ANOVA results did not show significant differences in cognitive performance on a Stroop task, our planned comparisons with a t-test showed an improvement in performance after playing the Kinect game as opposed to the Mouse game.
This effect was too small to show up in an ANOVA with 24 participants.
Upon further investigation, we found that performance on the Stroop task is subject to differences due to first language.
Because our participants repeated versions of the test over the course of four days, their performance was likely to improve over the course of the study.
The issue is that performance improvements are quite variable for people who do not speak English as their first language.
For example, in Task 3, the interference task, the time for participants to complete the task ranged from 54 to 135 seconds.
70.8% of our participants were not native English speakers.
Rather than discount their data, reduce the power of our experiment by looking at betweenparticipant differences only on the final day of the experiment, or increasing our sample size significantly, we chose to further explore the potential cognitive benefits of our casual exergame in a second study.
The planned comparisons of the Stroop results demonstrate that there may be a systematic  effect of casual exergame play on cognitive performance, thus we conducted a second study to better explore this effect with cognitive tests that are not susceptible to large individual variation in performance due to language.
In Study 1, we found that players of Kinect-based GrabApple had heart rates within targets for moderateintensity exercise , burned an average of 97 Calories, and had perceived exertion levels of 12.5 on the Borg Rating of Perceived Exertion, where 12-13 represents "somewhat hard".
These values were significantly higher than after playing a sedentary version of the game, but not different than exercising on a treadmill.
Playing our casual exergame for 10 minutes produces efficacious exercise.
We found that after playing our casual exergame, players felt more positive and aroused than after playing the mouse version or exercising.
Players reported that the Kinect game was more fun than the mouse game or exercising.
Although they found it more difficult and not as easy to learn as the mouse version, they were more likely to consider playing the casual exergame during a break in their workday than playing either the mouse version or exercising.
In this study, we explored the potential cognitive benefits of casual exergame play as compared to playing an identical, but sedentary, version of the game.
Because Study 1 revealed that the casual exergame produced exercise intensities similar to exercise on a treadmill, we focused on only the two versions of the game in Study 2 - the casual exergame version, played using the body as the game controller as sensed by the Kinect, and the sedentary version, played using the mouse as the controller.
In addition, we chose two cognitive tests that are not subject to whether players speak English as their first language - the d2 test of attention and the WRAT4 Math Computation test.
The procedures for Study 2 were identical to Study 1, with few exceptions.
Because players completed only two conditions, the study happened over two days instead of four .
Also, players were introduced to the d2 test of attention and the WRAT4 Math Computation test rather than a Stroop test.
Finally, we did not require players to complete a CVD test, as neither cognitive test is affected by CVD.
The experimental apparatus was the same as used in Study 1.
The letters have one to four dashes, arranged either individually or in pairs above and below the letter.
Subjects are required to cross out any letter `d' with two dashes arranged in any combination above or below the 'd'.
We allowed participants 15 seconds to complete each line.
TN-E and CP are indicators of concentration.
The Wide Range Achievement Test 4  assesses basic academic skills through two equivalent forms designed for pre- and post-intervention testing .
We used the Math Computation test to measure the ability to perform basic computations through calculating written math problems.
We gave each participant 15 minutes to complete the test.
The test score is the number of correct responses.
We fully balanced the presentation of the two versions of the test across the ordering of conditions.
Although the WRAT4 measures achievement, given on two consecutive days, it can indicate concentration and focus rather than an improvement in mathematics ability.
Twenty-four participants , aged 19 to 33 , who did not participate in Study 1, were recruited from a local university.
Seventeen of the participants played video games at least weekly; the others played only a few times per month or year.
Eight participants had experience playing games with a Kinect, but not on a regular basis.
When asked about their daily exercise, only one participant got 30 minutes of sustained physical activity per day and 17 participants performed 30 minutes of exercise at least 2-3 times per week.
Participants reported reasons why they do not complete the daily-recommended amount of exercise: 9 because of busyness, 3 because of laziness and 6 because of tiredness from other activities .
When asked if they take regular breaks during the workday, 13 of our players take a break every half hour to two hours.
Paired-samples T-tests  were used to compare the exertion and cognitive performance of the players in the two conditions.
Based on Study 1 , we expected that players would exert more energy, and have better cognitive performance after playing the Kinect version, so we used one-tailed tests.
Wilcoxon Signed Ranks tests were used to compare results from questionnaires on player preference and affective state.
Participants performed significantly better on the d2 Test after playing the Kinect version of the game than after playing the mouse version of the game in terms of speed  and overall performance .
However, there were no significant differences in terms of accuracy .
Our results clearly show acute cognitive benefits of casual exergame play; however, there are limitations in what we can infer from our studies and new questions that are raised.
First, the improvements were shown in tests administered five minutes after exercise; we do not know how long these acute benefits last.
The administration of the two cognitive tests in Study 2 took 20 minutes, so we can assume that the benefits last at least that long.
A 30-minute advantage for 10 minutes of exercise may be a good investment for an exercise-induced cognitive pick-me-up, but future work will need to study the duration of cognitive benefits.
Second, the measured cognitive benefits were acute, i.e., short and temporary.
Whether repeated casual exergame play over the long term would result in the general cognitive benefits seen in people with good aerobic fitness  remains to be seen.
Third, our players were motivated to play the casual exergame for ten minutes at a moderate-level of intensity.
Outside of the context of our experiment, we do not know how much physical effort players would put into playing GrabApple.
We also do not know how motivated people would be to play a casual exergame repeatedly throughout the day to improve their focus and concentration, or to play a casual exergame repeatedly over the long term.
Previous work suggests that active video game play declines over time .
If the game does not engage players for repeated play, then the temporary cognitive benefits of casual exergame play will not be achieved.
The novelty of the Kinect may have affected the players' perceptions of fun; whether the results hold after repeated play requires study.
Maintaining engagement and encouraging repeated play through game design is part of our current line of research.
Fourth, we saw improvements by comparing performance after playing an exergame to performance after a mousebased game.
We are currently investigating the size of the benefit by studying improvements to baseline performance.
Finally, we compared the exertion produced by our casual exergame to that produced from exercise on a treadmill.
In the exercise condition, we forced participants to exercise at a moderate intensity by adjusting the speed and incline of the treadmill every minute.
We cannot anticipate the results if participants had been allowed to exercise at their own pace.
We can assume that participants who were lazy and did not achieve target heart rates indicative of moderateintensity exercise would not show cognitive benefits or the benefits would be reduced.
Our results can be summarized in six findings.
Playing a casual exergame for ten minutes results in: * Exertion levels similar to running on a treadmill and significantly higher than playing a sedentary casual game; * Improved performance compared to a sedentary casual game on three cognitive tests that measure concentration; * Similar cognitive benefits to traditional exercise on a treadmill as measured by a Stroop test; * Increased arousal compared to a sedentary casual game or treadmill exercise; * Increased valence compared to a sedentary casual game  or treadmill exercise; * Greater perceived fun than a sedentary casual game  or treadmill exercise.
Thus, our results show that playing a casual exergame for ten minutes at a time can produce acute cognitive benefits, improve affective states, and produce physical activity levels similar to traditional exercise on a treadmill.
Our results are the first to show that a casual exergame, played for only ten minutes, can produce measurable acute cognitive and affective benefits.
The cognitive improvements are statistically significant.
These are in line with results from previous research on the acute cognitive benefits of traditional exercise.
Because of the potential benefits to people at work, in school, or at home of even a 4% increase in ability to concentrate, our findings have both statistical and practical significance.
We show that playing casual exergames produces acute cognitive benefits; however, we also argue that for people to choose to play, the casual exergames must be convenient and accessible.
This requirement for a low overhead to setup presents a challenge for game design.
As new activity sensors become integrated into technology, casual exergames can move beyond the desktop, becoming more convenient to play.
With smartphone-based games, people could access games quickly and play during natural breaks in their day, such as when waiting for a bus.
Casual exergame designers will be faced with a challenge of creating games that produce moderate-intensity exercise, but are not considered socially awkward.
People playing casual exergames in the street or at work may not want to perform exaggerated motions, whereas motions such as jumping or walking may be considered less awkward.
This issue of social awkwardness is complicated by casual exergame players not sending cues that they are engaging in exercise via specific clothes; the games are intended to be played with little overhead to set up, thus people would be playing them in regular attire.
As with other behaviours, if enough people play casual exergames, the motions associated with play will be regarded as socially acceptable.
One way to make casual exergames ubiquitous and to motivate play is to deploy them in common public break locations, such as coffee shops or bus stops.
We are interested in how casual exergame deployments in schools, workplaces, and homes can help motivate people to play repeatedly.
In schools, kids who enjoy playing games could refocus before each class or at known lull times.
At home, kids could play casual exergames when they feel tired before starting their homework in the evening.
Deploying casual exergames in break rooms at workplaces would help workers get physical benefits of exercise in a manageable way and also refresh their minds.
Employees who exercise during lunch breaks report better work performance and mood improvements compared with workdays that they did not exercise .
With casual exergame deployment, the cognitive benefits that we showed using standard tests in a lab may translate into better performance at school or work.
Taking 10 minutes to exercise will be good for a person's health, but from an employer's perspective, the improved performance would need to offset the time spent exercising.
Second, there are special populations who would benefit from temporary improvements in concentration.
We are working with children with fetal alcohol spectrum disorder - which is generally co-diagnosed with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder - to study potential acute cognitive benefits of casual exergame play for this population.
Finally, to explore the practical significance of our findings, we are working with schools to explore the long-term engagement of casual exergames, the duration of experienced cognitive benefits, the outcome of repeated play sessions during the day, and the general benefits that accumulate over regular play.
Acute cognitive benefits, such as temporary improvements in concentration, can result from as few as ten minutes of exercise; however, most people do not take exercise breaks throughout the day.
Casual exergames can motivate people to exercise in short bursts multiple times per day.
Through two studies, we show acute cognitive benefits of the casual exergame over the sedentary version , demonstrated by improved cognitive performance on tests that require focus and attention.
Improvements were found in players' affective states after playing the casual exergame, which produces similar exertion levels as treadmill exercise, but is perceived as more fun.
Played repeated times throughout the day, casual exergames have the potential to help people improve their focus at school, home, and in the workplace.
Casual exergame designers have an opportunity to improve both the physical and cognitive health of their players.
Our results for cognitive benefits after casual exergame play are encouraging, and there are three main research directions that we plan to pursue to establish casual exergames as a method for improving cognitive health.
First, the cognitive benefits we found are measured through outcomes; people were better able to concentrate, improving their performance on a test of ability.
