In recent years much research work has been dedicated to detecting user activity patterns from sensor data such as location, movement and proximity.
However, how daily activities are correlated to people's happiness  is not well explored.
In this work, we propose an approach to investigate the relationship between users' daily activity patterns and their life satisfaction level.
From a well-known longitudinal dataset collected by mobile devices, we extract various activity features through location and proximity information, and compute the entropies of these data to capture the regularities of the behavioral patterns of the participants.
We then perform component analysis and structural equation modeling to identify key behavior contributors to self-reported satisfaction scores.
Our results show that our analytical procedure can identify meaningful assumptions of causality between activities and satisfaction.
Particularly, keeping regularity in daily activities can significantly improve the life satisfaction.
There are already various studies which investigate the goals that should and can be achieved through such systems, such as maintenance of physical health , and providing the means for self-monitoring .
Recognizing and analysing human activity patterns can be used to improve the design for healthcare systems and lifestyle recommenders.
While there exists several studies that employ different techniques to recognize activity patterns and emotional states ; little has been done to understand the relations between these patterns .
Thus, a detailed analytical procedure is required to identify the structural relations between activities and well-being.
In this study, we are interested in two issues.
First is to find the activity patterns of users using the information collected from mobile devices.
Second is to investigate how daily activities are correlated to people's satisfaction from life, measured through survey data.
We adopt the well-known Reality Mining dataset  in our study, through which we extract daily activities and apply Structural Equation Modeling  to find their relations with reported levels of satisfaction.
Pervasive healthcare systems provide automated wellness monitoring  and activity suggestions to improve the wellbeing of the user.
The user is equipped with various sensors, which collect information on users' metabolism, activity, location, and so on.
The ever-increasing number of diseases and deaths due to inactivity 1 strongly indicate that such systems should become an indispensable component of our lives.
The Reality Mining Dataset  is collected between 2004 and 2005 from a longitudinal study in MIT, Boston.
It includes 94 users .
Each participant was given a mobile phone with several pre-installed pieces of software to record various information, including call logs, Bluetooth devices in proximity, cell tower IDs, application usage, and phone status .
The Reality Mining dataset has been used in many studies.
For example, Zheng et al.
Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than author must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Copyright is held by the owners/authors.
Publication rights licensed to ACM.
The dataset do not include annotations of user daily activity.
We use communication information , proximity information  and location information  in the dataset to estimate the activities.
Cx is a generic notation for the set of available items of the given feature x.
For instance, for activity entropy H, Cx is the set of all possible activities.
Then, p would denote the probability of having activity c at time t. A person with high activity entropy would have irregular amounts and distribution of activities while he/she participated to the longitudinal study.
We compute entropies for activity, social time, location and proximity for each user for weekdays and weekends respectively, providing us with 8 regularity features as shown in Table 3.
For a given time t, P  denotes the number of bluetooth devices in the proximity of the u denotes the average number of bluetooth deuser u, and P u , vices discovered hourly by the same person.
If P  > P we label the user in high-social mode, otherwise he is labeled in low-social mode.
We summarize these activities  in Table 1.
According to our estimation method, an average student spends 7.4 hours on sleep, 6.8 hours on work, 1 hours on break in work , 7.3 hours on leisure outside , and 1.5 hours on other activities .
We also include four communication-related features: the number of SMS, number of phone calls, proximity  information.
We also notice that users' activities are very different between weekdays and weekends, so we calculate them separately.
Thus we obtain 24 features for activities on weekdays and weekends for each user as shown in Table 2.
There are 25 survey questions in the dataset, 10 of which are self-reported measures of happiness, health and travel frequency of the users .
In this work we use such self-reported satisfaction information to represent users' happiness.
These fields have different ranges: question with Id = 42 ranges between 1-5; question with Id = 41 ranges between 1-4; and the rest range between 1-7.
To obtain a unified interpretation, we scaled their values to a common range, i.e., 1-5.
We have performed a linear scaling, which retains the information of the original values.
Id 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 Survey Questions I am satisfied with my experience at MIT thus far I am satisfied with my current social circle I feel I have learned a lot this semester I am satisfied with the content and direction of my classes and research this semester I am satisfied with the support I received from my circle of friends I am satisfied with the level of support I have received from the other members in my group I am satisfied with the quality of our group meetings I am satisfied with how my research group interacts on a personal level Have you been sick recently?
We apply Principal Component Analysis  on the features to group them into factors .
We choose the eigenvalue threshold as 1 to determine the number of factors, and the factor loading threshold as 0.55 in order to include the features for further analysis.
To understand how these activity features affect self-reported satisfaction, we use Structural Equation Modeling , which can be used both to explore and confirm hypotheses of causal assumptions between groups of features, and model noises in the data with latent  variables.
To our knowledge, there is only one study that uses SEM for daily activity analysis - specifically, for predicting sequence of activities based on commute data .
The dataset of that study includes solely self-reported activities and their durations.
In contrast, the Reality Mining dataset was collected using modern sensor technology.
We have followed commonly accepted thresholds for factor analysis3 : as shown in Figures 1 and 2, each factor has at least 2 features with factor loading larger than 0.7.
The structural model fit for our hypothesis is shown in Figure 3.
In this model, we have drawn paths from the activity related factors  to the satisfaction-related factors.
The analysis conveys three interesting causal assumptions: * Social Entropy - Leisure and Sleep - Social Life Satisfaction: The increase in social activity regularities  improves both Leisure and Sleep, and Social Life Satisfaction.
Furthermore, Leisure and Sleep also has direct positive influence on Social Life Satisfaction.
Thus, we say that Social Entropy has an amplifying effect.
To illustrate this, we select top ten regular users and top ten irregular users with respect to the feature of social entropy, and compare their satisfaction levels.
We observe that in average the regular users report 40.74% higher satisfaction score  in the survey question with Id = 34 than the irregular users.
This implies that spending more time at work lowers the time for sleep and other activities.
However, this analysis does not exactly show how to compute an equilibrium between work and leisure and sleep activities.
We identify 6 factors from the activity features, and 2 factors from the survey data.
We name the factors with respect to the feature with the highest positive loading, as conveyed in Figures 1 and 2.
In Proceedings of the 10th workshop on Mobile Computing Systems and Applications, no.
Eagle, N., Pentland, A., and Lazer, D. Inferring social network structure using mobile phone data.
Korhonen, I., P arkk a, J., and Gils, M. V. Health monitoring in the home of the future.
Kuppam, A., and Pendyala, R. A structural equations analysis of commuters' activity and travel patterns.
Understanding my data, myself: Supporting self-reflection with ubicomp technologies.
McDuff, D., Karlson, A., Kapoor, A., Roseway, A., and Czerwinski, M. Affectaura: An intelligent system for emotional memory.
Pearl, J. Causality: Models, Reasoning, and Inference, vol.
Pearson, K. On lines and planes of closest fit to systems of points in space.
Suryadevara, N. K., Quazi, T., and Mukhopadhyay, S. C. Smart sensing system for human emotion and behaviour recognition.
Tollmar, K., Bentley, F., and Viedma, C. Mobile health mashups: Making sense of multiple streams of wellbeing and contextual data for presentation on a mobile device.
In 6th International Conference on Pervasive Computing Technologies for Healthcare , 65-72.
Tsai, C. C., Lee, G., Raab, F., Norman, G. J., Sohn, T., Griswold, W. G., and Patrick, K. Usability and feasibility of pmeb: a mobile phone application for monitoring real time caloric balance.
Zhang, K., Pi-Sunyer, F., and Boozer, C. Improving energy expenditure estimation for physical activity.
Zheng, J., and Ni, L. M. An unsupervised framework for sensing individual and cluster behavior patterns from human mobile data.
The model fitted with SEM.
The values on the directed paths denote the standardized regression weights of the model.
For example, when Leisure and Sleep Activities goes up by one standard deviation, Social Life Satisfaction also goes up by 0.227 standard deviations.
For brevity, we omitted the features of the factors and the paths that do not have statistical significance.
Similar with the previous observation, the Working Activities factor has an amplifying effect.
Other regularity-related factors  are crucial to Leisure and Sleep, Communication, and Workplace Activities.
Thus they indirectly regulate satisfaction: the lower the entropy is, the higher satisfaction with research and social life a user would have.
We have performed a statistical analysis on the Reality Mining dataset to identify the predictors of life satisfaction.
Our results show that our method is useful for estimating user activities, and for identifying meaningful relations between activities and satisfaction.
More specifically, our analysis shows that work, leisure and sleep activities, and regularities in the daily activities have both direct and indirect influences over the reported levels of satisfaction.
These findings can guide us toward better designs for lifestyle recommender systems.
Our long-term research goal is to design a lifestyle recommender system that provides accurate personalized suggestions on daily activities to improve the wellness of its users.
In future we will perform advanced time-series analysis on the relationship between daily activities and life satisfaction.
Furthermore, the Reality Mining dataset provides a limited amount of information for our purpose.
We will launch our own user studies to obtain a more dedicated dataset with continuous sensor measurements on user mood and physical activities.
