Robotic telepresence systems--videoconferencing systems that allow a remote user to drive around in another location-- provide an alternative to video-mediated communications as a way of interacting over distances.
These systems, which are seeing increasing use in business and medical settings, are unique in their ability to grant the remote user the ability to maneuver in a distant location.
While this mobility promises increased feelings of "being there" for remote users and thus greater support for task collaboration, whether these promises are borne out, providing benefits in task performance, is un known.
To better understand the role that mobility plays in shaping the remote user's sense of presence and its poten tial benefits, we conducted a two-by-two  controlled laboratory experiment.
We asked participants  to collaborate in a construction task with a confed erate via a robotic telepresence system.
Our results showed that mobility significantly increased the remote user's feelings of presence, particularly in tasks with high mobility require ments, but decreased task performance.
Our findings highlight the positive effects of mobility on feelings of "being there," while illustrating the need to design support for effective use of mobility in high-mobility tasks.
Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Copyright is held by the owner/author.
Publication rights licensed to ACM.
A common approach to achieving this goal has been to improve audio  and visual connections  between remote communication partners.
Another approach has been to augment videoconferencing systems with robotic platforms, also known as robotic telepresence systems .
By enhancing the sensation of "being there" in the remote location, or presence, these systems promise to impart some of the same benefits that being physically present would pro vide, such as increased coordination and awareness.
For example, past studies have demonstrated that robotic telepresence sys tems increased the local users' feelings of the remote user's presence, improving collaborative team outcomes .
However, few studies have examined the effects that these sys tems may have on the remote user's, the remote's, perceptions of their own presence in the local environment.
In domains such as manufacturing, construction, or explo ration, the ability to change perspectives and maneuver in the environment may not only enable the remote user to offer the local user guidance and instruction, but may also directly contribute to task completion.
By enabling the remote user to interact with the surrounding space, these systems may in crease the remote's awareness of the physical environment, facilitating task-oriented actions, such as mapping an area, locating objects, and conducting visual checks.
However, be cause many of these systems have been designed for use in office settings , previous literature has primarily focused on the contexts of conversation and collabo rative meetings.
In these scenarios, once the system has been positioned in front of the local user, the local, the mobility of the system no longer plays a key role, and the robotic platform becomes the equivalent of a videoconferencing display.
As a result, how mobility affects the remote's sense of presence and contribution to task outcomes, particularly in settings where maneuverability directly impacts task completion, is unclear.
Our goal in this study is to investigate the role that mobility plays in instilling a sense of presence in the remote user and to increase our understanding of how it may improve team performance in physically oriented tasks.
Specifically, we seek to gain a better understanding of how mobility supports the remote user's contributions in tasks that require different levels of mobility --in tasks that are visible from a single view, requiring low levels of mobility, and tasks where the ability to maneuver gives the remote user greater latitude to participate in the completion of team goals, i.e., tasks with high requirements for mobility.
By exploring these questions, we hope to inform the future design of mobility features for robotic telepresence systems and to deepen our understanding of how mobility shapes remote collaboration.
The next section provides an overview of related work on remote collaboration, focusing specifically on presence and task awareness.
This overview is followed by a description of our hypotheses and our study design.
We then present our results and discuss their implications for design and research.
Finally, we summarize the study's limitations, areas for future work, and our conclusions.
The domain of workspace awareness in computer-supported cooperative work focuses on improving collaborative out comes by simulating a physical workspace in a virtual environ ment.
By designing tools that provide users with timely infor mation about the task at hand, such as who is present, where they are working, and what they are doing, these systems trans late the affordances found in physically shared workspaces into online tools that support group work .
For exam ple, by using digital representations of user arms to create a sense of where they are active in a virtual workspace , pro viding historical logs of past exchanges , and preserving spatial relationships , these systems facilitate coordination between users and improve group efficiency.
In these ex amples, indicators of collaborator presence are implemented as representations of information, such as positioning and availability, that users would have access to in a non-virtual workspace.
Previous research on robotic telepresence has examined how having a physical embodiment might support the remote user's presence in the local user's environment.
Findings from this work have demonstrated that these platforms improve the local users' sense of the remote user's presence, increasing the fre quency of informal interactions between co-workers--shown to be critical for organizational coordination --and the remote user's ability to participate in meetings .
Ad ditional research has examined how other aspects of robotic telepresence systems shape interactions, such as the effects that embodiment and control have on the development of trust between users in negotiation tasks , how the height of the system shapes the local's perceptions of the remote user's persuasiveness , and the role that system appearance plays on the local's feelings of team membership toward the remote user .
Previous work has also explored manipulating the camera's mobility in a telepresence system to increase the remote user's feelings of presence; however, the stationary nature of the task and the camera's limitations resulted in few users utilizing this capability, making it difficult to draw definitive conclusions .
While this past research illustrates how various aspects of robotic telepresence systems affect and improve the local user's perceptions of the remote user's presence , we lack a clear understanding of whether these systems truly improve the remote user's sense of "being there" in the local environment.
Previous work on supporting remotely distributed teams has focused on the importance of workspace awareness--how knowledge and awareness of where others are working and what they are doing might facilitate the coordination of ac tion --and on supporting grounding--the process of creat ing common ground to achieve mutual understanding .
Research in workspace awareness has explored different ways of conveying critical information and supporting grounding by informing users about movement within the online workspace.
For example, prior work has explored the use of workspace miniatures to show the location and activity of others in the workspace  and the use of indicators of availability  to aid in collaborative coordination.
Within the sphere of robotic telepresence, prior literature has sought to understand user needs for movement and awareness within specific contexts, such as office , medical  and educational  settings.
Research in teleoperation has explored the design of control interfaces that aid remote users in being aware of their surroundings to accomplish solo exploration tasks, including the avoidance of obstacles and successful navigation .
While these bodies of work inform the design of interfaces that more effectively support mobility in the remote environment, they do little to aid us in understanding how such mobility facilitates task awareness, coordination, and feelings of presence.
Mobile telepresence systems offer a unique opportunity for remote users to not only benefit from the tools developed in workspace awareness research and teleoperation, but also to directly contribute to tasks in a physical workspace.
In our study, we seek to understand the contribution that mobil ity may have in supporting remote users' feelings of presence, facilitating their ability to contribute to task completion.
To this end, we focus on two types of tasks: tasks where mobil ity requirements are low and movement does not aid in the completion of goals, such as conversations, negotiations, and activities limited to a small workspace, and tasks where the requirements are high and the ability to move in the physical space facilitates performance, such as construction, manufac turing, and exploration.
In other words, when does mobility matter?
To test these hypotheses, we designed a controlled laboratory experiment in which remote participants worked with a lo cal confederate in a collaborative construction task.
In the study, we manipulated the mobility of the robotic telepres ence system and the movement or mobility required by the task.
We measured the effects of these manipulations on the participant's sense of presence in the local environment and team task performance outcomes, such as completion time and errors.
The paragraphs below provide further detail on our study design, participants, measurements, and analyses.
Informed by previous research in workspace awareness and robotic telepresence systems, we formed two hypotheses pre dicting the role that the mobility of the system would play in different task types.
Remote users will report more presence in the local's environment when the system is mobile than when the system is stationary.
In a task that requires high levels of mobility, using a mobile system will improve collaborative outcomes over using a stationary system, while mobility of the system will not affect these outcomes in a task that requires low levels of mobility.
Our study followed a two-by-two between-participants design.
The independent variables were mobility, varied by the use of a stationary or mobile robotic telepresence system, and the levels of mobility or movement required by the task, low vs. high.
In order to maintain consistency across participants, we developed a task to construct an object that could be built on a small scale with TinkerToys, or on a large scale with PVC pipes.
When built on a small scale, the completed object measured approximately 22 inches  in length and 3.5 inches  in height, fitting on a table that was fully visible from the telepresence system's camera.
When constructed on a large scale, the completed object measured approximately 7 feet  in length and 3 feet  in height, requiring it to be built in a clear floor space that was not easily visible from the telepresence system's camera.
The construction of small-scale and large-scale objects served as low-mobility and high-mobility tasks, respectively.
Figure 2 illustrates the arrangement of the study environment across the task manipulation.
Although both local and remote users of a telepresence robot may benefit from the level of mobility that the remote user has, we were chiefly interested in the remote user's experi ence and perspective for two reasons.
First, prior work has primarily been dedicated to understanding robotic telepres ence interactions from the local user's perspective .
Second, because face-to-face interaction participants have the ability to move in the environment, we expected that providing the remote user with the ability to maneuver would have a greater impact on the remote user's experience.
Left: participant controlling the telepresence robot in the training phase and the remote setup in which they provided the confederate with instructions.
Center: the local setup for the low mobility and high mobility task conditions in which the confederate carried out the construction of the object.
Right: pictures of the completed objects for the small and large tasks provided to the participant.
Both stationary and mobile interactions in our study took place via a Double telepresence robot1 , which has a weight of 15 pounds and an height that is adjustable to either 47 inches or 60 inches .
The Double allows remote users to drive in the local's environment, switch between a front and bottom-view camera, and adjust the height to two different settings.
The telepresence robot's screen was an Apple iPad 2 tablet computer2 with a diagonal screen size of 9.7 inches  and a screen resolution of 2048x1536 and 264 ppi.
The front camera of the tablet com puter provided a video stream of what the system was facing to aid with communication, and the back camera showed the immediate surroundings of the robot using a mirror directed toward the ground to aid with navigation.
The participant and the confederate communicated via the Double videoconferencing interface, shown in Figure 3.
In the stationary condition, participants were not instructed on the controls for moving the system and the system was plugged into the wall, preventing movement.
In the mobile condition, participants were provided with an instruction sheet on the con trols for moving the system and were able to freely maneuver around in the experiment room.
The completed object had a total of 35 parts--22 straight pieces and 13 connect ing joints--with varying orientations and colors.
Participants were told that they would be working together with another study participant to build the object, that they would have the instructions, and that the other person would have the parts.
We motivated participants to work as quickly and accurately as possible by adding an incentive; if they were able to build the correct object faster than any other teams from the study, they would receive an extra dollar.
They were also told that they could begin the task as soon as the timer was started and that the timer would stop when they told the experimenter that they were finished.
Participants received a picture of the completed object that they were not allowed to show to the confederate, as shown on the right in Figure 3.
In order to measure the remote user's feelings of presence, we asked participants to mark where they and their partner worked during the task on a map of the rooms.
Figure 4 shows example data from this measure.
Markings on the map were coded as "in-room" if participants noted that they and the confederate were in the room where the object was being constructed.
They were coded as "separate" if participants marked that they and the confederate operated from separate rooms.
In order to avoid biasing participants, the map of the room was not changed between conditions, but participants were warned that the layout of the rooms or the objects included on the map may not be accurate.
Left: Data from the measures of presence across mobile and stationary conditions and broken down to tasks requiring low and high levels of mobility.
Center and right: Example data from the presence measure, participants used blue to circle the area that they worked in and green to circle the area that their partner worked in.
The examples in the center illustrate data from participants who felt present in the room where they were tele-present, rather than the "other location" where they were physically located, and those on the right illustrate data from participants who felt present where they were physically located.
We used the time taken to complete the construction of the object as a measure of task efficiency.
Time was marked in seconds from when the timer was started to when the partici pant opened the door of the study room and announced that they were finished.
The number of mistakes in the completed object, i.e., errors in the orientation or position of the pieces, served as a measure of task accuracy.
While we did not pose any specific hypotheses about subjec tive evaluations, we created an exploratory post-experiment questionnaire to better understand the effects that the mobility of the system might have on the remote user's perceptions of teamwork, team recovery, workspace awareness, and en vironmental awareness.
Participants were asked to rate their agreement on a five-point Likert scale, 1 = Strongly disagree, 5 = Strongly agree, with 34 statements .
Statements were modified from items in the Networked Minds Measure of Social Presence  and NASA's Situational Awareness Rating Technique .
In addition, participants were asked to rate their feelings of closeness with their partner using the Inclusion of Other in the Self Scale .
Follow ing these steps, the experimenter reconnected to the robotic telepresence system and introduced the confederate as another participant in the study.
The participant was reminded that they could begin when the timer was started and to open the door and announce when they were finished.
After answering any questions, the experimenter started the timer and exited the room.
During the task, the confederate did not initiate actions or provide guidance, acting only to complete partic ipant instructions; this was to prevent affecting the speed of task completion or the number of mistakes.
Once the participant had opened the door of the experiment room and announced that the task was completed, the experimenter re-entered, turned off the timer, told the confederate to log out of the system, and administered the post-study questionnaire.
Each session took approximately 30 minutes.
An experimenter greeted the participant at the entrance of our laboratory and obtained informed consent.
The experimenter then seated the participant in front of a computer and gave the participant up to 10 minutes to practice either driving the telepresence robot around  or practice moving through a maze .
A total of 32 adults , whose ages ranged between 18 and 30 years, M = 20.9, SD = 2.37, volunteered to participate in the study.
We re cruited from the University of Wisconsin-Madison campus community using online job postings and in-person recruit ment.
Participants reported that they were familiar with video conferencing, M = 4.8, SD = 1.7  and on average used videoconferencing once a month, M = 2.2, SD = 0.8 .
Although we told participants that they would receive an ex tra dollar if they were the fastest team to complete the task correctly in order to motivate faster completion times, all par ticipants received a total of $5, which included the completion bonus.
Data from measures of task completion time and task error.
On the left, the high-mobility task took significantly longer to complete than the low-mobility task, and participants in the high-mobility task took marginally longer to complete the task when using the mobile vs. the stationary system.
On the right, participants made marginally more mistakes in the high-mobility task than the low-mobility task.
We tested age, gender, and videoconferencing experience as potential covariates and found that none had a significant effect .
A two-way fixed-effects analysis of variance  was conducted with the mobility of the system and task mobility requirements as input variables and completion time and number of mistakes as response variables.
Planned comparisons in all tests used the Scheff e method.
A Pearson's Chi-squared test was used to determine the effects of mobility on the participant's feelings of presence in the drawn map measure.
To construct scales from items in our questionnaire, we con ducted an exploratory factor analysis, which resulted in four factors that corresponded to scales of teamwork , team recovery , workspace awareness , and awareness of the environment .
A closer examina tion of these results showed that, when engaged in the lowmobility task, system mobility had no effect on feelings of presence, 2  = .10, p = .73.
However, in the highmobility task, all participants using a mobile system reported themselves as being present in the room with the confederate , while all partici pants that used a stationary system reported themselves as being in a separate room , 2  = 16.0, p < .001.
Figure 4 illustrates these results and provides examples of responses from participants who felt present in the room with the confederate and those who felt separate, i.e., present in the room where they were physically located.
Our second hypothesis posited that mobility would improve task performance in a high-mobility task but not in a lowmobility task.
Our results did not provide support for this hy pothesis.
We found no main effect of system mobility on completion time or the number of errors.
We found no interaction effects for the mobility of the system and the mobility requirements of the task on the number of errors.
Finally, we found no significant effects of system mobility or the mobility required by the task on the remote user's percep tions of teamwork, team recovery, workspace awareness, and environmental awareness.
We also observed participants having difficulties with maneu vering the telepresence robot.
Although users were given 10 minutes to train with the system and were provided with an instruction sheet explaining the controls , users still experienced challenges.
For example, participants were observed to back into walls, run into pipes on the ground, or to move extremely slowly to avoid collisions.
These difficul ties resulted in one user tipping the system over during the training period and crashing it, such that the system had to be recovered from a prone position on the floor.
In NASA's Situational Awareness Rating Technique  , the primary factors for understanding a user's situational awareness include the user's division of attention, spare mental capacity, concentration, and familiarity with the situation.
While each of these factors individually may not have been a problem for participants, our observations were that the combination of being presented with an unfamiliar control system, coping with the task, having to divide attention between the photograph and the video of the other room, the pressure of competing in time and accuracy, and the concen tration needed to interact with the local confederate, may have been overwhelming for users in the mobile system condition.
This high cognitive load may have resulted in an inability to take full advantage of the system's mobility, decreasing their ability to work quickly.
This effect may have been particularly strong in the high-mobility task, as the low-mobility task did not require participants to move.
Consistent with our first hypothesis, our results showed that system mobility significantly improved the remote's feelings of being present in the local's location, particularly when the task required high levels of mobility.
In these situations, we observed that all participants using the mobile system not only actively moved in the task space, but also exhibited more present behaviors.
For instance, when constructing the large object, participants who were driving the system used language that referred to themselves in space, such as "Where am I?"
However, when using a stationary system or in the low-mobility task, we observed requests and statements by the remote user that referred to actions of the local confederate, such as "Can you push the object back please?"
Contrary to the predictions of our second hypothesis, greater mobility did not increase task efficiency or accuracy.
Using a mobile system was actually detrimental to task performance in the high-mobility task and had no effect in the low-mobility task.
We believe that the reasons for this outcome fall into two primary categories: a high burden of attention for the remote user and an instability in the remote user's frame of reference, which are discussed in the paragraphs below.
Psychological research on spatial cognition has studied the cognitive techniques that people use to understand their own positioning and the positioning of objects in their environ ment .
In this work, spatial reference systems are divided into three categories, egocentric reference systems, where lo cation is specified with respect to the observer, environmental reference systems, in which locations are specified with re spect to other objects, and intrinsic reference systems, when people learn a particular spatial layout of objects or a pat tern .
This work provides strong evidence that memories of room-sized layouts are mentally represented in terms of egocentric reference systems  or intrinsic reference systems, particularly when objects may be grouped into higher-order clusters .
In our task, when participants were not able to maneuver around the environment, their frame of reference was fixed in an egocentric view, where their spatial understanding was limited to object positioning in relation to the robotic telepres ence system, or "themselves."
However, when the mobility of the system enabled participants to change their field of view, their mental model for understanding object positioning may have changed to an intrinsic reference system.
This may have led them to attempt to gauge where objects were in relation to other features in the environment , causing problems for the three reasons discussed below.
During the task, we observed a number of behaviors that seemed to indicate that participants found performing the task and maneuvering the telepresence robot to require high levels of attention.
In their comments in the post-study survey, par ticipants illustrated task difficulties with comments such as "It was hard to communicate everything you wanted to say using non-verbal actions and more directions verbally instead," " difficult describing connectors," and "I'm pretty horrible at this ."
Many users were unfamiliar with the shapes of the joints and had trouble articulating dif ferences between pieces and directions for the construction.
Participants also reported difficulties with translating the pho tograph into three dimensional space, sometimes resulting in an object that was a mirror image of the one in the instructions.
As a result, once the participant had moved in space, relating new objects to old ones became increasingly difficult.
Second, when physically present, people may rely on a num ber of environmental and kinesthetic cues to estimate their changes in position.
In the robotic telepresence system that we used, no feedback was provided for how far the system had rotated or the distance that it had moved, creating distortions in egocentric frames of reference.
Exacerbating this situation was our decision to remove all distinguishing characteristics from the study room in order to minimize distractions from the task at hand.
While there were several features  which would be common in an office or factory setting, the environment was not as rich in cues as more naturalistic settings might be.
We observed participants in the mobile condition moving the system forward, then paus ing to turn back and forth to get a better understanding of their position and surroundings.
In some cases, participants would back up to their previous position and make remarks such as "Ok, so that's there..." before driving forward again, leading us to the conclusion that they were searching for objects in the environment to use as navigational aids.
We also observed occasions in which the participant rotated the system and lost track of how far they had gone, ending in their facing a wall and having to ask the confederate, "Where are you now?"
Third, the most distinguishing objects in the room were the pieces for constructing the object and the confederate.
As required by the task, both the pieces and the confederate were in constant movement under the direction provided by the par ticipant.
When using the stationary system, we often observed participants referring to the confederate's position when the confederate was not in view of the camera, as in the statements "There should be a green joint on your left and a red one on your right..." and "Yeah, right where you are now."
In contrast, when using a mobile system, participants appeared disoriented about the confederate's location in relation to their own, lead ing to backing repeatedly into walls while trying to locate the confederate or the object.
Previous work in computer-mediated communication has iden tified that the remote user's inability to understand how they are situated in the local user's environment can cause problems or frictions between users .
When viewed from the per spective of robotic telepresence systems, this lack of positional awareness significantly limits the ability of these systems to support task collaboration and has the potential to render them unusable.
While the ability to navigate has shown dividends in creating an orientation-free mental representation of the environment versus an orientation-dependent representation developed from a map or photographs , our results high light the gap between having the ability to move and the user actually benefitting from the capability.
One potential solution for supporting the remote user's nav igational needs is to leverage heads-up displays to create a realistic three dimensional representation of a virtual environ ment, such as a recreation of the local's surroundings, and to simulate a correct perspective for the user by monitoring the relative position of the user's eyes or head .
However, head mounted displays introduce other challenges for users of robotic telepresence systems, as they obfuscate the remote user's face.
Our findings suggest that while the addition of mobility may provide remote users with a greater sense of presence in the local's environment, simply providing them with the ability to maneuver is not enough.
The ability to drive the telepresence system not only adds the burden of understanding its spatial positioning in relation to other objects in the environment, but also divides the remote user's attention, significantly in creasing cognitive load.
Walking and talking becomes a much more difficult proposition when trying to interact with others through a mobile system.
While these problems are not insurmountable, our research points to the need for designers to consider ways of supporting the remote user's efforts.
For example, providing the remote user with a wider field of view may allow them to gain a better intrinsic understanding of the location of obstacles in the environment.
Adding indicators in telepresence interfaces that show the distance traveled, the degrees of rotation turned, or the position of the telepresence robot on a simple map of the local environment, such as those provided in gaming interfaces, may aid in maintaining an egocentric view of the system's position.
Providing the remote user with the ability to offload the controls for movement, either by providing pre-planned paths or more intuitively mapped control systems, such as game or gesture-based controllers, may reduce cognitive load, allowing the remote user to more fully focus on the task at hand.
Based on our study, we believe that there are informative lessons learned and fruitful paths forward for future work.
First, to control for the difficulty of maneuvering the robotic telepresence system, it is critical for future studies to provide a flexible training period that allows participants to become com fortable and agile with the system.
This lengthened training period would enable achieving a certain skill level instead of training for a set period of time.
Alternatively, a longer-term study could examine task performance over time.
Second, to be able to make broader claims about the use of robotic telepresence systems in spatially-oriented tasks, it is important for future work to explore a wider variety of tasks, such as collaborative exploration, search and rescue, and so on.
Third, providing a richer, more naturalistic environment with stable reference points, such as additional furniture or wall hang ings, may not only improve overall task performance with the robotic telepresence system, but may also offer greater external validity.
Furthermore, there are always limitations of a study's participant pool in terms of how repre sentative it is of a broader population of people with diverse educational, professional, and cultural backgrounds, which may be addressed by conducting follow-up studies, e.g., across different professional environments or cultural contexts.
For this purpose, we have sought to provide sufficient detail in the Methods Section to allow future repeatability of our study.
Baker, M., Hansen, T., Joiner, R., and Traum, D. The role of grounding in collaborative learning tasks.
Collaborative learning: Cognitive and computational approaches , 31-63.
Beer, J. M., and Takayama, L. Mobile remote presence systems for older adults: acceptance, benefits, and concerns.
The networked minds measure of social presence: pilot test of the factor structure and concurrent validity.
Media Interface and Network Design Lab .
Our work explored the effects of mobility on collaborative outcomes in two different task scenarios--a "small" task that required low levels of mobility and a "large" task with high mo bility requirements--seeking to answer the question, "When does mobility matter?"
To this end, we conducted a controlled laboratory experiment that followed a two-by-two  between-participants design in which partici pants acted as the remote user and a confederate acted as the local user.
Our results showed that the mobility of the system significantly improved the remote user's feelings of presence, particularly in tasks requiring high levels of mobility.
However, contrary to our prediction, we found that mobility lowered task performance in measures of efficiency in high-mobility tasks.
Our results suggest that, although the ability to maneuver the system provides remote users with immediate benefits such as a greater sense of presence, there is an often overlooked bur den that controlling a mobile system adds to the remote user's cognitive load.
These findings not only have implications for creating awareness of the potential consequences of providing the remote user with additional functionalities, such as mobil ity, but also highlight new opportunities for designing tools to support remote users.
Robotic telepresence systems offer the unique chance to participate in and to directly contribute to physically situated tasks.
However, our findings highlight the need for a deeper understanding of how mobility may be integrated in the design of robotic telepresence systems to best support the demands that such tasks place on the remote users.
Adalgeirsson, S. O., and Breazeal, C. Mebot: a robotic platform for socially embodied presence.
Aron, A., Aron, E. N., and Smollan, D. Inclusion of other in the self scale and the structure of interpersonal closeness.
Arthur, K. W., Booth, K. S., and Ware, C. Evaluating 3d task performance for fish tank virtual worlds.
Gutwin, C., and Greenberg, S. The effects of workspace awareness support on the usability of real-time distributed groupware.
Gutwin, C., and Greenberg, S. A descriptive framework of workspace awareness for real-time groupware.
Heath, C., and Luff, P. Disembodied conduct: communication through video in a multi-media office environment.
Kraut, R. E., Fish, R. S., Root, R. W., and Chalfonte, B. L. Informal communication in organizations: Form, function, and technology.
In Human reactions to technology: Claremont symposium on applied social psychology, Citeseer , 145-199.
Lee, M. K., and Takayama, L. "Now, I have a body": uses and social norms for mobile remote presence in the workplace.
McGovern, D. E. Human interfaces in remote driving.
McKenna, M. Interactive viewpoint control and three-dimensional operations.
Mou, W., and McNamara, T. P. Intrinsic frames of reference in spatial memory.
Nakanishi, H., Murakami, Y., Nogami, D., and Ishiguro, H. Minimum movement matters: impact of robot-mounted cameras on social telepresence.
One of the gang: supporting in-group behavior for embodied mediated communication.
