Tag clouds have become a frequently used interaction technique in the web.
Recently several approaches to present tag clouds with the tags semantically clustered have been proposed.
However, it remains unclear whether the expected gains in performance and advantages in interaction actually can be realized as no empirical evaluations of such approaches are available yet.
In this paper we describe a series of experiments designed to evaluate the effects of semantic versus alphabetical and random arrangements of tags in tag clouds.
The results of our work indicate that semantically clustered tag clouds can provide improvements over random layouts in specific search tasks and that they tend to increase the attention towards tags in small fonts compared to other layouts.
Also, semantically structured tag clouds were preferred by about half of the users for general search tasks.
Tag cloud layout does not seem to influence the ability to remember tags.
Tag clouds are typically presented in alphabetical order, but also different approaches such as random or importance based tag arrangements have been used.
Recently different methods to arrange tags semantically have been proposed  but no user-based evaluations of these approaches are available yet.
It therefore remains unclear, whether these new presentation approaches are actually suited to improve the usefulness of tag clouds, and what the specific strengths and weaknesses of semantic arrangements in comparison to alphabetic and random tag layouts are.
Concise research results regarding the importance of visual features within tag clouds are available.
However, the importance of tag position remains unclear, as the two studies come to different conclusions.
Whereas  report no influence of tag position  found that tags in the upper-left quadrant had more influence than tags in the lower-right quadrant.
This discrepancy may be a result of the different tasks  and tag cloud sizes used in the studies.
Tag clouds are visual displays of set of words  in which attributes of the text such as size, color or font weight are used to represent relevant properties e.g.
Tag clouds have become a frequently used interaction technique in the web.
The popularity of tag clouds can be explained by their ability to help users in getting a fast overview of a certain area.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Different studies impose that tag clouds are a good visualization technique to communicate an 'overall picture'.
Similarly, comparing the visualization of search results using tag clouds in contrast to hierarchical textual descriptions Kuo et al.
However, both studies showed disadvantages of tag clouds for specific search tasks.
The setup included random and alphabetically ordered lists and tag clouds, semantic ordering was not part of there setup.
They found that respondents were able to more easily and quickly find tags in alphabetical orders .
Results did not show any significant disparity in recognition of tags.
However, respondents could better recognize the overall categories presented when confronted with the vertical list of tags ordered by frequency.
Hearst and Rosner  discuss the organization of tag clouds.
One important disadvantage of tag cloud layouts they mention is that items with similar meaning may lie far apart, and so meaningful associates may be missed.
Hasan-Montero and Herrero-Solana  proposed an algorithm using tag similarity to group and arrange tag clouds.
They calculate tag similarity by means of relative co-occurrence between tags.
Based on this similarity they calculate a tag layout, where distance between tags represents semantic relatedness.
Another very similar approach is proposed by .
However, none of these approaches was evaluated systematically, and little is known about the actual effects of semantic tag layouts.
In detail we wanted to answer the questions, how semantic tag arrangement effects search time, the perception of tag clouds as well as the subjective satisfaction of the users both when searching for a specific tag and when performing searches for more general topics.
Additionally we were interested to find out whether tag cloud layout influences the ability to remember tags.
Three experiments were designed to answer these questions.
Our basic test content for all experiments was formed by 304 popular tags taken from 4 different thematic clusters of flickr.
Tags were randomly assigned to one out of four groups, which then were used to generate the tag clouds.
Each tag cloud used in the experiments consisted of 76 items arranged in 7 lines with 11 respectively 10 tags each.
Every tag cloud included exactly 6 very big, 11 big, 22 small and 37 very small tags.
Tags were randomly assigned to one of these font size groups.
Four different tag cloud layouts were used in our experiments: Alphabetic.
Tags were placed alphabetically starting at the top left similar to reading text.
Tags were placed randomly on the tag cloud by use of a random number generator.
We used the getrelated-function of flickrs API1 to retrieve a list of the tags most related to each word within the tag cloud.
Then based on the number of cooccurring related tags a measure for the relatedness of two tags was calculated.
An alternating least-squares algorithm to perform multidimensional scaling 2 was used to compute a two-dimensional arrangement of the tags.
In the third step we used the value on the y-axis to form 7 groups of 11 resp.
Next tags within each group were sorted according to their value on the x-axis.
The result provided an 11 times 7 arrangement that was used to generate the tag cloud.
In this approach we used WordNet  to calculate the relatedness of the used tags.
Several algorithms to compute semantic distances based on WordNet data have been proposed, a comprehensive discussion can be found in .
We used the approach proposed by Banerjee et al.
After calculating a distance matrix the same procedure as described in the folksonomy-based approach was used to arrange the tags in rectangular shape.
Altogether 16 different tag clouds using all combinations of the four content sets with the tag cloud layouts were used.
In all three experiments test conditions where presented in different order using content sets and tag cloud layouts that counterbalanced position and learning effects.
An ANOVA3 of difficulty rating of the users with regard to the different test conditions showed a similar pattern as the analysis for search time.
We found a significant main effect , with the alphabetic layout rated better than all other layouts, and folksonomy-based layout significantly better than random.
The first experiment was designed to test how semantic tag arrangement influences search time and subjective satisfaction when searching for a specific tag.
The task for the 24 test participants  was to find a specific tag within a tag cloud as fast and accurately as possible.
The tag to be found was shown on the screen, on clicking 'Next' a tag cloud containing the target word appeared on the screen.
The target word was also shown below the tag cloud.
After locating the target tag participants had to click on it to proceed to the next task.
Search time and clicked tag was logged.
Four different tag layouts as described above were used.
For each layout 12 search tasks for different targets within the same tag cloud where performed.
Target tags where evenly distributed across the four font sizes.
We controlled for evenly distributed target position across the 4 quadrants of the clouds used in each condition.
In experiment two we studied the effects of tag cloud layout for more general searches.
The main task for the participants  was to find a tag that belongs to a specific topic.
Participants had to search alternately for three different topics within the same tag cloud.
Each participant made 3 trials resulting in 9 search tasks per tag cloud.
Test participants were instructed to select the same tag only once.
For each topic 5 words  were present.
A two-way repeated measures ANOVA with search time as dependent variable and the factors tag cloud layout and trial  showed a significant effect for trial .
This result is surprising, as we expected semantic tag layout to provide - if any - benefit for general search tasks and not specific searches .
We think that efforts of users to comprehend the semantic structure may counteract possible performance gains.
However, more research is needed to clarify the involved mechanisms in detail.
Follow-up analysis with paired samples t-test showed that the alphabetic layout is faster than all other conditions and that the folksonomy-based layout is faster than both, the random and the linguistics-based design.
There is no difference between the random and linguistics-based layout.
The interaction diagram in Figure 2  shows that whereas for the conditions random and alphabetical the search time consistently decreases with increasing size of the target in the two semantically clustered conditions search times start to increase again for targets with very big fonts.
We think this effect is caused by users applying different visual search strategies to semantic tag layouts when they recognize the layout principle.
Words in small fonts provide valuable information about the contents of an area.
Analysis of Variance showed no effect for tag cloud layout  on the size of selected targets and a significant influence for trial : Tags in big fonts were generally found earlier than tags with smaller fonts.
Figure 2  illustrates the differences of the size of the selected tag for trial 1, 2 and 3.
In contrast to the other three conditions in the folksonomy-based layouts the selected tags font size is not continously decreasing.
Font size of the identified targets is decreasing from the first to the second trial, and then increases again for the third.
The increased focus on smaller tags is consistent with the findings of experiment one.
The third experiment was designed to evaluate whether variations in the tag arrangement have significant influence on the ability to recall tags or not.
16 test persons  participated in experiment three.
The main task of participants was to remember as many tags as possible.
Tag clouds with different tag arrangements where shown for 30 seconds to the test subjects, and immediately afterward they were asked to enter all words they could remember into a form.
Semantic layouts therefore should only be used when the quality of the arrangement can be assured.
Test participants also commented that it was difficult to identify clusters and relations beyond single lines.
In future we plan to work on improved layout algorithms that take care of these limitations.
One-way repeated measures ANOVA showed no influence of tag arrangement on amount of recalled tags .
In the interviews participants stated that the layout didn't make any difference whatsoever.
This and the almost complete overlapping confidence intervals for the four test conditions support the interpretation that there is no or only an extremely small effect of tag cloud layout on recall rate.
In this paper we investigated whether topically tag cloud layouts are good representations for finding specific tags, finding tags related to a category and for recalling tags.
Our results include encouraging evidence for continuing semantic presentation approaches but also show that many details of such approaches are not yet fully understood.
When comparing the distribution of remembered words across the different size categories to the expected distribution based on actual distribution of tag sizes in the original tag clouds a CHI-Square test shows a highly significant  difference in the distributions.
Not surprisingly the bigger the font of a word the higher the relative chance of being remembered is.
After finishing the study the participants of experiment one and two were shown printed tag clouds in the four different layouts and asked which one they would prefer for specific searches, general searches and on a web page in general.
Topically layouts can improve search performance for specific search tasks compared to random arrangements, but they still perform worse than alphabetic layouts.
Considering that we used very simple clustering and arrangement algorithms we expect further advancement on semantic arrangements with more elaborate procedures.
The differences in results for the folksonomy-based and linguistics-based approaches indicate that the quality of the used clustering algorithms is of major importance for the resulting interaction.
