Harvard School of Engineering and Applied Sciences* bethalt@seas.harvard.edu We hypothesize that creating and sharing multiple alternatives has more benefits than people may realize.
Both cognitive and social factors motivate this hypothesis.
First, the presence of a concrete prototype may  focus the discussion on refining that idea rather than thinking more broadly .
Without exploration, people often interpret the frame of the design problem too narrowly .
Second, people presenting designs often believe their status to be on the line .
This risk encourages overinvesting time, labor, psychological energy, and social momentum into a single concept .
In this singleprototype strategy, individuals may seek validation for their ideas and disregard or fear the critique and feedback necessary for exploration and revision .
Compounding this, collaborative work is often susceptible to groupthink, where members reinforce each other's belief in the current direction at the expense of other options .
Creating multiple prototypes in parallel can help individuals more effectively understand underlying design principles, enumerate more diverse solutions, and react less negatively to feedback .
Distributing one's psychological investment across multiple designs can reduce fixation and sunkcost reasoning .
Individuals may be more candid and critical of their own and others' ideas , resulting in more fluid and effective collaboration.
However, creating multiple alternatives leaves less time to polish each one and may be perceived as wasting effort .
Focusing on fewer endeavors can help people focus, contemplate, relax, and be more productive .
Increasing options can cause analysis paralysis -- a "paradox" of choice  -- and may jeopardize a group's ability to achieve consensus .
This paper investigates whether sharing multiple prototypes increases design performance, improves group interaction, and leads to more effective idea sharing.
In a betweensubjects experiment, 84 participants working in pairs designed Web banner advertisements for a non-profit organization.
The study comprised three steps.
First, participants prototyped designs individually.
Second, they worked with a partner to critique each other's ideas.
Third, each individual created a final ad.
Participants answered survey questions at several points and open-ended questions at the end.
Pairs were randomly assigned to one of three conditions: creating and sharing multiple ads; creating multiple ads and sharing the best; and creating and sharing one ad.
Comparing these three conditions separates the effects of producing multiple designs and sharing multiple designs.
Each condition was allotted the same time for design.
Prototypes ground group communication and facilitate decision making.
However, overly investing in a single design idea can lead to fixation and impede the collaborative process.
Does sharing multiple designs improve collaboration?
In a study, participants created advertisements individually and then met with a partner.
In the Share Multiple condition, participants designed and shared three ads.
In the Share Best condition, participants designed three ads and selected one to share.
In the Share One condition, participants designed and shared one ad.
Sharing multiple designs improved outcome, exploration, sharing, and group rapport.
These participants integrated more of their partner's ideas into their own subsequent designs, explored a more divergent set of ideas, and provided more productive critiques of their partner's designs.
Furthermore, their ads were rated more highly and garnered a higher click-through rate when hosted online.
Many designers live by the principle, "never go to a client meeting without a prototype" .
Prototypes help people summarize their ideas, demonstrate progress and expertise, surface implicit design vocabulary, and ground group communication and decision making .
Creating a prototype--sketching a possible future--helps people see the entailments and interactions of their design ideas and communicates those to other stakeholders .
Rapid iteration provides value, but it does not guarantee broad exploration .
People systematically overestimate the predictability of the future, especially in complex situations .
For example, when financial experts estimate the range of possible futures, they consistently underestimate the variance .
In prediction and decision-making tasks, people can improve the quality of their estimates by broadening the frame and generating multiple guesses under different assumptions .
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
This paper hypothesizes that producing multiple designs and being exposed to multiple examples produced by other group members leads individuals to create a more divergent set of concepts.
Hypothesis 1: Creating and viewing multiple designs leads to more individual exploration.
This study measured individual design exploration by having independent raters judge the diversity/similarity of each participant's designs.
Ads in the Share Multiple condition generated significantly more clicks per impression than the other conditions .
Independent  judges rated ads from the Share Multiple condition significantly higher.
Judges also rated Share Multiple ads as significantly more divergent.
Participants in the Share Multiple condition shared significantly more ideas and moved more towards consensus than pairs who shared only one design.
Group members in the Share Multiple condition reported a greater increase in rapport over the course of the experiment, while rapport in the other two conditions dropped.
Moreover, Share Multiple participants exchanged speaking turns significantly more often.
In short, sharing multiple designs improves outcome, exploration, sharing, and group rapport.
These results suggest that encouraging group members to share multiple ideas will pay dividends in both design outcomes and interpersonal dynamics.
The following subsections elaborate the study's rationale and hypotheses.
Designers often work collaboratively to generate, critique, and revise ideas, and to build consensus .
Under controlled conditions, individuals working separately often collectively produce a greater volume of ideas than group brainstorming .
Group members may block each other from sharing ideas , get frustrated with bad apples in the group , and "free ride" by deferentially following others' ideas .
However, measuring only the sheer volume of ideas is misleading: group brainstorming supports organizational memory of design solutions, recognizes skill variety among team members, and builds shared ownership of ideas--crucial for selecting and refining concepts .
To some extent, the debate over whether to design individually or collectively presents a false choice; creative work typically involves both .
Sharing ideas with a group can be an anxiety-laden experience, and this anxiety can negatively affect performance .
Individuals who know they will be judged by experts produce less novel ideas .
Many critique providers are aware that public feedback can be emotionally fraught; consequently they take care to temper criticism  and supplement critique with praise .
Anxiety may increase when people believe their worth as a person is part of what's being assessed .
For this reason, many educators and parents use language that critiques the work and the behavior, rather than the person .
Creating multiple designs may help both critiquers and creators separate egos from artifacts.
When asked for feedback, people provide more substantive critique when presented with multiple design alternatives .
People react less negatively when they receive critique on multiple alternatives in parallel .
This prior work studied individual behavior; this paper analyzes the social effects.
This paper hypothesizes that sharing multiple designs-- rather than one--improves group rapport and increases the rate at which people exchange ideas.
Hypothesis 2: Sharing multiple designs leads to more productive dialogue and better group rapport.
This study measured peer interaction by counting speech turns by each partner .
Also, five questions posed before and after the group discussion assessed individual views of their group's rapport.
Exposing people to examples increases the likelihood they will integrate similar features into their own designs , even when they are asked to create vastly different ideas .
Furthermore, borrowing increases with the number of examples people see .
However, using Smith et al.
In other words, participants borrowed from examples when they lacked a better idea, but viewing examples did not "push out" or inhibit people's novel ideas.
Furthermore, when viewed from a quality perspective, people perform better when examples are readily available .
In all of this prior work, examples were presented anonymously.
Collaborative work is importantly different in this regard because the examples are produced by a known and copresent peer.
Blending can be highly structured, as in morphological design , but is more commonly ad hoc.
When concepts are dissimilar, blending them yields a more ambiguous artifact .
Conceptual ambiguity can beneficially provide a generative resource .
Sharing multiple designs may help collaborators blend ideas.
The process of comparing and contrasting alternatives helps people create higher-level structures ; these structures help collaborators understand and communicate the rationale behind design decisions .
This paper hypothesizes that sharing multiple design concepts facilitates conceptual blending and that collaborators will use more surface-level and thematic features from their partner's work.
Hypothesis 3: Sharing multiple designs leads to more effective conceptual blending.
This study measures conceptual blending by counting features that migrate from one partner's preliminary designs to the other's final design.
Independent raters also judged the similarity of partner's designs before and after the pair shared their work.
Finally, this paper hypothesizes that sharing multiple designs leads to better performance due to a confluence of three factors: individuals explore more divergent ideas; groups have stronger dialogue and rapport; and the final design exhibit more effective conceptual blending.
Hypothesis 4: Sharing multiple designs produces better results.
This study measures design quality by gathering clickthrough performance metrics on advertisement designs and by recruiting professionals, clients, and other independent judges to rate ads.
We recruited 84 participants through papers fliers, online advertisements, and email lists.
Two individuals arrived concurrently to form study pairs.
Each pair was assigned to one of three conditions using a stratified randomization approach; the study balanced for gender  and graphic design knowledge across pairs and conditions.
Ten true-or-false questions assessed graphic design knowledge ; participants were deemed experienced if they correctly answered eight or more .
Participants who scored below eight were deemed novices.
Participants' average age was 26.5; three-fourths were students.
The experiment comprised the following steps: consent form, icebreaker, tool training, practice ad, design brief, individual design, group discussion, final individual design, group interview, and final debriefing.
Questionnaires collected demographic and self-report assessments.
The icebreaker, group discussion, and group interview were colocated and video-recorded.
All other procedures took place in separate rooms at individual workstations with no video recording.
For 120 minutes of participation, subjects received $20 USD cash.
At separate workstations, partners viewed a five-minute video about the Web-based graphic design tool .
Then, using the tool, participants replicated a graphic unrelated to the main task.
All participants replicated the graphic in less than ten minutes.
None had used the tool before.
Selecting a novel tool avoids confounds from participant's tool-specific expertise.
A between-subjects study manipulated the prototyping process prior to a group critique.
Web advertising was chosen as the design task because it fulfills key criteria:  Quality can be measured objectively and subjectively;  Participants need minimal artistic or engineering ability to either create or critique ads;  Individuals can complete tasks within a single lab session;  Solutions demonstrate creative diversity and a range of performance quality.
Participants all created Web ads for the same client, FaceAIDS.org.
The study allocated equal time for individual design and group discussions across three conditions.
In the Share Multiple condition, participants created three preliminary advertisements and shared all three during the group discussion.
In the Share Best condition, participants created three preliminary ads and chose one to share during the group discussion.
In the Share One condition, participants spent the entire individual design time on a single ad to share during the group discussion.
A five-minute video described participants' main design activity: to create an ad for FaceAIDS, a non-profit organization dedicated to global health equity and social justice .
In the video, the organization's executive director outlined four goals: reach out to students interested in starting local chapters of FaceAIDS, increase traffic to the FaceAIDS Web site, impress three judges from the FaceAIDS organization, and create ads with effective graphic design.
A paper version of the design brief was available for the group discussion .
All participants had 30 minutes for individual design.
In the Share Multiple and Share Best conditions, participants started a fresh design every 10 minutes.
This was typically adequate, even for novices.
At the end of this period, Share Best participants were prompted to select one design to be critiqued by the study partner.
After the design period, a study proctor printed ads for the group discussion.
Participants sat together and viewed a print out of their partner's design.
The study proctor set a timer for five minutes and then instructed the pair: "Examine your peer's design concept and then provide a critique.
What advice would you provide?
After this, the proctor set another five-minute timer and instructed: "Now spend another 5 minutes discussing what you think is the most effective way to satisfy the design brief."
After that, participants were instructed to return to their individual workstations to create a final ad design.
The study concluded with an open-ended group interview.
A study proctor used an interview guide and followed up with related questions.
These questions provided guidance for the final interview; the exact order and phrasing varied.
Describe how you arrived at your final design.
Explain the difference between your two final ads.
How much did the group discussion affect what you did in your final ad design?
How did your peer's critique affect your ad design?
To what extent were you able to reach agreement on the final design concept?
Exploring a diverse set of ideas can help people examine the space of designs and their relative merits .
To obtain a measure of idea diversity, ten independent raters assessed pair-wise similarity of all combinations of individual participant's ads .
Raters recruited from Amazon Mechanical Turk assessed similarity on a scale from 1 to 7 .
After the experiment, the final graphic ads were hosted on Google AdWords  for a 12-day campaign.
Design performance was determined through two objective measures:  Click-through rates : number of clicks divided by the number of impressions, and  Google Analytics  on the target client Website: total time spent and number of pages visited from each ad.
Ads were also independently judged by 30 individuals: three clients from FaceAIDS, six ad professionals, and twenty-one people recruited from Mechanical Turk, an online crowdsourcing system for paying workers for short tasks .
This collection of raters provided important--and different--audience perspectives.
Each judge read the FaceAIDS design brief and viewed ads in random order.
For each ad, they estimated  each ad's performance in an online campaign .
At two points--after the icebreakers and after the discussion--five questions asked individuals to assess their group rapport.
The change between these two points measures the discussion's impact on group rapport.
Four questions originate from the Subjective Value Inventory , an assessment of viewpoints on negotiation .
The relationship questions from the SVI provide a systematic measure of a group rapport; they assess partners' feelings about the relationship in terms of overall impressions, satisfaction, trust, and foundations for future interaction.
The fifth question derives from the Inclusion of Self in Others Scale , a measure of someone's sense of connectedness with another .
The questions asked:  What kind of overall impression did your peer make on you?
How satisfied are you with your relationship with your peer as a result of the interaction?
Did the interaction make you trust your peer?
Did the interaction build a foundation for future interactions with your peer?
Please check the picture below which best describes your relationship with your peer:
The client found four of the ads to have inappropriate negative imagery, and requested they not be shown.
Three of these were from Share Best; one was from Share Multiple.
In total, the ad campaign generated 239 clicks on 274,539 impressions .
The total advertising costs were $362 USD .
The results supported all four hypotheses.
Participants in the Share Multiple condition produced higher-quality designs  and created more diverse designs.
Pairs in the Share Multiple condition reported a greater increase in rapport, exchanged more verbal information, and shared more ideas.
Moreover, ads by more experienced participants received higher ratings than novices; the designs created by experienced participants were less diverse than novices.
For each final ad, we counted cross-pollinated features in five categories: word phrases, background color, images, layout, and styles .
Crosspollination was a binary value for each category.
A category received a mark if a participant's final ad exhibited a feature that was present in their partner's shared provisional ad, but not in their own provisional ad .
As an aggregate measure of group consensus, independent raters assessed pair-wise similarity between partner ads.
The similarity assessment contrasted ads created before and after the discussion.
Ten raters recruited from Mechanical Turk assessed similarity on a scale from 1 to 7  .
If the designs are more similar after the discussion, it suggests that partners converge around similar concepts.
A chi-squared analysis examined ad campaign performance for all 12 days.
Share Multiple ads had 98,867 impressions with 106 clicks, Share Best ads had 77,558 impressions with 57 clicks, and Share One ads had 98,038 impressions with 76 clicks .
An analysis of variances was performed with condition  and graphic design score  as factors and total time spent and pages visited as dependent variables.
Participants created a wide variety of ad designs, demonstrating a range of quality.
The highest-rated ads tended to be original, visually appealing, and cleverly touched on themes relevant to FaceAIDS .
Ads with high click-through rates grabbed the attention of web users by employing more unconventional color palettes, layouts, and rhetorical hooks .
The third highest performing ad, for example, was the second lowest rated ad.
This paper considers different meanings of quality by examining various outcomes.
FaceAIDS reviewed the ads before they appeared online.
Ads created by participants who scored high on the graphic design exam garnered 110 clicks on 128,783 impressions; novice ads had 129 clicks on 145,756 impressions.
Experienced participants benefited more from the manipulation than novices did .
Experienced participants in the Share Multiple condition outperformed experienced participants in the Share Best  and Share One conditions .
There were no ad performance differences between conditions for novices.
Thirty raters judged all final ads on a 7-point scale .
An analysis of variances was performed with condition  and graphic design score  as factors and performance rating as the dependent variable.
Professionals, clients, and turkers  all rated Share Multiple ads higher than the other conditions .
This differential between advertising professionals and other stakeholders is consistent with prior work .
Raters from Amazon Mechanical Turk deemed Share Multiple ads to be most divergent.
An analysis of variances was performed with condition  and graphic design score  as factors and pair-wise similarity rating as the dependent variable.
There was no interaction effect between condition and prior experience.
Tukey post-hoc comparisons of the three conditions indicate that group rapport increased in the Share Multiple condition  compared to the others .
In absolute terms, rapport only increased in the Share Multiple condition .
Experienced participants created less diverse designs than novices; their ads were also rated higher.
Expert designers can rapidly construct entailments, mentally simulating design moves and their consequences .
Drawing on their many prior experiences, experts can often ignore or disregard the obviously bad options .
This foresight enables experts to strategically explore highly-promising subsets of the design space.
Sharing multiple designs leads to more productive dialogue and better group rapport.
Across all conditions, there was a small but statistically significant decline in reported group rapport after the discussion =2.050, p<0.05.
While critique obviously provides a valuable channel for feedback and learning new information, negative critique can also degrade group relations and performance.
Individuals' self efficacy may decrease in reaction to negative critique, which in turn lowers their performance .
Furthermore, people receiving negative critique may resent the critique provider, poisoning team dynamics.
In an understatement, one crest-fallen Share Best participant demurred, "she didn't make me feel like a total failure."
Clearly the critique damaged her estimation of her abilities.
Would this participant have felt better about herself and her team if she had shared multiple designs?
In this study, group rapport actually increased when participants shared multiple designs.
And prior work has shown that when teams generate lots of ideas, people feel more shared ownership and stronger team cohesiveness .
Pairs in the Share Multiple condition exchanged speaking turns significantly more often.
As one Share Multiple participants said, "being able to see the other person's designs and actually bounce ideas back and forth... that helped clarify what was good design and what wasn't."
Frequent exchanges helped participants discuss design tradeoffs and consider changes that address fundamental issues.
As one participant said, "it got me thinking about who would click on an ad and why someone would click on an ad."
Sharing multiple designs increases conceptual blending.
Participants in the Share Multiple condition integrated more features and modified their designs to be more like their partner's.
Participants often talked about the process of merging designs.
One Share Multiple participant said, "we agreed we like elements of mine and I really like some elements of one of his and we just kind of did a mash-up and combined them."
In contrast, a Share Best participant said, "we thought about some ideas, but we didn't really get to a consensus of what we were going to design."
Likewise, a Share One participant said, "I didn't really get a lot of things to change on mine, so I just stuck with what I had."
This notion of "sticking" with an idea did not surface in the Share Multiple condition.
Seeing multiple of a partner's designs provides more raw material for comparison.
This was beneficial because comparison helps people understand underlying principles bet-
Independent judges rated the partner ad similarity before and after the discussion.
The similarity change provides a measure of shared perspective.
Tukey post-hoc comparisons of shifts by each pair show that similarity increased more for the Share Multiple condition  than the Share Best  or Share One conditions   .
Sharing multiple designs led to several kinds of better outcomes.
Simply creating multiple designs  led to broader exploration, but not better results.
The benefits were only realized if participants shared multiple designs.
It's important to remember that participants worked on the same task for the same amount of time.
The only variable was how many designs they created and shared.
This section suggests reasons for why this simple act yielded differential outcomes, illustrating these with interview excerpts.
Creating and viewing multiple designs leads to more individual exploration.
The Share Multiple and Share Best participants explored significantly more broadly than the Share One participants.
Creative work often benefits from broadly exploring possibilities before choosing a direction to refine .
As this study and prior work found , rapidly producing alternatives and getting feedback on them yields higher-quality, more-diverse results.
As one Share Multiple participant described after seeing her partner's designs: "they were completely different from mine and I was like holy hell, that's pretty good.
I didn't think about that."
Another participant claimed that "getting a different perspective helped and also seeing different ideas--not flaws in mine, but different ideas in his that I'd like to borrow."
One participant in the Share Multiple condition said " ads look different, but I feel like in general it's the same message that's getting across."
Forming a stronger understanding of their partner's design rationale may be one reason Share Multiple participants reached more consensus and produced better results.
Consensus is importantly different than groupthink, where a group blindly follows along one path without considering alternatives.
In this study, convergence between Share Multiple pairs occurred after participants had explored many concepts.
While it may appear that--given a sufficient budget-- advertising platforms have unlimited capacity, this is not the case.
Web adverting succeeds because it shows ads relevant to a user's current interests .
Showing irrelevant ads yields few clicks and little revenue for the host.
On a given day, a finite number of people search for a particular topic like AIDS, design, or real-estate.
That's the upper bound of relevant ads that can be served.
It's preferable to show all ads simultaneously to factor out differential effects of external variables, such as day of week, time of year, current events, etc.
Furthermore, one needs a sufficient number of impressions and clicks to make meaningful statistical distinctions.
For this paper's study, 80 ads pushed the limits of how many alternate ads can be simultaneously shown.
Circulating more ads would have sliced the market of available impressions too thin.
Design organizations and educators can structure group work around creating and sharing alternative designs.
For example, Stanford's introductory HCI course revised its curriculum to more strongly emphasize creating and comparing alternatives .
For designers and educators who already employ a "share multiple" approach, this result provides them empirical support.
In this study, participants were able to create complete designs in a short amount of time.
In many domains, sketches can be produced quickly, but creating complete designs is costly and time consuming.
Does that mean for complex domains, a share multiple strategy can only be employed early in the design process?
When creating multiple comprehensive designs is impractical, designers can still prototype and share alternatives to sub-problems.
For example, in Web design it may be infeasible to produce three very different functional sites, but invaluable to create and test strategically selected elements.
In fact, some of the world's best sites do so every day .
In our study, online click performance did not correlate with overall rating.
Some unattractive ads receive many clicks; the Web has a preponderance of such examples.
Is an advertisement's success defined by its click-through performance or by expert ratings?
Each tells a valuable story.
This paper found that when people produce and share multiple alternatives with peers, they explore more diverse ideas, integrate more of their partner's features, engage in more productive design conversations, and ultimately, create higher-quality work.
Many designers already practice this approach.
These results suggest that more practitioners and teachers might beneficially adopt a "share multiple" strategy.
More broadly, this work raises several important questions.
First,  do these results generalize to different types of groups?
In this study, participants were independently recruited with no prior collaboration.
In most professional work, collaboration is longitudinal, and power relationships and social dynamics are more complex.
In this study, all group members performed the same role.
Often for a variety of reasons, different team members perform different functions.
Cross-functional teams can add value in both professional and learning contexts, such as jigsaw learning where different students are responsible for complementary parts of a topic .
What does sharing multiple designs mean for cross-functional teams and how does the outcome change depending on who does the creating and sharing?
Second, recent research on "the crowd within" suggests that at least some of the benefits of aggregating many people's perspectives can be accomplished by providing individuals with a structured approach to considering alternatives .
This study witnessed several benefits of group discussion; can structured reflection help individuals benefit similarly?
Third, we hypothesize the share multiple condition benefited in two ways.
This paper's advertising paradigm provides experimenters leverage when studying creative work.
It offers strong quantitative benchmarks through its Web analytics, captures the views of many stakeholders, and provides measures of several different types of outcomes.
While using advertising analytics is appealing for its ecological validity, this section shares three practical challenges.
To maximize profit, many advertisers show ads differentially.
If an ad performs well, it is shown more.
If initial performance is poor, it is shown less .
Some platforms provide a setting to show ads more evenly; use this when available.
Even with this setting, rotation may not be completely even; monitor this daily.
It is important to run a pilot test with a few ads to determine effective keywords, budget .
Specifying geographical regions and time of day can also help generate a sufficient volume of impression and clicks.
Seeing others' designs gave participants a larger palette to work from.
An important step for future work is to separate these two effects.
One strategy would be to have designers supplement their own creations with previously created examples.
An alternative would be for software to synthesize design alternatives .
Forth, the benefits of rapidly creating and sharing multiple alternatives are myriad.
How might software tools help designers explore more broadly?
Initial results are promising ; more exciting work remains.
Aron, A., Aron, E.N., and Smollan, D. Inclusion of Other in the Self Scale and the Structure of Interpersonal Closeness.
Aronson, E., Bridgeman, D., and Geffner, R. Interdependent Interactions and Prosocial Behavior.
Structured and opportunistic processing in design: a critical discussion.
Bao, P., Gerber, E., Gergle, D., and Hoffman, D. Momentum: getting and staying on topic during a brainstorm.
Managerial Overconfidence and Corporate Policies.
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper Series No.
Example-centric programming: integrating web search into the development environment.
Brereton, M., Cannon, M., Mabogunje, A., and Leifer, L. Collaboration in Design Teams: How Social Interaction Shapes the Product.
Buxton, B. Sketching User Experiences: Getting the Design Right and the Right Design.
Cross, N. Expertise in design: an overview.
Curhan, J.R., Elfenbein, H.A., and Xu, H. What Do People Value When They Negotiate?
Mapping the Domain of Subjective Value in Negotiation.
Critiquing Critiques: A Genre Analysis of Feedback Across Novice to Expert Design Studios.
Rapidly Exploring Application Design Through Speed Dating.
Diehl, M. and Stroebe, W. Productivity Loss In Brainstorming Groups: Toward the Solution of a Riddle.
The Efficacy of Prototyping Under Time Constraints.
Parallel Prototyping Leads to Better Design Results, More Divergence, and Increased Self-Efficacy.
Dweck, C. Mindset: The New Psychology of Success.
Toward a General Theory of Expertise: Prospects and Limits.
Fauconnier, G. and Turner, M. The Way We Think: Conceptual Blending and the Mind's Hidden Complexities.
Felps, W., Mitchell, T., and Byington, E. How, When, and Why Bad Apples Spoil the Barrel: Negative Group Members and Dysfunctional Groups.
Creative Cognition: Theory, Research, and Applications.
Gaver, W.W., Beaver, J., and Benford, S. Ambiguity as a resource for design.
Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems, ACM , 233-240.
Gerber, E. Prototyping Practice in Context: The Psychological Experience in a High Tech Firm.
Inheritance of attributes in natural concept conjunctions.
Design as exploration: creating interface alternatives through parallel authoring and runtime tuning.
Hyland, F. and Hyland, K. Sugaring the pill: Praise and criticism in written feedback.
When choice is demotivating: can one desire too much of a good thing?
Groupthink: Psychological Studies of Policy Decisions and Fiascoes.
Jansson, D. and Smith, S. Design Fixation.
Kohavi, R. and Longbotham, R. Online Experiments: Lessons Learned.
Kosara, R. Visualization Criticism - The Missing Link Between Information Visualization and Art.
Broaden the decision frame to make effective decisions.
In Handbook of Principles of Organizational Behavior.
Designing with interactive example galleries.
Leifer, L. Dancing with Ambiguity: design thinking in theory and practice.
How examples may  constrain creativity.
Design Rationale: Concepts, Techniques, and Use.
Confirmation Bias: A Ubiquitous Phenomenon in Many Guises.
Ranganath, R., Jurafsky, D., and McFarland, D. It's not you, it's me: detecting flirting and its misperception in speed-dates.
Proc of Conf on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, Association for Computational Linguistics , 334-342.
Constraining effects of examples in a creative generation task.
The Reflective Practitioner: How Professionals Think in Action.
Schrage, M. Serious Play: How the World's Best Companies Simulate to Innovate.
Harvard Business School Press, 1999.
The Paradox of Choice: Why More Is Less.
The Emergence of Abstract Representations in Dyad Problem Solving.
Stroebe, W. and Diehl, M. Why Groups are less Effective than their Members: On Productivity Losses in Idea-generating Groups.
Sutton, R. and Hargadon, A.
Brainstorming groups in context: effectiveness in a product design firm.
Taylor, D., Berry, P., and Block, C. Does Group Participation When Using Brainstorming Facilitate or Inhibit Creative Thinking?
Thomke, S. and Nimgade, A. IDEO Product Development.
Thompson, L., Gentner, D., and Loewenstein, J.
Avoiding Missed Opportunities in Managerial Life: Analogical Training More Powerful Than Individual Case Training.
Getting the right design and the design right.
Warr, A. and O'Neill, E. Understanding design as a social creative process.
Wisniewski, E. and Gentner, D. On the combinatorial semantics of noun pairs: Minor and major adjustments to meaning.
In Understanding word and sentence.
Zwicky, F. Discovery, Invention, Research Through the Morphological Approach.
Instructions: For each of the statements below, indicate  whether or not the statement is a rule of graphic design.
1 Mix serif and sans serif fonts in order to give variety to the ad.
2 To help balance the ad, leave slightly more space at the top relative to the bottom of the ad.
3 Create a visual separation between the text and the background.
4 Angle the text in order to contrast different parts of the ad.
5 Keep all elements in the ad aligned to one side.
6 Create multiple visual focal points in order to attract attention to the ad as a whole.
7 Use borders or white around text and images to help frame the content.
8 You may use repetition to create a consistent and balanced look.
9 You may break alignment to draw the viewer's attention to important elements in the ad.
10 Draw the viewer's attention to important elements by contrasting scale.
The client wants an ad that fits their overall aesthetic and theme .
Ad professionals will rate your ads.
FaceAIDS is a nonprofit organization dedicated to mobilizing and inspiring students to fight AIDS in Africa.
FaceAIDS aims to build a broad-based movement of students seeking to increase global health equality.
The organization raises awareness and funds, with the goal of increasing global health equality starting with the AIDS epidemic in Africa.
FaceAIDS would like an advertisement that embodies the theme and general aesthetic of the organization.
In particular, they are looking to encourage high school and college students interested in getting involved in service or social justice work to start FaceAIDS chapters on their campuses, as a leadership development opportunity and a way to join a vibrant, impactful community of like-minded, driven peers.
In general they are looking for an ad that is tasteful, creative, professional, visually appealing, and conveys a clear message about the organization.
You may not use another company's logo, copyrighted images, profanity, obscenity or nudity.
Unacceptable ads will be rejected by the research team.
Do not include the magazine's URL on the ad.
Clicking the ad will direct the user to the site.
