Collaborators who are separated by geographical distance tell tales of sending faxes back and forth while talking on the phone in order to have timely interaction over graphical Shared window systems that enable information.
Then we describe what VideoWhiteboard is and report on early observations of Finally, we discuss some issues people using it.
Users draw on the video display screen  and those marks and accompanying hand gestures are imaged by the camera and displayed on the other screen.
This arrangement creates a composite shared drawing surface where the collaborators can see each other's marks and the hand made in relation to those marks.
Although this idealization implies a linear sequence of steps, the actual process involved alternating between looking at various kinds of collaborative work  and modifying the designs of VideoDraw and VideoWhiteboard.
Each site is equipped with a wall-mounted rear projection screen , a video camera, a video projector, and appropriate audio equipment.
Users draw on the smooth front surface of the screen using standard dry erase whiteboard markers.
As each user draws on the screen, those marks are imaged by the camera and projected Along with an onto the screen at the other site.
The collaborators see a composite image of real and "video" marks, as well as shadows of their remote collaborators' gestures and actions.
An audio connection also enables the collaborators to talk with each other.
Users can write, draw, erase, and gesture at the VideoWhiteboard screens much as if they were working together at a shared whiteboard.
Figure 6 shows a user interacting with a remote collaborator through a VideoWhiteboard.
Thus, users can add marks and gestures directly over the marks made by their remote collaborators.
In the drawing applications of VIDEOPLACE, the input focus  and the output focus  are separated, adding a level of indirection marks and actions.
AND VIDEODRAW COMPARING VIDEOWHITEBOARD Like VideoDraw, VideoWhiteboard allows each user to share a drawing space and naturally draw, gesture, and interact in that drawing space.
Each user has a common view of the drawing space and can make meaningful diectic references  to objects or locations in the drawing space.
Users can directly augment and interact over sketches created by a collaborator at the remote site.
They can gesture over sketches and the remote collaborators the referent can see those sketch.
Users at each site share a correct orientation to the and "left" have appropriate display surface-- "right" meanings to the collaborators at both sites.
Since the camera is on the opposite side of the screen from the user, it actually captures an image that is leftright reversed.
Although we have not completed an extensive analysis, our initial observations have raised some interesting issues.
Like using a whiteboard, VideoWhiteboard allows several people to be working on the drawing collaborators to work screen without screen in at the same time.
Unlike VideoDraw, VideoWhiteboard has a large screen surface, which offers the users more drawing area.
The large screen also allows more than one user site.
A common initial reaction to using VideoWhiteboard is that it feels like the remote collaborator is located on the other side of the screen, instead of in a remote shadow screen location.
VideoWhiteboard conveys gestures of the upper body, while VideoDraw shows mostly hand gestures.
In VideoWhiteboard, the camera and the users are positioned on opposite sides of the screen, obviating VideoDraw where the user's camera's parallax having view problem to view of the drawing also less of a problem one problem with head may block the surface.
In one observed incident, a user did not hear her remote collaborator clearly and cocked her ear toward the projection screen while asking him to repeat what he said, as shown in Figure 8.
Videowas set up connecting two rooms in Whiteboard different sections of the building.
A half-duplex audio connection was provided by speakerphones.
Even if the users are not operating under evoke through that impression, VideoWhiteboard appropriate mechanisms for it.
This arrangement greatly reduces the division of attention that occurs in other collaborative drawing situations where participants must choose between looking at their collaborator or looking at the drawing surface.
In face-to-face interaction around a whiteboard, fellow collaborators are either beside or behind a participant who is facing the whiteboard making a drawing.
When using the VideoDraw prototype, down other collaborators alternated between looking at the drawing collaborators.
Some users reported that they felt uncomfortable because they could not easily tell who they were interacting with in those situations.
This problem might be eased by using about stereo which audio to help provide some location voice belongs to which shadow.
Although VideoWhiteboard does not present the same sense of 3-D that the full color image in VideoDraw does, the ambient lighting around the screen can provide differences in shade in the projected shadow depending on how close the object is to the screen.
The fundamental asymmetry between what a user actually does and what the remote collaborator can see through the projected shadow can cause some interfactional difficulties.
Hand gestures that refer to precise locations  or subtle gestures that are performed screen  can be difficult to perceive.
Existing video teleconferencing rooms that have rear projection video capability could be readily modified to provide a VideoWhiteboard configuration.
Despite its large screen area, VideoWhiteboard is limited by the resolution of the particular video technology used .
We plan to continue in order and how to to studying the use of VideoWhiteboard learn more about collaborative activity build shared drawing tools.
The optical alignment of the superimposed images is only optimal in the center of the screen and gets progressively worse toward the edges of the screen.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS We would like to thank the working group of colleagues who have been involved in the group analysis of videotapes of work activity and Sara Bly, Charles particular prototypes.
Kathy Goodwin, and Marjorie Goodwin for their interest in studying the shared drawing We also thank our colleagues  who volunteered purposes.
VideoWhiteboard conveys gestures example, through shadows while VideoDraw conveys full color video images of gestures.
Comparing the two provides an opportunity to understand what interactions require the higher bandwidth full color gestures of VideoDra w and what adequately supported by the gesture shadows of VideoWhiteboard.
