We began to explore this problem based on experiences with our prototype desktop video Conferencing system.
In a study of how people used the prototype D2utg & Isaacs, 19931, we found that there were more unsuccessful attempts to conference than those that resulted in an actual conference.
Many of these attempts were unsuccessful because the recipient was not in the office to respond to the conference request.
This statistic suggested that it was not only important vide a means for remote collaborators and negotiation other, but also to support the pre-interaction that allows collaborators times to contact each other.
THE CHALLENGE OF DISTRIBUTED GROUPS Working together in groups whose members rue separated in location and time is typically more difficult than working together in a physically proximate group.
Research  and common experience indicate that proximity tering and maintaining working plays a major role in fosrelationships.
Requesting a glance to a colleague started a 3-second, reciprocal, audio-video comection, from which the participants could decide to have a desktop video conference.
It also included "autocruising" where random glances were occasionally made among the users to simulate serendipitous encounters.
Cruiser offered a "do not disturb" mode that effectively prevented glancing in.
Early in the design process, we realized that we would need a familiar and consistent model of how users interact with Montage.
After considering the telephone model, the overview model, and the hallway model, we decided that the hallway model would give Montage users lightweight their privacy.
They confirmed that people would like to have more effective ways of contacting people, especially those who are physically remote and are in different time zones.
They wanted help in finding people who were not in their office or the ability to "leave a note" to have them call back.
Users expressed strong concerns about how recorded video views of them might compromise vacy and subject them to unwanted monitoring.
They remarked that it felt somewhat heavyweight to start a desktop video conference.
Those who worked in an environment with widespread use of existing tools to help contact and coordinate with others , wanted them integrated together with any tool that would help incmme shared awareness.
Portholes does not require any explicit action to allow one's image to be seen by others.
Thus, users may not be aware of who is watching their video image at any given time.
While this is appropriate for certain work groups  under certain contexts , when we described Portholes to people during our inter-
Guided by what we learned from these interviews and our previous experiences with desktop video conferencing, we set out to design a tool that would provide a sense of teleproximity distributed audito~ among distributed group members group members.
Once you can see the occupant, you are in a position to be seen by her, although she may not have the doorway in her field of view at the time.
Since there is no physical for preventing it, one could stand outside your door and watch and listen to what you do.
Of course, this rarely happens since you could see that someone was eavesdropping and use social mechanisms to deter such behavior.
Although the hallway model does not protect privacy as strictly as the telephone model, it does provide the visual and auditory cues that enable you to detect any unwanted monitoring.
By using the hallway model, we hoped Montage would provide enough cues to enable the users to protect their privacy.
Scenarios of use The following scenarios of use describe the design and features of Montage.
Let's say John wants to contact Monica to ask about a paper they have been writing together.
John moves his mouse to the icon-sized Montage application on his computer screen and selects Monica from a menu, as shown in Figure 1.
Within seconds, a reciprocal, video-only connection between John and Monica is established.
A small video image  of Monica fades in on John's screen along with some glance controls, as shown in Figure 2.
An even smaller appears within preview video of himself on John's screen.
From the video image, John can tell if Monica is in the office or busy with a phone call or office guest.
Either person can open an audio connection by pressing the audio button.
Upon opening an audio connection, connections.
In a Montage visit, users can PIWS a button that starts and connects a shared bitmap drawing tool, called ShowMe WhiteboardTM.
Our past experience indicates that users may not always use a shared drawing tool during a desktop video conference, but sometimes need quick access to it during a conference.
If a shared drawing tool is always started with a visit, users might object to the large screen space that it occupies.
If John glances at Monica and iinds she is not in her office, he has quick access to three other communication tools through the bottom row of buttons on the glance window, .
He can browse her on-line calendar to see where she is currently scheduled to be or when she might be available which in her office again.
Stickup notes also have an embedded "Glance Back" button that allows Monica to quickly glance back at John once she sees the note.
John can also send her an e-mail message and let her respond to it when she has time.
Sending e-mail effectively transfers an attempt to communicate interactively to an asynchronous communication.
For example, if the person was talking with a guest and not looking at the computer screen, an incoming glance with audio enabled might compromise the privacy of that conver-
E-mail message, on-line calendar browser,
It uses the Digital Integrated Multimedia Environment  prototype Sbus board, which does real-time video encoding and compression for the Sun SPARCstationTM.
We are using the CellB video compression algorithm, which reduces a 128 x 120 pixel video image at 5 frames per second to approxi-
It comthrough the enables applicaappliused ToolTalk applications user.
Montage relies on this service to keep itself in sync  and as a means for sending and receiving requests to other applications .
Montage is also instrumented to log all user interactions with it in order to help us study how people use it.
We are currently in the process of conducting among a real working has already an extensive group.
Howsome some This usage data should be viewed as preliminary needs to be investigated ways, our group through further study.
There are two technical factors that are essential to Montage's effectiveness.
The first one is quick initiation of glances .
The reported data still include a nominal amount of demonstration and testing activity that could not be sifted out.
From the logs of six group members over nine weeks, 653 glances were logged.
On the computer desktop, it would be very disruptive events would to have windows Therefore, or video images suddenly popping up, especially since these not be under the user's control.
Our objective was to use these effects to help glances feel as unremarkable as people walking by an open office door.
An application like Montage underscores the need to keep networked multimedia interactive applications in sync.
This statistic emphasizes that the value of Montage is not only to make it easier to contact people but also to support the pre-interaction coordination that leads up to actually maling contact with them.
It also ~inforces the importance of keeping glances quick and lightweight, as well as integrating them with other tools to coordinate contact.
Of the 420 unacknowledged glances, the glancer used calen-
The lack of e-mail use among our work group is not surprising since we are all located in one building and have many other opportunities to contact each other.
We expect to learn more about the value of the integrated communication applications in our use study of Montage.
It is important to note that the logged usage of Montage occurred several months after it was first introduced to the group.
Thus, the data does not show a strong novelty throughout effect, where usage drops off over sustained amount of use time, but instead shows a relatively the nine weeks.
We are observing the group's work activity for over three months, including before and after we install Montage.
In addition to the usage logs that Montage automatically generates, we are tracking the usage of voice-mail, e-mail, and scheduled face-to-face meetings across the conditions.
The current include Although design of Montage presents opportunities Montage currently at a time.
We are also considering allowing users to customize their access modes by setting different accesspermissions to different individuals or sets of people.
Users may want to allow certain groups of people to glance directly in while others may require accepting a glance request before a glance can start.
On the one hand, such accesspolicies may be adequately addressed socially without the need for technology mechanisms.
Montage opens the design space for a use of video on the desktop that goes beyond conventional videophone or desktop video conferencing.
It exploits the visual cues that video uniquely transmits to help users find opportune times to contact each other.
In addition to the growing evidence of the value of video over audio-only interactions , Montage explores a use of video to support the pre-interaction negotiation that leads up to having or not having an interaction.
Since much of the negotiation about whether to have an interaction occurs through visual cues, video is a natural channel for enabling users to accomplish this negotiation.
By using video to enable users to fmd opportunities for interaction, Montage could clearly demonstrate the value of video in supporting collaboration in a way that is differentiated from conventional desktop video conferencing uses of video.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS We want to acknowledge the contributions of the rest of the Collaborative Computing  group within SunSoft, especially Alan Ruberg for updating the AMP architecture to Solaris 2 and programming all of the digital video effects and Andrew Hao for implementing the Stickup notes application that is included in Montage.
The DIME board and original AMP architecture were developed in Sun Microsystems Laboratories, Jnc.
We thank Darrell Sano for many of the graphic images used in Montage and Vincent Lau of the SunSolutions group for helping us interface Montage to the ShowMe Whiteboard product.
We also thank the 20 people who allowed us to interview them.
Sun, SPARCstation, Solaris, ShowMe Whiteboard, and ToolTalk are trademarks or registered trademarks of Sun Microsystems, J.nc.
Fish, Robert S., Robert E. Kraut, Robert W. Root, and Ronald E, Rice, "Evaluating Video as a Technology for Informal Communication", Proceedings of the Conference on Computer Human Interaction  '92, Monterey, CA, May 1992, pp.
Gaver, William, Thomas Moran, Allan MacLean, Lennart Ldvstrand, Paul Dourish, Kathleen Carter, and William Buxton, "Realizing a Video Environment EuroPARC's RAVE System", Proceedings of the Conference on Computer Human Interaction  '92, Monterey, CA May 1992. pp.
Isaacs, Ellen, A. and John C. Tang, "What Video Can and Can't Do for Collaboration: A Case Study", Proceedings ACM Mr.dtimedia '93, August 1993.
Louie, Gifford, Marliyn Mantei, and Abigail Sellen, "Making contact in a multi-media environment", Behavior and Information Technology, .
Pearl, Amy, System Support for Integrated Deskop Video Conferencing, Sun Microsystems Laboratories, Jnc.
Root, Robert W., "Design of a Multi-Media Vehicle for Social Browsing", Proceedings of the Conference on Computer-Supported Cooperative Work, Portland, OR, September 1988, pp.
Tang, John C. and Ellen A. Isaacs, "Why Do Users Like Video?
Studies of Multimedia-Supported Collaboration", Computer Supported Cooperative Work: An International Journal, Vol.
Whittaker, Steve, David Frohlich, and Owen Daly-Jones, "hformal workplace communications: What is it like and how might we support it?
