We developed a low-effort interaction method called Click2Tag for social bookmarking.
Information foraging theory predicts that the production of tags will increase as the effort required to do so is lowered, while the amount of time invested decreases.
However, models of human memory suggest that changes in the tagging process may affect subsequent human memory for the tagged material.
We compared  low-effort tagging by mouse-clicking ,  traditional tagging by typing , and  baseline, no tagging conditions.
Our results suggest that  Click2Tag increases tagging rates,  Click2Tag improves recognition of facts from the tagged text when compared to type-to-tag, and  Click2Tag is comparable to the no-tagging baseline condition on recall measures.
Results suggest that tagging by clicking strengthens the memory traces by repeated readings of relevant words in the text and, thus, improves recognition.
Social tagging systems are examples of what Benkler  has defined as commons-based peer production systems, in which knowledge products  are produced by decentralized, largely independent aggregates of users.
The utility of such systems typically depends on having large user bases, and those participation rates are partly driven by having low cost-of-effort interaction and communication.
A recent large-scale analysis and model of contributions to Wikipedia and similar systems  demonstrated the positive relation between lower interaction effort and increased participation.
Consequently, in the development of our own social tagging system, SparTag.us , we have been motivated to develop techniques that lower the costs of producing tags and other annotations.
Lowering the cost of tagging effort should also have an impact on individual tag production.
An extension of information foraging theory , discussed below, predicts that lowering the effort of producing tags should also increase individual tag production rates while decreasing the time devoted to tag production.
However, there may be cognitive costs.
Theories of memory  suggest that changes in the kind and amount of tagging effort may affect how well people remember the original content or tags.
We want to avoid tagging techniques that provide low interaction costs, but make it harder for people to remember the content that they have tagged.
In this paper, we unravel how different techniques for producing tags to Web content affect individual tag production and individual memory.
In particular, we performed an experimental contrast of a lower interaction cost technique , developed for our system SparTag.us, against a standard  type-to-tag technique, similar to ones used in popular tagging systems such as del.icio.us.
Click2Tag allows users to simply mouse-click words in a text to have the words become tags for the content.
Type-to-tag allows users to type their own tags for the content.
Both of these tagging techniques were contrasted with a baseline condition of no tagging.
We examined the effect of these techniques on both recognition and recall tests for the original material.
In recent years, there has been an explosion of social bookmarking systems .
These systems allow users to generate labels or keywords  to content encountered on the Web.
These tags can later be used by the same user, or by others, to retrieve tagged information.
The social aspects of these systems emerge from implicit or explicit sharing of tags among users.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
When tags are entered, they are inserted at the end of the paragraph and displayed within the same rendered web page.
This design was inspired by annotation studies  and by in-document collaboration systems , in which the content, and not some external form, is used as the setting for information sharing.
Thus, Click2Tag combines synergistically with in situ tagging, ensuring that the focus of attention remains on the content at hand.
It is important to note that SparTag.us users are not constrained to use only the Click2Tag technique.
Figure 2 shows that SparTag.us users actually also have the option of typing in any words they like, using the more standard typeto-tag technique.
The design of SparTag.us was motivated by the objective of providing low-effort tagging and highlighting capabilities to users as they browse and read Web content.
SparTag.us consists of two parts: A client-side browser extension plus a server.
Tagging and highlighting functionality is made available in the same window displaying a Web page.
Every paragraph is taggable , and text can be highlighted in yellow by click-and-drag.
A searchable notebook collects together all tagged and highlighted material.
Tags and highlights may be shared by setting various sharing permissions.
Many, if not most standard systems, use a type-to-tag technique in which users can generate any string as a tag and enter it into a tag list.
The systems analyzed by Hong et al.
SparTag.us was designed to reduce these two types of costs by integrating tagging into the flow of reading.
Specifically, the Click2Tag technique makes two types of sub-page objects live and clickable: paragraphs of the web page and words of the paragraphs.
According to Hong et al.
When people tag a web page in del.icio.us, there is about 50% chance that the tag word appeared in the content of the page.
Making each word of the paragraphs clickable allows users to simply click on a word to add it to the tag list without typing, thus lowering the interaction costs of tag typing.
This input method can be especially useful in cases where keyboard input is not the primary input means .
Click2Tag mitigates the attention-switching costs by enabling in situ tagging.
Social information foraging theories , as well as microeconomic theories of networked, commons-based peer production information economies  predict that as the costs of production of shareable knowledge  are driven down, more individuals will participate and reap greater net benefits.
Thus, reductions in the cost of tagging will improve the value of the system to the individual user.
Collections of people using social tagging systems such as del.icio.us, Connotea, and Clipmarks engage in information foraging and sensemaking activities.
As discussed in Pirolli , the net benefits gained by users participating in a social information foraging community must be greater than solitary information foraging.
Benkler  makes a similar point from the perspective of microeconomics.
Social tagging systems are instances of networked information economies, involving the production, distribution, and consumption of information by decentralized individual actions over distributed networks.
One crucial set of preconditions for the emergence of such economies is that the costs of knowledge production to the individual user must be very low.
Reductions in the effort involved in tagging should increase the number of participants in a social tagging system.
The assumption that social tagging systems are instances of such networked information economies has been one of the prime motivators for reducing the cost-of-effort of interaction with SparTag.us.
However, there are theoretical reasons to expect changes at the level of the individual user, and those changes are the focus of the study presented in this paper.
Consistent with the information patch model, the current model assumes that tag production on a particular article produces diminishing returns as a function of time.
In other words, on average, as time progresses, the user generates tags at an ever-diminishing rate.
The cumulative production of tags on an average article may be characterized by a gain function, g.
The overall average rate of gain from tag production is  where G is the sum of all the gains from all tagging, TB is the total between-patch time  and TW is the total within-patch time .
Under some strong but relatively general assumptions  the optimal time allocation to spend on tagging is tW*: R = g'  where g' is the marginal rate of  tag production.
Equation 2 captures the rule: Continue tag production until the marginal rate of gain for continued tagging drops below the overall rate of gain R. Figure 3 presents a graphical representation of this model familiar in optimal foraging theory .
Between-patch time is plotted horizontally from the origin to the left and within-patch time is plotted form the origin to the right.
The curve g1 represents a hypothetical diminishing returns function for tag production.
A line plotted from the intercept tB to a point tangent to g1 will have a slope equal to the overall average rate of gain from tag production R, and the point of tangency to g1 will be g1, thus giving us the optimal average time tW* to allocate to tagging.
The information patch foraging model from information foraging theory  can be used to make qualitative predictions about the effects of reducing the cost of producing tags.
The information patch model addresses the optimal allocation of time in information patches  versus between-patch activities .
Extending the model to tag production, we assume a simple characterization of the tag producer's task as involving a trade-off between reading + interaction time vs. tag production time.
In the case of the current tagging model, we assume that the user's tagging activity around an individual article constitutes a "patch" of productive activity of some value to the user.
Imagine an idealized user who navigates the Web and reads articles.
This idealized user iteratively navigates to a page, reads it, and moves onto the next.
Now assume that this idealized user is also engaged in tagging the articles that were read.
For each Web page, the user engages in a set of micro-tasks around the addition of tags .
So this idealized user's time can be divided into time devoted to  interaction  plus reading and  tag generation.
On each article, the user spends some amount of time, on average, engaged in tag generation activities, and this is called the average within-patch time, tW.
Charnov's Marginal Value Theorem states that the rate-maximizing time to spend in patch, t*, occurs when the slope of the within-patch gain function g is equal to the average rate of gain, which is the slope of the tangent line R. The average rate of gain, R, increases with improvements in the gain function, while simultaneously decreasing the optimal time to allocate to tag production.
Figure 3 also includes another gain function, g2 that represents the effects of lower time cost associated with producing tags.
Going through the same graphical solution of plotting a tangent line to g2, one can see that the optimal time allocation to tagging is reduced while increasing the overall rate of gain R and increasing the number of tags produced.
The information patch model predicts that lowering the time cost of tag production will increase the number of tags produced per document by individuals while decreasing the amount of time spent on tagging.
The strength of a memory trace captures the relationship of practice to memory performance.
It has been shown that repeated practice increases strength, and strength decays as a function of time since last practice .
Reaction times and accuracy on recognition tests both improve with strength .
Click2Tag appears to encourage users to re-attend to the original content and, thus, increase the strength of memory traces for that content.
Elaborateness of encoding of material  also generally improves aspects of memory.
Memory research  has shown that, when people are asked  with additional information that is highly semantically related to the content they are studying, they typically show superior recall when compared to content that has been processed less elaborately.
One explanation  suggests that the memory traces that elaborate the original content provide additional retrieval routes to recall the content.
This is because self-generated elaborations have some high likelihood of being re-generated at recall time as a retrieval route to the content.
Since type-to-tag requires users to generate tags to associate with the original content, we expect it to produce more elaborative encodings and to improve recall performance.
We recruited 27 participants who were each compensated with $20 in cash or Amazon gift certificates.
Most participants were employees of PARC  or students at a local university .
PARC employees were recruited through an internal mailing list; students and other participants were recruited by posting an ad to a university bulletin board and to craigslist.
The participants were not required to have previous experience with tagging, but they had to have experience with reading news or other information on a computer screen.
In the no-tags condition , we see participants fixating more on relevant words when they read text, although perhaps less so than in the Click2Tag condition.
Participants went through three study-recall blocks.
A study-recall block had two parts: in the first part, participants performed 6 study trials, and in the second part, participants performed 6 memory trials.
Participants were instructed to perform these trials as fast and accurately as possible.
The design of the study was within-subjects: all participants saw all conditions described below.
In each study trial, participants read a passage, selected randomly from the list of 18 passages.
The trial could belong to one of three conditions as follows: * No-tags: In this condition, no tagging was performed.
The tags were displayed in a box under the passage and could not be modified by the participants.
Subjects were not allowed to cut and paste in this condition.
After 6 study trials, the participants completed 6 memory trials.
A memory trial had two components, presented in the following order: * Recall: Participants were given two cues about one of the 6 passages they had previously studied .
Then they had to remember and type as many facts from that passage as possible.
There was a time limit of 1.5 minutes per passage for this phase.
They had 1 minute to answer all questions.
The order of presentation of questions was randomized, and the order of passages within a block was randomly generated for each participant, as was the assignment of a passage to a particular block or condition.
The passages in the memory trials were presented in a random order, unrelated to the order in which the passages were studied.
The only constraint was that there be 6 passages per block,
To keep them engaged in the experiment, at the end of each block, subjects were given feedback about their overall performance so far in the recognition tests.
We did not give feedback after individual recognition trials.
For each trial, we measured the study time, the number of tags, the number of facts recalled and the recall time, the recognition time per question and the recognition accuracy.
Figure 5 provides a summary of the main measures of interest discussed in this section.
The upper part of Figure 5 presents measures associated with the reading and tagging of articles when presented for study: the amount of time spent reading and tagging and the number of tags generated per article.
The middle part presents two recall measures: the mean number of facts recalled per article and a recall efficiency score that normalizes for study time.
The lower two groups of bars in Figure 5 present recognition measures for accuracy and time.
In the statistical analyses that follow, we performed ANOVAs with subjects as the random factor using Block  and Condition .
When there was a correlation with study time, we performed ANCOVAs with study time as a covariate.
Figure 5 shows the reading and tagging times for the three conditions.
These results pointed to a time cost associated with the tagging conditions, and also confirmed that Click2Tag was a lower-cost interaction technique than type-to-tag., and that participants allocated less time to tagging with Click2Tag.
People tended to attach more tags  in the Click2Tag condition than in the type-to-tag condition.
This corroborates the prediction that Click2Tag would foster greater production of tags.
In contrast to the traditional type-to-tag method, Click2Tag appears to reduce the amount of time invested in reading and tagging, yet appears to increase the number of tags produced.
Another measure that we looked at was the recall efficiency: How many facts did subjects recall per unit of study time  - see Figure 5.
Pairwise comparisons indicated higher efficiency for no-tags than for type-to-tag .
Contrasts also showed that the no-tags condition was better than the two tagging conditions combined =2.64, p<0.004, although there was no significant difference between Click2Tag and no-tags.
These results are encouraging for Click2Tag.
They show that, although for type-to-tag, the supplemental cost of tagging affects the recall, by using a low-cost technique the effects on recall become comparable to the no-tags condition.
Figure 5 shows the average number of facts recalled per condition.
Our statistical tests on the recall data were diminished in power by the loss of 41% of the recall data due to computer failure 1.
The number of recalled facts was marginally correlated with the study time , so we performed an ANCOVA with study time as a covariate.
We obtained a significant effect of block =4.91, p=0.01, indicating improved learning over the course of the experiment, but no other effects or interactions were significant.
We did not find any advantage of the tagging conditions  for recall, although there is a non-significant trend in the data for the tagging conditions to surpass the no-tags condition over time.
Figure 5 shows the average recognition accuracies in the three conditions, and Figure 6 splits these data by block and condition.
The correlation between the study time and the accuracy at recognition is low  and not significant, and therefore we only report the ANOVA.
This loss of power only affects the recall data.
Note that initially we ran the study with 20 participants and that study resulted in the loss of 202 recall trials out of 360 trials.
We then ran extra 7 participants to supplement for the data loss .
We did not find any other effects or interactions in the study after running 7 extra participants - although in the initial study  there was a marginally significant interaction between block and condition, this interaction disappeared after running 7 more participants.
This was significantly lower than the 84% accuracy in the no-tags condition  and the 82% accuracy in the Click2Tag condition .
The difference between Click2Tag and no-tags was not significant.
These results show that Click2Tag did not impair memory, in spite of reducing the tagging costs.
People recognized facts equally well in the no-tags and Click2Tag condition.
However, they were slightly less accurate when they typed.
This supports our hypothesis that Click2Tag strengthens facts in memory, and thus has better effects on recognition than type-to-tag.
As in the case of recall, the no-tags condition was better in the beginning than the tagging conditions, suggesting some learning of the experimental setup.
For recall, there was no difference among conditions in the number of facts recalled.
This was contrary to our initial hypothesis that type-to-tag encourages elaboration and therefore may promote superior recall.
There was lower recall efficiency in the type-to-tag condition than the baseline no-tags condition, but no difference between the baseline and Click2Tag.
Our results confirm the intuition that Click2Tag decreases the cost in tagging time, and show that it succeeds to avoid cognitive costs to subsequent memory.
Indeed, the study time in the Click2Tag condition is lower than in the type-totag condition, and the memory measures show comparable or better performance than in the other conditions.
Since Click2Tag was faster than the other conditions and also more accurate than type-to-tag and as accurate as notags, there was no time-accuracy trade-off involved.
The lower time of Click2Tag validates our assumption that Click2Tag is a low cost interaction that also has beneficial effects on recognition memory, compared with the more traditional type-to-tag technique.
Our results indicate that participants took longer to read the passages in our experiment when they also had to tag them  compared to the no-tags condition.
Moreover, people were faster to encode text in the Click2Tag condition than in the type-to-tag condition, and they also attached more tags, suggesting that, as initially hypothesized, Click2Tag is indeed a more efficient tagging technique in terms of interaction cost.
With respect to our question of how tagging affects memory, our results suggest that Click2Tag increases the strength of memory for original text content relative to type-to-tag interaction and even the no-tags baseline.
This is indicated primarily by the superior recognition times for Click2Tag.
The tagging times were constrained to be the estimates yielded by our fit of the memory model discussed in detail in the next section: tinteraction  = 15 s, for Click2Tag, and tinteraction  = 37 s, for type-to-tag.
The amount of time allocated to non-tagging time  is basically 96 s  - 15 s = 81 s between-patch time for Click2Tag and 103 s  - 37 s = 66 s between-patch time for type-to-tag.
Using these times and the mean number of tags produced, we solved for Equation 3 algebraically to get  
The estimated gain functions for the two tagging conditions are presented in Figure 8.
In Figure 8, we have drawn lines from the origin to the points on the curves corresponding to the observed times.
One can see that the lines are not perfectly tangent, as predicted , but reasonably close.
One can map memory strength onto probability of retrieval following Anderson and Lebiere .
For  we use the pre-set value of 0.5, which was validated by many memory models , so we do not consider it a free parameter in the model.
To recall a fact from memory, we assume that one could either directly retrieve it, or, if it could not be retrieved, one would attempt to infer it making a plausibility judgment based on an elaboration performed at encoding.
We also assume that retrieval in free recall suffers compared to recognition because participants do not have external cues  and must rely on self-generated retrieval cues.
Thus, the probability of recalling a fact from memory is:  We assume that the effect of elaboration increases with diminishing returns as a function of time spent elaborating :  where d is a parameter.
Thus, we assume that in the type-to-tag condition the time Tread is smaller than in the other two conditions, both because of the increased interaction time and because subjects also elaborate the content in order to find appropriate tags.
If that is the case, we can expect that the strength of the memory traces for the facts in the passage be smaller than in the other conditions, and thus the probability of retrieving those facts may be smaller than in the no-tags or Click2Tag conditions.
However, because of elaborations, in the type-to-tag condition there is actually another way to access those facts  - and that is the second term in Equation 8.
Thus, the overall probability of recall may be the same for this condition as for the other two conditions, due to the compensating effect of elaboration.
Unlike free recall, for recognition elaborations do not play a big role .
Therefore, the probability of recognizing a fact correctly is simply the probability of retrieving it from memory, as given by Equation 7.
Consequently, we get that the recognition accuracy in the type-to-tag condition is lower, simply because the reading time Tread is lower than in the other conditions, and thus the strength and the probability of recognition are lower.
Two questions still remain:  why we do not see any memory advantage for the tagging conditions in general, and  why the type-to-tag condition in particular does not perform better at recall.
A possible explanation is that of a trade-off between interaction and elaboration time  vs reviewing time ,.
To explore in more detail this hypothesis, we built a simple model.
Let us assume that the encoding time is given by the equation: Tstudy = Tread + Tinteraction + Telaboration 
Thus, in the study phase, participants spent some time  reading and encoding the material, then they attach the tags , and finally they may elaborate on the text they just read .
We assume that the elaboration time is zero for no-tags and Click2Tag, and that the interaction time is zero for no-tags.
We also assume that people spend the same amount of time Tread encoding the material in the notags and Click2Tag conditions .
Note that the interaction time contains not only the time to actually type or mouse click the tags , but also the time needed to think about what would make a good tag.
We assume that the strength of the memory trace is proportional to the time spent reading :  with b as a parameter.
The retrieval of a memory trace depends on its level of activation, A, which is its base strength  plus activation spread to it via associations to cues in the environment .
Table 1 shows the values with which we have instantiated these parameters.
To determine the components of the study time in Equation 4 corresponding to the three conditions, we used the study times that we observed in our experiment, assuming that the encoding time Tread was 81s  for both the no-tags condition and the Click2Tag condition.
For the type-to-tag condition, Tread was estimated to be 50s.
The interaction time in the Click2Tag condition was obtained from the observed study time values: Tinteraction = 96s -81s=15s.
The elaboration time in the type-to-tag condition was assumed to be Telaboration = 37s.
With these parameters, the above model predicts a set of recognition and recall probabilities that are presented in Tables 2 and 3, along with the observed data.
We started this paper by noting theoretical arguments about several possible impacts of lowering the time cost of effort in social tagging systems.
One important set of arguments, that remains to be explored more thoroughly, is that lowering the time cost of producing tags will cause more people to participate in a social tagging community.
This was one of the main motivations for the development of the Click2Tag technique.
A more subtle prediction concerned the impact of reduced time costs on tag production at the individual level.
Here we demonstrated that participants produced more tags with Click2Tag than the more timeconsuming type-to-tag technique, and they spent less time doing so.
Theories of memory, however, suggested that there may be both positive and negative consequences to lowering the cost of effort of tagging.
We showed that Click2Tag does not impair memory performance and, in fact, appears to strengthen memory for the tagged content.
Compared to type-to-tag, the lower-cost Click2Tag is beneficial to recognition memory, due to strengthening of relevant words in text.
In contrast, although typing tags may encourage text elaborations, the cost of typing is too high and impacts the recall efficiency, as well as the performance in recognizing seen content.
However, there may be other benefits of type-to-tag that remain to be explored.
Type-to-tag is a top-down procedure, and it induces users to fit the content into their own "ontology" and retain only those facts matching their view of the world.
On the other hand, Click2Tag is more bottom-up, content-driven.
People tag with relevant words in the passage, paying less attention to their own ontology.
One question that remains to be explored is whether the two techniques will lead to different tag "folksonomies".
Another related question refers to the impact of the tagging technique on information retrieval as opposed to memory retrieval.
That is, when users need to browse or execute a search to satisfy an information need, which technique will have led to better information seeking performance .
Although the full implications of tagging by typing still remain to be explored, we have shown that a lower-cost interaction technique  has beneficial effects on human information processing when compared to a higher cost technique , possibly because it allows the users to tag without trading-off content reading time.
The main point of this model-fitting exercise is to provide some quantitative detail to the qualitative predictions given at the beginning of this paper.
No attempt has been made to improve goodness-of-fit statistics or reduce the degrees of freedom by reducing the number of estimated parameters.
The information patch model appears to provide a good approximation to the observed increase in tag production and reduction in tagging time effected by reducing the costof-effort of tag production.
The memory model appears to provide a good approximation to the effects on recall and recognition that occur with the two tagging techniques because of how they redistribute user attention among reading, tag interaction, and cognitive elaboration.
Furthermore, the time allocation estimates have been constrained to be the same across the two models.
Our results are somewhat similar in spirit to note-taking research.
One study  compared note-taking using typing versus pasting and found that pasting led to better learning than typing.
However, Bauer and Koedinger  found that note-taking using pasting combined with typing made participants record more ideas, but also forget more.
Other research  has shown that verbatim notes  led to poorer learning than paraphrased or summarized notes.
Our research suggests that it is worth further exploration of the impact of lowering the costs of the social production of knowledge, not only in tagging systems, but also in other social knowledge production systems.
There is a general need to develop theories and models that move beyond predicting that a system is more usable or efficient to encompass predictions about how usability and efficiency affects the social production of knowledge.
Bobrow, D. and Bower, G. Comprehension and recall of sentences.
Bradshaw, G. and Anderson, J.R. Elaborative encoding as an explanation of levels of processing.
Bretzing, B. and Kulhavy, R. Note-taking and depth of processing.
Charnov, E.L. Optimal foraging: The marginal value theorem.
Churchill, E.F., Trevor, J., Bly, S., Nelson, L., and Cubranic, D. Anchored conversations: Chatting in the context of a document.
Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems, ACM, The Hague, The Netherlands, 2000, 454-461.
Hong, L., Chi, E.H., Budiu, R., Pirolli, P. and Nelson, L.. SparTag.us: A low cost tagging system for foraging of web content.
Proceedings of the working conference on Advanced visual interfaces, ACM, Napoli, Italy, 2008, 65-72.
Marshall, C. Annotation: From paper books to the digital library.
A comparison of reading paper and on-line documents.
Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems, ACM, Atlanta, Georgia, United States, 1997, 335-342.
Pirolli, P. Information foraging: A theory of adaptive interaction with information.
Oxford University Press, New York, 2007.
Pirolli, P. and Recker, M. Learning strategies and transfer in the domain of programming.
The role of practice in fact retrieval.
Stephens, D.W. and Krebs, J.R. Foraging theory.
Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 1986.
Strong regularities in online peer production.
Anderson, J.R. Learning and memory: An integrated approach.
Anderson, J.R. and Lebiere, C. The atomic components of thought.
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Mahwah, NJ, 1998.
An elaborative processing explanation of depth of processing.
Levels of processing in human memory, Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ, 1979.
Bauer, A. and Koedinger, K. Pasting and encoding: Note-taking in online courses.
Bauer, A. and Koedinger, K.R.
Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems, ACM, San Jose, California, USA, 2007, 981-990.
The wealth of networks: How social production transforms markets and freedom.
