Being able to use technology in the bedroom, outside at recess, or at a friend's house is very important to children .
The mobility of these devices also opens up the potential for inter-group collaboration.
Children can walk around, maintaining the flexibility of interacting with many other children, rather than limiting their collaboration to those on the computer beside them.
The economic benefit for the use of handheld computers in schools is significant.
As handheld computers continue to drop in price, they have become more accessible than desktop systems, making them ideal candidates for increasing access to technology.
Utilizing handheld computers in activities that are better suited to their small, portable, and individual nature, may even lead to better utilization of desktop computers in schools.
This paper describes an exploration of the collaborative potential of small, mobile computing devices for children's use in educational environments.
A user-centered, iterative design and implementation process was undertaken to develop Geney, a test-bed activity to help children to explore genetic concepts using Palm handheld devices.
The goal of this project was to investigate ways to utilize handheld computers for collaborative learning activities and to gain insights into the design of children's applications for handheld computers.
This paper describes a project to explore issues surrounding the development of a collaborative handheld educational application for children.
A user-centered, iterative design process was used to develop GeneyTM, a collaborative problem solving application to help children explore genetic concepts using PalmTM handheld computers.
The design methodology utilized mock-ups of representative tasks and scenarios, pre-design meetings with target users, prototype development, and feedback sessions with target users.
The results of this work identify an effective way of utilizing handheld computers for collaborative learning and provide important insights into the design of handheld applications for children.
This work also illustrates the necessity of user-centered design when new user groups are targeted, especially when novel user interface paradigms are employed that go beyond current windows-based interfaces.
As computers become increasingly prevalent, new ways of interacting with technology are becoming possible.
Wireless, mobile computing devices are becoming more available to a variety of users, especially children.
CybikoTM  produces a "kid friendly" handheld device with short-range wireless capabilities targeted at young children.
NintendoTM manufactures GameboyTM , a portable video game player that is popular with many children.
These and other devices represent a new paradigm of handheld computing devices targeted specifically at children.
Handheld computers provide an exciting new interaction paradigm, especially for children.
The mobile nature of these devices will allow children to utilize technology in many aspects of their lives.
As we inevitably move to smaller, more portable computing devices, one of the dangers is that our interactions with technology will become more individual.
For children in school environments, losing the rich, interpersonal communication between friends is problematic for technology-based interactions.
A common sight in many schools and classrooms is a group of students clustered around a desktop computer, playing together.
Children enjoy playing and working together and often are more successful as a result of this collaboration .
The form factor of handheld computers makes this style of collaboration almost impossible due to their small screens and limited input facilities.
The motivation for our work is to better understand how handheld computers can be used to enhance children's individualistic and collaborative interactions and to enrich their overall experience.
The potential of portable computing devices in schools has been investigated in recent years from the perspective of laptop computers.
Many schools have instituted "laptop" programs where each student has been given access to a personal laptop computer for use in school and/or at home .
However, in most of these programs, the laptops are primarily used to provide computer access to all students and are essentially used in the same manner as desktop computers.
The use of small, portable handheld computers in schools is a relatively new concept.
Very little research has been reported on children's use of handheld computers or on their use in educational environments.
In 1998, a group of researchers brainstormed the potential of low-cost, portable, networked educational appliances from the perspective of new classroom tools to engage students in active, constructive, reflective learning .
Other research has investigated potential designs and uses of handheld technology for children's learning environments .
Currently, the main reported use of handheld computers in schools has been as a data collection tool for field laboratory experiments .
We believe it is important to gain an understanding of how collaborative processes can be structured using handheld computers.
Driver notes that "the learning of science as knowledge construction involv both individual and social processes" .
Colella, Borovoy and Resnick's work on participatory simulations explores the social processes of using small computational objects in a collaborative learning activity .
Handheld computers have the potential to impact both the individual and social processes and we need to understand how to best design these devices to support these activities.
As noted by diSessa , the technology should not be the central concern, but instead the support of students' activities should be the goal.
These notions reaffirm the need for child-centered research to help guide future advances and provide guidelines for development of technology that effectively supports children and their interactions, both with the device and with each other.
The following sections present the application that was developed, the design methodology employed, and the lessons learned from the various design and implementation stages.
Following this, general design guidelines are presented along with a discussion of issues surrounding collaboration on handheld computers.
We designed and implemented Geney, an activity to help children explore genetic concepts through the use of multiple Palm devices and a central personal computer.
Other applications exist to teach genetics using computers such as GenScope  and Creatures2 .
Our game is different because it is designed to be played by an entire class, collaboratively, with Palm devices available for the students.
Geney simulates a population of fish representing a gene pool.
The fish are distributed across multiple Palm devices, each Palm being a single pond of fish.
Fish mature, get older and eventually die.
Students can exchange fish with their friends through the Palm device's infrared port, and they can arrange to mate fish within the same pond.
These fish eventually have offspring that have genetic traits derived from their parents' genes.
Given the complexity of genetics, a limited set of genetic traits is actually tracked and used to determine the characteristics of offspring.
The goal of the game is for students to collaboratively work together to produce a fish with a particular set of characteristics.
This set of characteristics will be specified at the time the gene pool is distributed to the Palm devices at the start of the game.
At any time, students have in their Palm devices a limited picture of the entire gene pool and of the family trees for the fish in their pond.
Only by working cooperatively with other students playing the game can the class achieve the desired goal.
The Palm III displaying the three main screens from the Geney game:  the Pond screen,  the Details screen, and  the Family Tree screen.
The game has three main screens, only one of which can be viewed at any given time on a Palm: * The Pond screen  where students can view all the living fish in their Palm device's pond, as well as basic information about each fish.
The Details screen  where students can view all of the details, including expressed genetic traits, for any particular fish in their pond.
The Family Tree screen  where students can view a graphical representation of any selected fish's immediate family relationships .
A usercentered, iterative design process employing a range of usability testing and inspection techniques was performed.
Five distinct stages were conducted: requirements analysis using mock-ups and scenarios; validating requirements with target users; prototype development; prototype testing with target users; and development of a complete application specification.
The following sections present the work that was completed in each of these stages.
Results from each stage, specific to Geney, are presented in the application specification.
More general results from each stage are summarized in the general results section.
The duration of a game can be varied to be played over a shorter time frame, such as a single class, or over a longer time frame, such as an entire semester.
It is probably preferable to play the game over an extended period of time to give the children and teachers time to comprehend and discuss progress within the game.
At various times during the playing of the game, data from all Palm devices can be uploaded to a central PC to generate a complete family tree or summary of the gene pool.
This is useful for reference purposes, as well as for providing historical snapshots of the progress within the game for later analysis once the game is complete.
This also serves as an archival copy of the current game status in case the information on individual Palms is accidentally erased.
The first stage in the design methodology involved a process of iterative paper mock-up design by members of the design team with the goal of establishing initial parameters for the application design.
The mock-up designs allowed specific tasks to be specified in a set of mock-ups, representative tasks, and scenarios for the activity which were prepared for use in the second design phase.
These tasks tested areas which the design team felt needed user input including navigation of family trees and executing the beaming process.
Before engaging in extensive design work and prototyping of an actual system, it was important to gain insight into the ways in which children interact with handheld computing devices such as Palm devices.
Palm devices were designed as an organizational aid for professional adults and are marketed as such.
They were not designed with children in mind as the primary users.
It was also necessary to gain insight into the pedagogical aspects of the game and to investigate user interface issues for Geney on the Palm platform.
Accordingly, a two-part evaluation session with students was conducted to gain the necessary insight.
Two 40-minute evaluation sessions were held at a local elementary school in Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
In total, 14 students  from a class consisting of Grade Five, Six and Seven students between the ages of 10 and 13 participated.
In both evaluation sessions, students were divided into pairs and each pair shared a single Palm device.
Each student was provided with his or her own stylus.
Children were asked to think aloud as they worked through the assigned tasks with members of the project team.
By playing in pairs, the children may have been more comfortable discussing ideas, thoughts and opinions.
Students were asked to collaboratively draw a face, each taking turns adding elements to the face.
Students had to pass the drawing from Palm to Palm and add features at each stage until they had completed drawing a face.
This activity was used to assess the students' ability to collaborate using Palm devices.
In the first phase of the evaluation session, the children were asked to use existing applications for the Palm that require similar types of interaction and tasks as would be required by Geney.
In particular, it was important to introduce the students to the various aspects of the Palm environment and to observe their difficulties and successes with the new environment.
Four applications were used in this phase: * Launcher III - a variation on the standard Palm launcher which divides applications into groups and uses folder tabs as a mechanism for selecting groups .
This activity assessed the students use of tabs and introduced them to the concept of finding and launching applications.
Address Book - a core Palm application which comes as part of the default set of installed software.
This activity was used to introduce the students to, and assess their ability to use Graffiti, navigate menus, and negotiate, commence and complete a beaming session.
Album To Go - an application that allows for the storage of pictures and other images in an electronic album .
Students can view any image stored on their Palm and can share images by beaming them to other Palms.
Students were provided with a Palm device containing four images and were paired with students using a Palm with a different set of four images.
Students had to arrange that both Palms ended up with all eight images.
This activity was used to assess students'
In the second phase of the evaluation session, the children were presented with paper mock-ups of Geney and were asked to perform a series of representative tasks with the mock-ups while thinking aloud about their reasoning and experiences.
A project team member worked with each pair of students, explaining the logic behind the mock-ups.
Students were encouraged to manipulate the mock-ups if necessary, rearranging elements of the interface, removing elements and adding elements.
Throughout this phase of the session students were encouraged to engage each other and the experimenters in discussions of their likes and dislikes related to the software and tasks they were presented with.
The sessions were videotaped and the video data was subsequently analyzed in an attempt to identify specific problems and difficulties.
After evaluating the results gathered in the initial meeting with students, a process of iterative prototype design towards the goal of refining the interface for the application was performed.
A usable prototype which ran on a Palm device was developed for testing with students at the elementary school in the next phase of the design process.
The prototype was developed using the standard development toolkit for the Palm platform that was also used for final application development.
The prototype developed in the third stage of the design process was taken back to the elementary school for an informal 40-minute evaluation session with 12 students in two separate groups of six.
The first group of six students had participated in the previous testing sessions and were familiar with Palm devices and the original paper mock-ups while, the other group of six students were not.
During the evaluation session, students were asked to work through a set of representative tasks with the electronic prototype using actual Palm handheld devices.
Students were again divided into pairs and each pair worked with a single Palm device during these tests .
They were asked to think aloud while working through the representative tasks.
Although the model of mating and breeding fish portrayed in the game is not completely accurate, fish were chosen for the prototype because they were relatively easy to draw with the rendering capabilities of the Palm.
Implementation of a metaphor for the system which could be used throughout the application was discussed.
Specifically, a pond metaphor was used in which all the fish on a Palm reside in a pond and menu options reflect the environment of a pond and family of fish.
The children seemed to be able to grasp this metaphor easily.
The issue of visual detail on the Palm display was given close attention.
The basic Palm III display is limited to 160 x 160 pixels with four levels of gray.
This provides an extremely limited environment in which to display visual information.
As a result, design choices were made to limit the amount of detail displayed on each screen, and to select an easy-torender character  for the prototype.
The number of offspring each couple could have in the application was problematic.
The concern here was the potential explosion of the gene pool and the resulting memory demands on the Palm devices being used for the system .
It was decided to enforce an arbitrary constraint: no pair of fish could have more than three offspring and on average the number of offspring per pair would be two.
One example of an issue that arose during the prototype testing was the issue of how fish are named.
Children had strong feelings about this.
Although they were willing to have the system provide default names for the fish, perhaps recognizing that it would be cumbersome for them to have to provide names every time an offspring was born, they emphatically requested the ability to override the system whenever they wished.
Some children initially had difficulty beaming a fish between Palm devices.
It was necessary to provide a mechanism to scaffold the beaming process so that students could easily execute the task.
The scaffolding was through prompts that provide "wizard-like" instructions .
Children with the first prototype of the Geney game during the prototype testing with target users design phase.
The sessions were videotaped and the videotape was subsequently analyzed in an attempt to identify specific problems and errors which needed to be resolved in the final interface.
Attempts were also made to informally assess users' frustration or satisfaction levels as a way to gauge the success of the design with the target audience.
In order to integrate the findings from the design methodology, the team reviewed the results from the previous phases and identified several issues which emerged from the discussions and evaluations.
The following design issues, specific to the Geney activity, were identified: * Social and cultural issues need to be considered in the design of the application.
Specifically, decisions were made to allow fish to have only one mate and to avoid issues surrounding infidelity, sexual promiscuity and incest.
It was also decided to avoid using people or common pets as the subjects of the application, both to avoid issues surrounding genetic engineering and selective breeding.
These decisions were made to finesse sensitive social and cultural issues that might hinder adoption of the game for reasons irrelevant to our design goals.
The issue of what type of character to use within the game arose frequently.
Many students indicated that they would like to be able to choose the type of character used in the game.
The children were able to utilize scrolling effectively.
It appeared to be important to present as much information as possible at each level and avoid deep structures of embedded screens and dialog boxes.
Consistency: Consistency can be viewed from several perspectives for handheld applications.
First, consistency within an application, second, consistency across Palm applications, and third, consistency with other computer applications.
It is important to ensure consistency internally within an application, externally with conventions of Palm application design, and globally outside of handheld interfaces.
Feedback: As in most interface design, feedback is an important issue.
In addition, children also commented on the need for descriptive menu entries.
Consideration needs to be given to clearly indicate prompts for action as well as feedback on actions taken.
Undo Facility: The need to provide robust and pervasive canceling and undo facilities was clear.
In many instances, errors or inadvertent actions were committed and it is important that children be provided with the ability to cancel all steps if necessary.
Customization and Creativity: Many of the children indicated that they would like to be able to choose the type of animals on their Palm devices.
The ability to customize and express their creativity was important to the children.
This is common for children's interactions in general and has been commented on in previous research on children's technology .
The results of this research provide insight into the use of handheld computers for children.
In particular, several design guidelines were identified to help ensure that handheld applications for children are designed appropriately.
Many of the issues identified relate to general design heuristics such as those identified by Nielsen  which are appropriate for adults as well as children.
A soft-button must be selected to bring up the menu .
Children had difficulty remembering the action to bring up the menu and commented that they would prefer the menu to be visible on the screen as with traditional desktop interfaces.
Beaming: All students were able to understand and utilize beaming in the Palm environment, however some had difficulty executing the process.
Graffiti : Given that Palm devices lack a keyboard, a stylus is required for all data entry.
Two methods are available for text entry: tapping on letters on a pop-up, on-screen keyboard image, or using Graffiti, a specialized handwriting recognition system which uses simplified letter forms to achieve high levels of accuracy.
Children were able to easily use both methods of text entry.
In terms of preference, students expressed a strong liking for writing with Graffiti.
The results of this research demonstrate an innovative way of engaging children collaboratively using handheld devices.
The most compelling observations of children interacting with Geney, both during this study and in informal sessions afterwards, were the rich social interactions that took place.
Many of the children said that the best aspect of the game was the ability to "beam fish to each other".
Although the children initially worked most closely with the children physically next to them, they did move about the room and expand their social network to include other children in the room.
This sharing and collaborative aspect of the game was very engaging and exciting.
Even children who were quieter and less inclined to work with others were "brought in" by other group members and engaged in the activity.
Figure 3 shows children playing the Geney game, beaming fish to each other.
All three children are engaged in the activity, although only two of the children can beam information back and forth at a time.
This not only reiterates the importance of these design issues, it provides insight into which of these issues also relate to the design of handheld applications.
It is important that research continue to examine effective design of applications from a child's and learner's perspective.
The success of Geney as a collaborative activity is an important research contribution.
Handheld devices are typically used for individual activities which we believe constrains their potential.
In particular, it is important to design technologies that seamlessly integrate into the many facets of children's lives, including activities that engage groups of children towards a common goal.
Some of the limitations of our work include the informal nature of the evaluations, and difficulty obtaining useful video footage.
Informal, exploratory sessions were used for the evaluation phases so as to not constrain the children's interactions.
While this provided rich, informative feedback, only specific aspects which the children commented on were addressed.
Future work should conduct a more thorough, detailed investigation of usability aspects of handhelds for children.
The mobility of Palm devices meant that they frequently changed hands and moved around the work surface.
This meant that it was difficult to obtain video footage of the Palm screen while activity was occurring.
Further research needs to explore ways of gathering screen information from small handheld computers without restricting use of the devices in ways that make the testing sessions unnatural or unrealistic.
The next stages of the Geney project involve expanding on the collaborative aspect of the activity.
The first step involves exploring how to distribute information across several Palms to overcome limitations of the small displays on handheld computers and to encourage collaboration among the children.
The second step is to work closely with teachers and educational researchers to further develop the pedagogical aspects of the collaborative activity.
Additional information on the Geney application is available on our web site .
Three children playing the Geney game.
Meanwhile, T., who has been part of an earlier discussion with the other two, is watching the beaming process.
The results of this work highlight the potential of using handheld computers to facilitate and engage children in collaborative learning activities.
Resnick  comments that designing computational tools involves an understanding of computational ideas and paradigms.
Just as sculptors need to understand the qualities of clay , designers of computational tools need to understand their chosen medium.
To effectively utilize handheld computers for children it is important to build an understanding of the issues surrounding small, portable, handheld devices as a computational medium.
This paper provides insight into how children interact with Palm devices and applications.
More importantly, our results demonstrate how this type of technology can be used in new ways to support children's collaborative activities.
Special thanks to Eric Cheng and Marius Scurtescu for contributing to the design study, Garth Shoemaker and David Cowperthwaite for suggesting the original idea for the game, Adrian Ally for filling in the genetic gaps, and the rest of the EDGE Lab for their patience during our design and development sessions and for feedback on this work.
Inkpen, K., Upitis, R., Klawe, M., Lawry, J., Anderson, A., Ndunda, M., Sedighian, K., Leroux, S., Hsu, D. "We have never forgetful flowers in our garden:" Girls' responses to electronic games.
Mikhak B., Martin F., Resnick M., Berg R. and Silverman B.
The Childrens Machines: Handheld and Wearable Computers Too.
In Proceedings of the International Symposium on Handheld and Ubiquitous Computing .
Nintendo Co. Ltd. Nintendo: Game Boy Color.
Resnick, M. New paradigms for computing, new paradigms for thinking.
Constructionism in practice: Designing, thinking and learning in a digital world.
Rieger, R. and Gay, G. Using Mobile Computing to Enhance Field Study.
Powerful tools for schooling: Second year study of the laptop program.
In M. Gardner et al 
Toward a scientific practice of science education.
Soloway E., Grant W., Tinker R., Roschelle J., Mills M., Resnick M., Berg R. and Eisenberg M. Science in the Palms of Their Hands.
Laptop schools lead the way in professional development.
Center for Innovative Learning Technologies.
Colella, V., Borovoy, R., and Resnick, M. Participatory Simulations: Using computational objects to learn about dynamic systems.
Implementation and evaluation of the GenScopeTM learning environment: Issues, solutions and results.
Designing Handheld Technologies for Kids.
