We here investigate what drives the popularity of information on social media platforms.
Focusing on YouTube, we seek to understand the extent to which content by itself determines a video's popularity.
Using mechanical turk as experimental platform, we asked users to evaluate pairs of videos, and compared users' relative perception of the videos' content against their relative popularity reported by YouTube.
We found that in most evaluations users could not reach consensus on which video had better content as their perceptions tend to be very subjective.
Nevertheless, when consensus was reached, the video with preferred content almost always achieved greater popularity on YouTube, highlighting the importance of content in driving information popularity on social media.
Other efforts, instead, analyzed social media content focusing on data mining tasks such as popu larity prediction  and video classification , analyzing popularity differences in content duplicates , and explor ing content importance as parameter of popularity evolution models .
In this paper we take a different and complemen tary approach, focusing on understanding the extent to which content matters for popularity of videos on YouTube.
Our methodology attempts to assess users' relative percep tions of the contents of pairs of videos through user surveys conducted over Amazon mechanical turk.
Users in our experiments are exposed only to the video content, and are not subjected to other factors  that may impact their perceptions of content .
Specifically, we present to users pairs of videos from the same major topic and uploaded around the same date, and ask them to choose which one:  they enjoyed more,  they would be more willing to share with friends, and  they predicted would become more popular on YouTube.
These questions target the user's individual perception of content interestingness and of the interests of her social circle , as well as the user's expectations on a global scale.
Our goals are to assess, for each of these questions, whether users reach consensus, and, when there is consensus, whether user perceptions match the relative popularity achieved by the videos on YouTube.
This suggests that users' per ceptions about content are quite subjective and that content may not be the most important factor that drives popularity in many cases.
However, whenever participants reached consen sus, their choices mostly match the video with largest popu larity on YouTube, suggesting that, in these cases, content has a significant impact and predictive power on video popularity.
The goals of our study complement previous work.
In particular, Salganik et al.
However, they focused on the impact of social influence on popularity, whereas we focus on the role of content and rely on users to evaluate the content in a setup that is isolated  from dissem ination mechanisms that might influence popularity.
What drives the popularity of information in social media?
Recently, this question has attracted a lot of research atten tion as social media sites become increasingly popular.
An unresolved part of this question is about the relative roles of two primary forces that drive the popularity of a piece of information:  its content, i.e., the interestingness, topicality,
It stands to reason that both factors matter, but the extent to which they impact the popularity of a piece of information remains an open issue.
Copyrights for componentts of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Our study is guided by two questions:  Given a pair of videos with similar topic, can users reach consensus on their relative popularity?
Question Q1 is focused on the collective notion of popular ity reported by the users in our experiment, who are subject only to the content itself.
This notion relates to whether a user likes and/or would be willing to share a video more than the other, and also whether a user, despite personal tastes, be lieves one video would become more popular than the other.
Question Q2 aims at comparing this notion with the popular ity achieved by the videos on YouTube, measured by the total number of views at the time we collected the videos, which can be affected by various factors, other than content alone.
YouRank as signs one fold  to each user following a roundrobin schedule.
It shows to the user only the embedded video streams, hiding any other video metadata kept by YouTube.
After logging in, each user was first asked to answer the de mographic survey in Figure 1a.
Thus, two neutral options  were available in case the user could not choose one video.
The user could also provide feedback in free text form for each pair.
We asked users not to visit the video page on YouTube, and to indicate whether they had watched any of the videos in the past.
To avoid bias due to user fatigue, the pairs of a fold were randomized whenever a new user was assigned to the fold.
A user was expected to take roughly 45 minutes to evaluate 4 pairs of videos, each one from 4 to 6 minute long.
Thus, upon task completion, each user was paid 4.50 US dollars, which is consistent with the MT suggested hourly rate of 6 US dollars.
In practice, the users took on average 44.8 minutes to complete the task, although some evaluations were disregarded .
In order to identify videos with similar topic, we used Free base1 , a collaborative semantic knowledge database covering over 30 million topics.
We crawled YouTube for videos in dexed under the same Freebase topic on its API, focusing on 2 topics that span diverse user interests and are neither too spe cific nor too broad: major league baseball and music videos.
We crawled YouTube on August 2013, focusing on videos that were uploaded from the US on April 2012.
By studying videos of similar topic and uploaded from the same country, we factored out the notion of popularity due to latent social, cultural and psychological issues .
By focusing on videos uploaded around the same time, we factored out popularity variations due to first mover advantage  and upload date .
We also downloaded only videos considered safe by YouTube's safe search, limiting the chance of users finding a video offensive, and that could be embedded in external sites.
The latter is to allow user evaluations to be done outside YouTube, and thus be unaffected by the other pieces of information  available on a video's page.
For each topic, we chose 3 videos of each range, each video having from 4 to 6 minutes of duration.
To tackle question Q1, we measured consensus for each video pair using the Fleiss' Kappa  score of agreement .
This score varies from -1 to 1, while values above .4 are interpreted as fair to good agreements, and above 0.75 as very good agreements .
We determined that consensus was reached if the null hypothesis of negative or no agreement  could be rejected.
The same score was achieved regardless of whether the neutral responses c, d, were included.
Thus, we computed it over all responses.
We also applied Bonferroni correction to rule out significance due to random chance .
To answer Q2, we focused only on pairs of videos for which consensus was reached and computed the fraction p  of those pairs for which the preferred video matches the one with larger popularity on YouTube.
We then used an exact binominal sign test based on Clopper-Pearson confidence in terval , which is suitable to small samples , to test whether p  is above random chance .
We ran our user experiments on Amazon mechanical turk , recruiting as participants of our task only master work ers  based on the US.
The first step was to build, for each topic, all 36 pairings for the 9 selected videos.
However, in both rounds, some users refused the task after logging in.
Also, we disregarded eval uations in which the users reported they:  were unable to watch a video, 2 cases, or  had watched at least one of the videos before .
The lat ter was done to avoid a bias due to prior knowledge.
We were then left with 6 to 10 evaluations per pair .
We summarize the answers to the demographic survey next, and afterwards we discuss the results for our two driving ques tions based on the answers to the form in Figure 1b.
Users agreed less often when asked which video they enjoyed the most , reflecting a natural heterogeneity of user interests.
The consensus was even rarer for sharing patterns , pos sibly reflecting heterogeneity in terms of social activities and users' perceptions of the interests of their social networks.
This is reflected by the number of times users chose a neu tral answer.
For E2 this occurred from 40%  to 52%  of the evaluations.
For both topics and the other ques tions, less than 20% of the evaluations used a neutral choice.
Finally, we show that when consensus was reached, the agree ments were on average good  or very good .
On MT, we required all users to be from the US.
Moreover, 53% and 42% of the them  were males in the baseball and music experiments, respectively, whereas in both rounds, most  had from 20 to 45 years of age, and only 5% were under 20 years old.
The answers of users regard ing their viewing and sharing habits  are summarized in Table 1.
Note that participants of both rounds of experiments are avid YouTube viewers: they watch videos at least occasionally, and most of them do it often  or very often .
Also, most users share YouTube content occasionally  or often , whereas only 22% of the users in both rounds share YouTube videos only rarely or never.
Finally, in both rounds, users tend to share online content in general more often, as expected.
The divergence in opinions reveals the more egocentric no tions of liking/sharing content.
U2 dislikes the video because it was sad, and U4 likes it because of her personal musical taste.
U1 would share the video because of the girl in it, while U3 would not share it because she secretly likes the band.
Recall that users evaluated pairs of videos that covered a wide range of popularity values on YouTube.
Thus, one may ask whether users could reach consensus more often for pairs of videos with a larger gap in their relative popularity.
Surpris ingly, we found no strong trend towards that, as illustrated in Figure 2 for E3 in the major league baseball experiments .
Very low  values were obtained even for videos which differ in popularity by hundreds of thousands views.
Table 2 also shows that the agreements are more common for major league baseball videos than for music videos.
While this may be related to a more diverse range of personal in terests for music videos , it may also re late to promotional campaigns for this kind of content.
Such campaigns may cause videos to be popular for a short while, regardless of user tastes.
As an example, we could note case of music videos that experienced a burst in popularity, possi bly caused by promotion  but was unable to remain popular over time.
Nevertheless, there are many cases of lack of consensus.
One example is a pair of baseball videos, where one of them has over 100 times more views than the other, and remains more popular throughout the monitored period.
Yet, the users of our experiment could not reach consensus in none of the ques tions.
Table 2 shows, for both video topics, the percentage of pairs in which users reached consensus, .
It also shows the average  scores for those pairs that rejected the null hypoth esis.
Results are shown separately for each question in Figure 1b, and for different significance levels .
In general, for any considered significance level, and for both topics, the fraction of pairs that passed the test tends to be very small .
The fraction is larger when users were asked which video they predicted would be more popular .
Considering only pairs for which consensus was reached , Table 3 shows the fraction of pairs in which the video preferred by MT users has higher popularity on YouTube.
Note that, whenever consensus is reached, user preferences match YouTube's popularity in almost all cases.
This result is above random chance  in most cases, except when the number of pairs with consensus is too small.
Thus, if users can reach consensus on their opinions, the preferred video is likely to become more popular.
We chose one of the most popular social media sites, YouTube, and recruited only master MT workers, who are known to perform better tasks.
Given our budget, we carefully chose the videos of our dataset, covering three popularity levels, with multiple videos per level.
To avoid extraneous factors, we only com pared videos of the same topic and similar age, and only used evaluations of users who had not seen the video before.
To ensure that our sample sizes are not too small to draw con clusions, we applied conservative and exact statistical tests, adequate for them, presenting results for various significance levels.
However, we acknowledge that it is impossible to generalize our findings without future studies.
We hope that this work will encourage future efforts to apply our methodology across various applications and over more content instances.
In the traditional media , dissemination mechanisms are closely tied to the content generators.
Con tent is traditionally generated or selected by professionals on behalf of organizations that have vested interest and ability to promote their content .
Differently, social media is dominated by content generated by ordinary users, and the key dissemination mechanisms are  crowdendorsements: information "liked" by crowds is promoted in search results and recommendation tools, and  viral prop agation over a social network: anyone who finds the informa tion content interesting can "share" it with friends.
Thus, the dissemination mechanisms are democratized and only loosely coupled with the content generators.
This democratization of fers the hope that information popularity would be driven to a larger extent by its content  than it is in traditional media.
In this paper we give the first step towards understanding the extent to which this is true.
To that end, we relied on user evaluations of pairs of YouTube videos of similar topic, factoring out dissemination related factors.
We found that users' perception of content is very subjective, as users often could not reach consensus at which video they liked or would share more, or predicted would be come more popular.
This result indicates the difficulty in de termining the role of content in driving popularity, and com plements previous observations that users cannot estimate the extent of visibility of their content .
However, when ever there was consensus, the preferred video almost always matched the one with higher popularity on YouTube, high lighting the key role played by content in those cases.
From a social media research perspective, this finding empha sizes the need to account for content in studies of popularity.
From a media site operator's or viral marketer's perspective, it has implications for popularity prediction.
For example, it can be leveraged by marketers or advertisers to compare new videos against old ones with known popularities to de fine which one has more chance of attracting viewers.
It also motivates future studies on how a site operator can design a scalable way for gathering users' feedback to predict which of newly uploaded videos are more likely to become popular.
We note that representativeness is an important but chal lenging issue in any empirical study, as ours.
Figueiredo, F., Benevenuto, F., and Almeida, J.
The Tube Over Time: Characterizing Popularity Growth of YouTube Videos.
Improved Video Categorization from Text Metadata and User Comments.
Statistical Methods for Rates and Proportions, 3 ed.
Understanding the Interplay between Titles, Content, and Communities in Social Media.
