However, their model was based on one-dimensional  horizontal movement, while applications of such a model require two dimensions .
In this paper, the pointing error model is investigated for 2-D pointing in a study of 21 participants performing a time-matching task on the ISO 9241-9 ring-of-circles layout.
Results show that the pointing error model holds well in 2-D.
If univariate endpoint deviation  is used, regressing on N=72 observed vs. predicted error rate points yields R2=.953.
If bivariate endpoint deviation  is used, regression yields R2=.936.
For both univariate and bivariate models, the magnitudes of observed and predicted error rates are comparable.
It is when a user's movement time may not be predictable by Fitts' law that the above pointing error model is potentially most useful.
Haste, tentativeness, or extra care may cause users to point at speeds not predicted by Fitts' law.
For example, in computer games, targets often appear for short durations, forcing players to rush.
Another example is predicting text entry error rates on stylus keyboards for users that deliberately slow down or speed up.
Yet another example is in safety-critical interfaces when trying to make controls big enough in light of space constraints to ensure a given error rate.
In all instances, a pointing error model is required to make quantitative performance predictions.
A current limitation, however, is that Eq.
3 was based on horizontal pointing to onedimensional  vertical ribbon targets, but applications of a pointing error model require two dimensions .
In this paper, we investigate the accuracy of the pointing error model using the 2-D multidirectional ring-of-circles arrangement from the ISO 9241-9 standard .
As in Wobbrock et al.
The metronome is paced individually for each subject by first establishing that subject's Fitts' law model.
Our findings show that the pointing error model holds well in 2-D.
If univariate endpoint deviation  is used while fitting Fitts' law, regressing on N=72 observed  vs. predicted  error rate points yields R2=.953 with an equation of y = .026 + 1.045x.
Thus, both outcomes show well-fit models and comparable magnitudes of observed and predicted error rates.
ID is the task index of difficulty measured in bits.
Task parameters are target distance A and size W, and a and b are empirical regression coefficients.
The independent variables in the model include target distance  and size , but now instead of predicting MT, time becomes the actual time taken to reach the target, MTe.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Important to the derivation of the pointing error model is the observation that endpoints in rapid aimed movements follow a normal distribution,1 and that the entropy therein is log 2  2e , where  is the standard deviation of the distribution.
When a ~4% error rate occurs in an experiment, log2 W accurately reflects the information in the distribution.
But when subjects point with a higher error rate, their "effective" target width We is greater than W. When they point with an error rate less than 4%, We < W. Thus, We enables a post hoc adjustment to a 4% error rate.
This is the basis for Crossman's speed-accuracy correction , which uses We instead of W in Eq.
2 and allows a "fast but careless" subject to be compared to a "slow and careful" subject.
When fitting Fitts' law models to subjects, the effective index of difficulty  in Eq.
4 replaces the nominal ID from Eq.
However, in 2-D, this reduction does not occur ; accordingly, we have the option of either using SDx and ignoring deviation orthogonal to the task axis, or of using bivariate deviation SDx,y and capturing deviation in both dimensions.
For completeness, we explore error predictions using both univariate  and bivariate  endpoint deviation as the basis for We and IDe.
Twenty-one subjects participated in our study, of which a third were female.
Subjects were run on a 21" Samsung SyncMaster 214T flat panel monitor set to 1600x1200 resolution.
The computer had a Xeon CPU running Windows 7 at 3 GHz with 2 GB RAM.
The input device was a Logitech optical mouse.
We built a full-screen program in C called FittsStudy  to facilitate the study.
4, Ae reflects the mean distance of actual movements.
5, SDx is the univariate standard deviation of endpoint x-coordinates for an AxW condition whose data have been rotated to a reference axis .
The pointing error model assumes that if a subject points at the speed with which Fitts' law predicts they should , they will point with a ~4% error rate.2 If they point faster than Fitts' law predicts they should , the error rate will rise above 4%.
If they point slower , the error rate will drop below 4%.
3, the regression coefficients a and b are decorated with primes to indicate they are not from a traditional Fitts' law study but instead come from fitting Fitts' law to, ideally, a range of MTe  MT.
Put another way, a and b should be built upon movements spanning the speeds for which one intends to predict error rates.
Our study consisted of two parts, both of which used the ISO 9241-9 ring-of-circles target arrangement  with 23 targets per ring.
The first three of these targets were logged as practice and ignored during analysis, leaving 20 test trials per ring.
A trial began immediately following the click of the previous trial and ended with a single click, regardless of whether that click hit the target.
Misses were accompanied by a red flash and an audible ding.
Subjects' individual Fitts' law models were built.
Subjects' Fitts' law models were used to parameterize the metronome in part 2.
By manipulating MT% instead of raw MTms, subject-specific speed differences were accommodated.
After this moment, the flood fill disappeared and began to grow again.
As described above, the pointing error model relies on Fitts' law regression coefficients a and b, which arise from fitting a line to a subject's  points; IDe relies on We, which relies on SDx, the spread of hits.
In both 1-D and 2-D, this spread of hits can be defined as a deviation of coordinates around their centroid .
When fitting Fitts' law to a subject, each AxW ring of 20 test trials resulted in one  point, giving 18 points for regression per subject in part 1 and 72 points in part 2.
As stated above, part 1's a and b coefficients were used to set the metronome, while part 2's a and b coefficients were used in Eq.
3 for error rate prediction.
Crossman's speedaccuracy correction  was used for each subject in each condition.
All trials within an AxW or MT%xAxW condition were normalized to horizontal  before endpoint deviations were computed as SDx and SDx,y.
Both SDx and SDx,y result in good fits for the pointing error model with high R2 values and regression equations near y=x.
A Wilcoxon signed-rank test on absolute differences between predicted and observed error rates using each deviation scheme shows no significant difference between the SDx and SDx,y models , indicating they are comparable in fitting these data.
For part 1, spatial outliers were removed.
They were defined from prior work  as errors whose effective distances were less than half their nominal distances, or whose endpoints fell more than twice their target widths from their target centers.
For part 2, spatial outliers were kept, but temporal outliers were removed, defined as movements whose actual durations were shorter than 75% or longer than 125% of the metronome interval.
In part 1, the average movement time was 761 ms with an average error rate of 4.3%, close to the desired 4%.
Using a mean-of-means throughput calculation , throughputs were 4.91 bits/s and 4.49 bits/s with univariate  and bivariate  endpoint deviation, respectively.
Thus, the a and b model values elicited for each subject in part 1 for pacing the metronome in part 2 were trustworthy.
In part 2, the average movement time MTe and average metronome time MTms should be close.
The average overall error rate was 18.9%.
Throughputs were 4.83 bits/s and 4.39 bits/s using SDx and SDx,y, respectively.
Thus, the a and b model values elicited for each subject and used in Eq.
3 for error rate prediction were trustworthy.
On the whole, our error model predicts well in 2-D using either univariate  or bivariate  endpoint deviation.
Despite SDx's slightly higher R2, the two were not significantly different in their deviation from observed error rates.
In general, error rate predictions using SDx,y were higher than those using SDx, which makes sense given the extra movement dimension taken into account.
Despite W not causing a significant difference in observed error rates , there was still "banding" evident.
Figure 3a shows how MTe and predicted error rates were linear in ID, just as Fitts' law requires.
But Figure 3b shows that this linear behavior did not emerge when points were grouped by W. Indeed, prior work  has shown that error rates decrease with increases in W even when ID is maintained, suggesting a W-specific effect.
In this paper, we have shown that the pointing error model serves well to predict error rates from target distance  and size  and actual movement time .
Both univariate  and bivariate  endpoint deviations worked well, predicting error rates with similar differences from observed error rates.
Although neither A nor W had a significant effect on observed rates, W seems to have a greater effect on error rates than A.
Future work should investigate W further, teasing out any disproportionate effect on errors and adjusting the pointing error model accordingly.
Future work should also augment the model for noncircular and irregularly-shaped targets.
Performance should be predicted for a game, e.g., Whack-a-Mole, where movement is governed by game conditions, not by Fitts' law.
