ABSTRACT Rapid growth in 3-D rendering technologies has deluged us with glitzy graphical representations.
In what contexts do people find 3-D graphs of 2-D data both attractive and useful?
We examine students' preferences for graphical display formats under several use scenarios.
Line graphs were preferred more for conveying trends than details, and more for promoting memorability than for immediate use; bar graphs showed the opposite pattern.
3-D graphs were preferred more for depicting details than trends, more for memorability than immediate use, and more for showing others than oneself.
The reverse held for 2-D graphs.
Do glitzy graphics do more than attract the eye?
How can quantitative information best be rendered on 2-D surfaces such as paper or computer screens to facilitate easy and accurate comprehension and memory?
In this paper we report the results of three studies of people's preferences for graphical displays in which 2-dimensional data sets are rendered as dots, lines, or bars with or without 3-D depth cues.
In these studies we focus on the cases in which 2-dimensional data had to be displayed, and a choice had to be made about the general type of display to use, as well as the preferred dimensionality of the graphical elements.
Given the ease with which any of tens or hundreds of different graph types can be generated using even the most basic of available graphics packages, the question is one with which journalists, scientists, designers, and statisticians are confronted daily.
To be understood, graphics must first be accurately perceived.
Cleveland and colleagues  have characterized the ability of the human perceptual system to extract information from graphs when presented in various geometric forms, such as angles, lengths, areas, and volumes.
This low-level analysis has yielded "hierarchies" in which basic elements are ranked in terms of comprehension scores.
For graphs of a dimensionality equal that of the data, accurately perceiving and understanding all of the properties of the display is critical to extracting the information.
However, for 3-D displays in which the depth does not represent any additional quantitative information, the viewer must deal with redundant and extraneous cues.
One obvious place to turn for advice on selecting graphs is the graphic design community.
The message from designers is straightforward: simple and clear is better, extra ink is bad, and extraneous information detracts from the impact of the graphic .
In one example, Tufte starts with a complex figure with extra 3-D shading and, in accordance with the goal of maximizing the ratio of data to ink in a graphic, strips out the elements generating the illusion of depth.
The argument is that if the information being displayed is inherently 2-dimensional,
Visualization, Spatial Representation, 3-D Graphics, User Interface Design.
INTRODUCTION Graphical displays of quantitative information are becoming increasingly common in advertising and news reporting, as well as in the more traditional areas of business and science.
As graphics technologies have become more sophisticated, graphical displays have grown more varied and more baroque.
Until recently, 3dimensional  displays were used primarily to render 3-D data sets in such specialized domains as CAD/CAM and geometric modeling.
The ability to add depth cues to graphs of 2-dimensional  data is now commonplace in general-purpose analysis and visualization packages, and the demand for "sexy" but possibly gratuitous 3-D graphics is increasing.
Permission to make digital/hard copies of all or part of this material for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that the copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage, the copyright notice, the title of the publication and its date appear, and notice is given that copyright is by permission of the ACM, Inc. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires specific permission and/or fee.
According to Tufte, rendering uninformative depth is a bad idea in principle because it can lead to misperception of the information of interest, and it can hide the real content from the viewer.
These admonitions are largely based on the cumulative experience of talented professionals, and for the most part make sense.
For empirical support we can turn to the literatures on visual perception and visual illusions.
Early in this century, Gestalt psychologists repeatedly demonstrated that interactions among elements in a visual display can result in a perception very different from the simple physical description of the components of the display.
For example, Jordan & Schiano  found that the perceived length of a single test line can be greatly affected by the presence of one additional context line in the visual display; moreover, the size and direction of the resulting distortion depended systematically upon the relative proximity and size of the context line to the test line.
In his how-to book on graphical design, Kosslyn points out that the ultimate goal of the designer is to have control over the perceived properties of a graph - - not merely the physical properties of the page or screen rendering .
Given the sort of data described above, it could easily follow that rendering false depth cues in graphical displays of quantitative information amounts to placing extraneous information on the page at the risk of introducing perceptual distortions.
However, in the context of 3-D displays, the conclusions are not necessarily clear.
Such displays may be difficult to perceive when there is ambiguity in the 2-D representation of a 3-D object, as in reversible figures such as the Necker cube or Escher drawings.
What remains to be seen is whether 3-D objects are detrimental to accuracy and speed of judgments from graphics.
Also, what parameters of 3-D rendering can be manipulated to minimize its harm?
Finally, are there any benefits to depth cues, and what parameters maximize them?
The little research that does bear directly on the comparison of 2-D vs. 3-D displays of 2-dimensional data has focused primarily on the extent to which information is accurately perceived in graphs of different dimensionality.
Results from both perceptual match and magnitude estimation studies have been interpreted as evidence that added dimensionality has little or no effect on accuracy .
However, there are several alternative interpretations of these findings, some of which will be taken up in the Discussion.
Taken all together, the message would seem to be telling us to "keep it simple, stupid."
However, this is not the way the world is.
For one thing, the world we perceive is rich, complex, and even ambiguous.
The ratio of data to ink in many publications is going down fast.
Information providers are increasingly producing graphics with colors, pictures, and all sorts of extraneous 3-D structure.
Graph users as well as graph producers seem to have preferences and opinions about the effectiveness and appropriateness of these graphs.
Existing research on graphical displays suggests that the effectiveness of graphical formats varies with context and intended use, but little if any research exists that demonstrates the extent to which people have sound i n t u i t i o n s about which graph types are best.
One exception is Carswell et al.
They were provided information about two different universities in the tbrm of several graphic displays.
The impressions that the students formed about each university were directly influenced by whether the information had been presented in 2-D or 3-D graphs.
In three studies, we examine people's preferences for different types of graphics, depending on the use to which the graphic is to be put.
EXPERIMENT 1 This first study was designed to be a broad exploration of subjects' preferences for different graph types.
Subjects were presented with 6 scenarios, and asked to choose a graph type from an array of 9 graphs.
The scenarios and graph types were chosen to capture the varied situations in *which graphs are used and the range of options commonly available .
METHODS Subjects The subjects were 161 Stanford U n i v e r s i t y undergraduates enrolled in an introductory Psychology course.
Questionnaire Subjects were given a booklet with several questionnaires, including the one described below, which they were instructed to take home and complete over the course of two days.
Estimated time to complete the entire packet was roughly 1-2 hours, with the page for this study taking no more than a few minutes.
A one-page questionnaire was used to probe subjects' attitudes about a set of graph formats: the top half of the questionnaire contained 9 panels of graphs illustrated below.
The graph panels were arranged to form a 3 x 3 matrix, with each graph labeled with a letter from A to I.
The bottom half of the page presented subjects with 6 scenarios to consider.
In fact, you really don't want the board members to worry too much about details, but rather to focus on the "gist" of what you are saying.
You will be contrasting different data points to get this across.
You want the board to be able to remember your results, and compare them to what they hear in the next talk.
RESULTS We report only subjects' first choices as their second choices do not substantially change the picture.
Graphs Nine types of graphs were created in the software program Excel :  a scatterplot,  a simple bar graph,  a 3-dimensional volume bar graph, displayed from the perspective of a viewer looking up from below the x-axis plane,  a 3-dimensional volume bar graph, displayed from the perspective of a viewer looking down from above the x-axis plane,  an area line graph,  a simple line graph,  a 3-dimensional volume line graph, displayed fi'om the perspective of a viewer looking down from above the x-axis plane,  a 3-dimensional surface line graph, with the same perspective as the 3-dimensional volume line graph, and  a 3-dimensional volume pie graph.
The collection of graphs offered subjects very different options, with choices between certain pairs of graphs reflecting subtle variations along one dimension.
For example, graphs 3 and 4 only varied in the perspective shown to the viewer - - both were 3-dimensional volume bar graphs.
Along the same lines, graphs 7 and 8 differ in that the former renders a volume by filling in the area underneath the curve, while the latter representation depicts a'floating surface, even though both can rightly be called "3-dimensional graphs."
Scenarios Subjects were asked to "imagine yourself as a research scientist working at a high-tech firm.
You have been given the chance to present the findings from you work to the Board of Directors of the company.
Your research assistant has been assigned the job of preparing the slides that you will need.
The pattern of preferences for the 9 graph types for each of the 6 scenarios is given as Table I.
Due to the exploratory design of this study, the data do not lend 2: area bar 3: 3-D volume bar themselves to a rigorous statistical analysis.
The area bar graph and the simple line graph, two familiar types, were the most popular overall.
Of the two 3-D volume bar graphs, 5: area line 6: simple line subjects greatly preferred the view from above to the view from below .
Of the two 3-D line graphs, they chose the 3-D volume more often than the 3-D surface .
For Scenario 1, which emphasized understanding the data for one's self, subjects liked a bar area graph best.
8: 3-D surface line 9: 3-D volume pie 
For getting a point across quickly  or picking out general trends , subjects preferred a simple line graph.
EXPERIMENT 2 In this experiment, we sought to refine our initial findings by more carefully manipulating the graph types, scenarios and data sets employed.
In the literature, the use of the term "3-D graph" has been applied to many different types of graphs.
Here we distinguish between graphs that add depth to create the impression of a surface suspended in space and those that add depth to create the impression of an object with volume.
The instructions for Experiment 1 suggested a very particular situation ; here we created generic scenarios that avoided referencing specific situations and f o c u s e d on m o r e general circumstances.
Nine types of graphs were created.
The graphs are shown in Figure 2, and included:  a scatterplot,  a simple line graph,  an area line graph,  a 3-dimensional volume line graph,  a 3-dimensional surface line graph,  a simple bar graph,  an area bar graph,  a 3-dimensional v o l u m e bar graph, and  a 3dimensional surface bar graph, in which only the tops of 3-dimensional bars were used to indicate quantity on the y-axis.
With the exception of the scatterplot, the graphs were divided into two broad categories--line graphs that connected the data points, and bar graphs that plotted each data point independently with a vertical element of some sort .
Within each category, an example of a simple graph, an area graph, a volume graph and a surface graph was created.
While the simple graphs  and area graphs  are familiar formats that do not need much explanation, the distinctions between the 3-dimensional graph types are important and not as readily apparent.
T w o versions o f the q u e s t i o n n a i r e were prepared, differing only in the nature of the data depicted in the graphs themselves.
Each data set consisted of nine data points.
In one version, the general trend  data set, the graphs of the data formed a slightly right-skewed curve.
In the second version, the data points were selected to create a multiple reversal  data set.
Applying the definition of a trend reversal as the change in slope of the graph , the G T data set contained 1 trend reversal, while the M R data set involved 6 trend reversals.
Data set  was a between-subject variable.
The 6 scenarios listed below were designed to set up contrasts on three dimensions: self vs. other , details vs. trends , and now vs. lawr .
You want to see it graphically displayed so that you can understand what is going on.
This is just for your own use; you won't be showing the graph to others.
Conveying what is going on to them is critical.
You want them to understand your findings as fully as possible.
It is important that the specifics of how each data point relates to the others be evident in the figure.
One should be able to just glance at the figure and understand what is going on.
The important thing here is the "gist."
It makes no difference if they remember this next week--the decision needs to be made correctly today.
The graph should convey the information right here and now.
RESULTS As in Experiment 1, we analyzed only subjects' first choices.
As in the first study, our subjects' judgments were non-random.
In general, their pattern of choices was quite similar for the multiple-reversal and general trend data sets .
Some obvious and nonsurprising patterns jump out of the data .
Our subjects clearly chose different graphs for different situations.
Overall, they liked the familiar area bar and simple line graphs best .
They rarely chose the simple bar  or 3-D surface bar graphs .
The more structured design of this survey also permits a more detailed analysis.
We can look at preferences for graphs of different dimensionality by collapsing over data set and collapsing the line and bar graphs.
When we do so, a consistent pattern emerges.
For all of the 3 pairs of questions, subjects' preferences for simple, area, 3-D volume, and 3-D surface graphs changed systematically.
Simple and area graphs were liked for some sets of circumstances, and 3-D volume and surface graphs for others .
Subjects liked simple and area graphs better for their own use than for presenting to others; the opposite pattern held for 3-D volume and 3-D surface plots.
They chose the 3-D graph types more often when the data had to be remembered, and simple and area graph types more often when the figure was for immediate use.
If we collapse over data set and collapse over diinensionality, another pattern emerges.
Our subjects chose line and bar graphs for different uses.
They chose line graphs more often when the data had to be remembered than when the graph was for immediate use; the opposite pattern held for bar graphs.
Our subjects liked line graphs better for general trends than for details.
Bar graphs, on the other hand, were chosen more for details than for trends .
Both of the patterns described above were robust; each holds for both the multiple reversal data set and the general trend data set results individually, as well as for the combined data.
EXPERIMENT 3 In this final experiment, we focused on the central question of preferences for "2-D vs 3-D" graphics by creating a two-alternative, forced-choice questionnaire.
The format and procedures were identical to those described in Experiments 1 & 2, except for the number of graph panels presented.
Figure 3a: Graph type choices for simple, area, volume, and surface graphs.
Bar positions represent the relative frequency with which a graph type was chosen for two contrasting scenarios.
Numbers below the graph type labels give the actual frequency.
For example, simple graphs were chosen 40 times for the "self' scenario and 17 times for the "others" scenario.
Figure 3b: Graph type choices for line and bar graphs.
Bar positions represent the relative frequency with which a graph type was chosen for two contrasting scenarios.
Numbers below the graph type labels give the actual frequency.
For example, bar graphs were chosen 58 times for the "now" scenario and 41 times for the "memory" scenario.
A clear pattern of preferences that reinforce the findings from Experiments 1 & 2 emerged .
Not only can comparisons be made b e t w e e n p r e f e r e n c e s within each graph dimensionality , but relative preferences for employing 2-D or 3-D graphs can also be assessed.
For most situations, subjects preferred the 2-D area graph.
Two exceptions are when graphs were to be used for presenting data to others, in which case there was no significant difference in preference for the two graph types , and when the graph needed to be memorable, in which case the 3-D volume graph was significantly preferred .
Figure 4: Graph type choices for area  and volume  graphs in Experiment 3.
Graphs show the number of subjects selecting each of the two graph options, broken down by implied use scenario.
When assessing the pattern of results for each of the three continuum--self vs. other, detail vs. trend, and now vs. l a t e r - - s i g n i f i c a n t interactions exist between the dimensionality of the graph and the proposed use scenario .
GENERAL DISCUSSION The key findings of the three surveys can be described as follows.
First, subjects were not leery of choosing graphs with 3-D shading.
Second, they found different graph types appropriate for different rhetorical purposes.
They systematically chose line graphs for different circumstances from bar graphs, and chose 3-D graphs for different situations from 2-D graphs.
In particular, they chose 3-D graphs over 2-D graphs when the situation demanded memory, and equally often when it involved communication to others.
In addition, the use of 3-D graphs was deemed more appropriate for certain scenarios than other scenarios: for examining details rather than trends in data, for making a memorable rather than an immediate impression, and when using a graph to communicate to others over situations in which the graph is for one's self.
Finally, subjects preferred graphs that strongly suggested a 3-D volume to those that depicted a surface floating in space.
Why this robust pattern of preferences for these 3-D graphs?
Our subjects consistently selected 3-D graphs for various scenarios, and rejected them for others.
Moreover, out in the real world scientists and businesspeople are voting with their feet  for 3-D graphs.
This may be just the tip of the iceberg, considering the general proliferation of 3-D interfaces and computing environments being developed.
We propose two possible explanations for these preferences.
The more parsimonious of the two is a simple discriminability or salience account.
In Experiments 2 & 3, subjects chose the 3-D volume  graphs more often when the scenario demanded memory or showing data to others.
Under these conditions people may feel that extra graphical flourishes will make the figure stand out, making the graph both more memorable and more impressive to others.
A second explanation derives from the ecological and evolutionary situatedness of our visual systems.
We have evolved to deal with a world of 3-D objects and 3-D scenes.
Figures that more strongly suggest a spatially realistic environment may better engage our visual systems, and may be more easily coded in terms of schemas we have for visual scenes.
This kind of facilitation could be helpful for communicating a pattern to others or keeping it distinct in memory.
This hypothesis might also explain why people like 3-D volume graphs more than 3-D surface graphs: the former more closely resemble solid objects such as the ones we deal with in the real world.
While this view is not directly addressed in the work we report here, it serves as an interesting and plausible explanation.
Our subjects did seem to have had a sense that graphs with depth were more appropriate for communicating and remembering, and they found realistic volumes preferable to unlikely floating surfaces.
Could it be that their intuitions were in line with their actual abilities?
This possibility has some support in the small literature directly comparing 2-D and 3-D graphs of quantitative information.
Two recent studies  failed to find a difference in accuracy of estimates from 2-D and 3-D graphs.
However, one of these studies  failed to distinguish between 3-D surface and 3-D volume graphs; the other  averaged data over several heterogeneous 3D graph types.
In light of the great differences we found in peoples' preferences for these types of graphs, it seemed worthwhile to attempt a more direct comparison.
Under these conditions, we found a reliable and suggestive effect of dimensionality: adding depth cues impaired accuracy in both a magnitude estimation and a perceptual match task.
However, this performance difference was small.
Moreover, it vanished when subjects had to make their judgments from memory .
At this point we can conclude with some certainty that people prefer graphs of quantitative information enhanced by 3-D shading for some situations.
More pronounced and important is the fact that these preferences show a systematic structure.
For our subjects, adding 3-D shading to 2-D displays amounted to more than simply adding more ink to the page, or pixels on the computer screen.
The challenge for designers and consumers of graphics is to learn about and take advantage of these preferences for features inherent in graphic displays.
For behavioral scientists, it is to discover the extent to which these preferences have a basis in the human perceptual system.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The first and second authors are supported by National Science Foundation Fellowships.
In addition, this research has been supported by Interval Research Corporation.
Graphing in depth: Perspectives on the use of three-dimensional graphs to represent lower-dimensional data, Behaviour & Information Technology, 10, 459474.
The Elements of Graphing Data, Wadsworth Advance Books and Software, Monterey, CA.
Graphical perception: Theory, experimentation, and application to the development of graphical methods, Journal of the American Statistical Association, 79, 531-553.
Graphical perception and graphical methods for analyzing scientific data, Science, 229, 828-833.
Seeing is Deceiving: The Psychology of Visual Illusions, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Hillsdale, NJ.
Serial processing and the parallel-lines illusion: Length contrast through relative spatial separation of contours, Perception & Psychophysics, 40, 384-390.
Elements of Graph Design, W.H, Freeman and Company, New York, NY.
Representing information in graphs, Paper presented at the meeting of the Psychonomics Society, Los Angeles, CA.
Visual psychophysics of simple graphical elements, Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance.
The Visual Display of Quantitative Information, Graphics Press, Chesire, CT.
