GaussBits support occlusion-free tangible interactions on and above the portable display.
We present GaussBits, which is a system of the passive magnetic tangible designs that enables 3D tangible interactions in the near-surface space of portable displays.
When a thin magnetic sensor grid is attached to the back of the display, the 3D position and partial 3D orientation of the GaussBits can be resolved by the proposed bi-polar magnetic field tracking technique.
This portable platform can therefore enrich tangible interactions by extending the design space to the nearsurface space.
Since non-ferrous materials, such as the user's hand, do not occlude the magnetic field, interaction designers can freely incorporate a magnetic unit into an appropriately shaped non-ferrous object to exploit the metaphors of the real-world tasks, and users can freely manipulate the GaussBits by hands or using other non-ferrous tools without causing interference.
The presented example applications and the collected feedback from an explorative workshop revealed that this new approach is widely applicable.
TUI  has been proven effectively to allow users to control and comprehend digital information as it supports direct manipulation and the utilization of spatial knowledge .
Since various advanced technologies are making prevalent mobile devices become increasingly powerful, some portable TUI approaches have been developed to improve the user experience.
Although TUIC , Clip-on Gadgets  and CapStones  can exploit the characteristics of a capacitive touchscreen to sense on-surface tangible objects, the interactions are confined to the 2D space because of the limitations of the available sensing technology.
Such on-surface approaches allow users only to perform 2D tangible interactions but not 3D interactions, such as grasping an object by performing in-air steering  - not only because the platform does not support near-surface tracking, but also because a grasping hand normally partially or fully occludes the target object.
Although some visionbased  and traditional magnetic approaches  can track the near-surface interactions, the former methods may suffer from the occlusion problem and the latter ones involve excessively heavy components for portable usage.
As a magnetic tracking method for portable devices, GaussSense  uses a thin-form Hall-sensor grid to detect the characteristics of a magnetic stylus, such as its hover po-
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Incorporating with a touchscreen allows information about the tilt and ID of a stylus to be determined.
However, the proposed sensing mechanism and the magnetic tangible object  are specifically designed for pen applications on the 2D canvas.
These limitations raise challenges in the transfer of this platform for the tracking of tangibles in the near-surface space.
These challenges motivate the development of GaussBits herein.
A GaussBit is a tangible object that contained a magnetic unit inside.
As in GaussSense , a thin Hall-sensor grid is used for tracking.
The key difference is that both N- and S-polar fields can be tracked at the same time.
Based on the bipolar magnetic field tracking technology, several designs of magnetic tangibles that provide magnetic fields with suitable properties for sensing are showcased.
The specifically designed magnetic unit allows the 3D position and partial 3D orientation  of the magnetic unit to be stably resolved on or above the display.
Therefore, it enables detection on tablets and non-touch LCD displays.
The new detection algorithm further allows multiple objects to be tracked at the same time.
Figure 1 shows one of the demo applications of GaussBits, called GaussPilot.
A Hall-sensor grid is attached to the back of a portable display, allowing the 3D position and tilt of a Tiltable GaussBit inside the toy aircraft to be resolved.
A user therefore can tilt and/or hover the toy aircraft above the display to perform the flight simulation.
The GaussPilot highlights several promising features of its enabling technology.
Since the sensor can track the remote magnetic field, a user can easily grasp a GaussBit to interact with the mobile device's display in the near-surface space as well as on the screen.
Additionally, since the magnetic field can easily penetrate through any non-ferrous material, such as the user's hand, interaction designers can incorporate a GaussBit into an appropriately shaped non-ferrous object to exploit metaphors from simulating the real-world tasks, and users can freely manipulate the GaussBit by hands or using other non-ferrous tools without interfering with the tracking.
This work will demonstrate three other example applications, which are GaussClock, GaussNavigator, and GaussCooker.
We also conducted an explorative workshop to investigate the possible applications of our approach.
The results reveal that the enabled design space is easily adoptable, has various applications, and supports more inspiring and interesting spatial operations to enrich the experience of users.
The rest of the paper is arranged as follows.
First, related work is discussed.
Then, the design of GaussBits is introduced and several example applications are presented to illustrate the enabled design space.
The tracking of tangible objects in the near-surface space above an interactive surface has primarily been performed using vision-based methods, such as the use of AR markers1 , motion tracker2 for pen interaction , or feature tracking methods for 3D puppetry-based storytelling .
Ullmer and Ishii developed metaDesk  by utilizing computer vision and magnetic methods for object tracking to explore the tangible interactions on a desktop surface through a map application.
SecondLight  enables near-surface interactions based on a computer-controlled diffuser, which allows a rearprojector to project images on and through the interactive surface.
ZeroN  further developed 3D tangible interactions by allowing an object to remain in mid-air using the magnetic levitation.
Nevertheless, the vision-based methods typically suffer from the occlusion problem, and although magnetic motion-tracking methods such as Polhemus3 are occlusion-free, the proposed settings makes them difficult to be integrated with mobile devices and difficult to be portable.
Recently, the primary sensing technology on portable multitouch devices has been based on the capacitive sensing method.
Before this technology became widely available, DiamondTouch  and SmartSkin  have demonstrated the tracking of conductive objects  on a capacitive sensing platform.
Recent research has begun to develop tangible interactions on capacitive touchscreens .
Clip-on Gadgets  map user inputs to the rich-haptic gadgets' inputs at the touch points on the edges of mobile touchscreens.
TUIC  presented capacitance tag designs in the space domain  and time domain  separately.
Based on the concept of passing-down markers , CapStones  enables the stacking of widgets on mobile capacitive touchscreens.
Owing to the limitations of the capacitive sensing technology, the tangible interactions are confined to 2D displays.
With respect to vision-based approaches, playAnywhere  is a portable camera-projector system that turns any surface into an interactive surface where tangible tracking is supported.
Portico  tracks objects on the screen and the surrounding surface using two cameras that are positioned above the display.
Though those vision-based approaches provide portable solutions and allow the interaction of tangible objects in the near-surface space above the display, they still suffer from the occlusion problem because of the limitations of the vision-based technology.
Direct or low-frequency magnetic fields can pass through the body, making them suitable for use in occlusion-free tracking.
Polhemus presented a high-resolution 6-DOF  tracking method using an electromagnetic field, but its sensing mechanism depends on an external emitter that makes it difficult to integrate into mobile devices.
Passive resonant tags  can cause the resonance of the sensing electromagnetic coil array to provide ID, single axis position, and orientation information.
A ferromagnetic input device  deploys an array of coils which allows to sense free-form ferromagnetic objects.
However, both of these solutions are typically unsuited to portable use.
With respect to portability, magnetometers are used in many mobile devices and can track the 3D position of a passive magnet within a radial detection range , but the orientation of the magnetic field cannot be resolved.
Although an electromagnetic resonance 4 sensor can be integrated into a mobile touchscreen to detect the hover and tilt of a passive stylus, it can not resolve roll.
SmartTable  utilizes a grid of Hall-effect switches to sense the information about the location and orientation of a 2D magnetic pattern on the surface, but it can sense only in 2D.
GaussSense  use an analog Hall-sensor grid to detect hover and the tilt of a magnetic stylus on touchscreens.
However, it's uni-polar magnetic fields tracking technique cannot recognize the roll of the stylus, or the tilt of a stylus while it is hovering, because the detection is associated with touchscreen input.
The method also cannot track multiple magnetic styli at the same time.
Hence, the feasibility of its extension to tangible interactions in 3D is unclear.
To resolve the tilt of a GaussBit's tilt information to be easily resolved in any direction without ambiguity, a cylindricalsymmetric 3D magnetic field between its two ends is required .
Therefore, the use of an axially magnetized cylindrical magnet, as shown in Figure 2 is suggested.
If see-through capability is required, as in a magnifying glass application, an axially magnetized ring magnet as shown in Figure 2 can be also used.
Figure 2 show the magnetic field intensity map of the sample magnets.
When the magnet is tilted, one side of it is higher than the other side, so the difference between the magnetic field intensities of the two sides provided tilt information.
The flip operation can also be recognized from the change in polarity.
The tilt of a Tiltable GaussBit is estimated from the sensed shape of magnetic field.
Accordingly, using magnets with larger radii provides more information and therefore a more precise estimate of tracking.
With respect to limitations, however, the roll angle cannot be determined, because the cylindrically symmetric magnetic field is invariant under rotation.
A GaussBit is a basic design element for use with a magnetic field tracking technique.
Based on the properties of a magnetic dipole field, which is symmetrically and uniformly distributed, the GaussBits can provide their 3D position information, and partial 3D orientation information through.
The basic operations that can be performed with the GaussBits are 3D translation, tilt, roll, and flip.
The 3D translation of a GaussBit can be easily resolved by analyzing the distribution and the maximum strength of the sensed magnetic field, as has been discussed previously .
The present work focuses on designing GaussBits to enable the resolution of their roll and tilt.
Neodymium magnets are used in prototype GaussBits.
The simplest way to resolve the roll angle of a GaussBit accurately is to lay down a Tiltable GaussBit to let the direction of the magnetization parallel to the surface as shown in Figure 3, or to attach another opposite-polar magnet by the Tiltable GaussBit as shown in Figure 3.
The magnetic field intensity map then becomes as shown in Figure 3, and the N-part and S-part of the magnetic field can be easily observed.
Because the magnetic field of a Rollable GaussBit is not cylindrically symmetric, tilt is ambiguous to determine at some angles.
However, the flip operation still can be detected by keeping one polar field stronger than the other, as shown in Figure 3, so that the sensor can "see" which side is facing down by recognizing the polarity of the strongest part of field.
The asymmetry designs introduced herein support carrying identification of GaussBits, which will be discussed later.
GaussBits can be manipulated above the display.
A multilevel dial, GaussClock , is demonstrated.
It is a widget for adjust ing a clock.
A laid 10mm-heightx4mm-radius cylindrical magnet in an acrylic case is used as a Rollable GaussBit, and a 5mm-thick LCD, mounted a Hall-sensor grid in the back is used as the display, as shown in Figure 4.
When the GaussClock is placed on the surface, the second hand of the clock is displayed to be adjustable.
When the GaussClock is lifted to the lower or higher near-surface space, the minute or hour hand of the clock is shown to be adjustable, respectively.
A user can rotate the GaussClock to adjust the selected hand.
Since the sensing becomes less precise as the height of hovering increases , this property is mapped to the operands.
The GaussClock on the surface can be sensed precisely, and the supporting surface also serves as a firm reference for the precise control.
Hence, a user can perform precise adjustments, such as of the seconds.
Coarse-scale control such as adjusting the hours are better performed in the air.
Currently, a GaussBit cannot be designed to support the full set of 6-DOF operations without ambiguity, because both types of GaussBits exploit either symmetry or asymmetry of a magnetic field - and these properties are mutually exclusive.
However, both types of GaussBits support interaction in the near-surface space above a portable display, rather than only on the display.
Although the interaction space is limited to the sensing range, which is usually less than 5cm, it suffices for users to interact with the content on the display in various scenarios.
In the next section, several example applications will be presented to demonstrate the capabilities and the tangible interaction design space enabled by GaussBits.
A map navigator, GaussNavigator, is presented here to demonstrated how a Tiltable GaussBit can extend the dimension of control  When GaussNavigator is placed on the surface, information of interest is displayed inside the ring and context information is displayed outside it.
A tangible map navigator, GaussNavigator , is presented here to demonstrate the extension of the control scope in tangible map navigation.
A 3mm-heightx19mm-outerradiusx15mm-inner-radius ring magnet is used as a Tiltable GaussBit, because this application requires see-through capability.
The hardware configurations for sensing and display are the same as those of GaussClock.
When a GaussNavigator is placed on the map, detail information of the area of interest such as the street names are shown inside the ring, and the contextual information such as the satellite view are shown outside it.
The user can move it freely to see around the areas of interest.
When the user wants to visit the area outside the current viewport, he or she can tilt the GaussNavigator to scroll the map.
The speed and direction of scrolling depends on how the GaussNavigator is tilted.
To zoom-out the map, the user can lift the GaussNavigator from the surface, then the map is zoomed-out at the hovering position.
In contrast, if the user wants to zoom-in the map, he or she can rapidly switch between modes by flipping the GaussNavigator in the near-surface space.
The hover, tilt, and flip operations provide intuitive mode switching during navigation of the map.
Users can intuitively use GaussNavigator based on existing spatial knowledge.
A simple clock widget, GaussClock, is presented here to demonstrated the use of a Rollable GaussBit as a multi-level dial.
A tangible pilot simulator, GaussPilot, is presented here to demonstrate the benefits of an occlusion-free method in providing favorable form factors and real-world metaphors.
The on-screen virtual shadow provides information on tracking.
A fish-frying simulation, GaussCooker, is presented here to show how a user can manipulate GaussBits using other non-ferrous instruments, based on magnetic penetration.
The pan is made of 2mm-thick plastic.
A tangible flight simulator, GaussPilot , is shown here to demonstrate the advantages of the occlusion-free property.
Since magnetic field tracking is unaffected by nonferrous material, a Tiltable GaussBit that is made of a 3mmheightx15mm-radius cylindrical magnet is stuffed into the plastic toy aircraft, which the user can grasp the object in his or her hand.
The display is an 8.7mm-thick iPad25 on the back of which is attached a Hall-sensor grid .
Since the physical object is shaped properly, users can control the GaussPilot based on their knowledge of piloting a toy aircraft.
A users can control the GaussPilot by pinching the toy aircraft above the display.
A virtual shadow visualizes tilt information and hover position to indicate to the user whether the aircraft is off-track.
To avoid obstacles, the user intuitively tilts the GaussPilot intuitively.
To pick up the virtual bonuses, the user can land the GaussPilot on the screen temporarily at the correct position.
A user can also raise or lower the nose of the GaussPilot to climb or dive, respectively.
This application demonstrates that the occlusion-free sensing technology overcomes the limitations of physical form design, allowing designers freely to customize objects to help users better perceive the available set of operations .
Moreover, since an object can be made of non-conductive materials, the original capacitive touch sensing is not interfered with.
Hence, designers can freely add features such as touch+tangible interactions  or apply other ID techniques  through the as-yet unused touch input.
Finally, the application scope has been extended from 2D to 3D.
A non-GaussBit, a plastic frying pan, is used to hold the fish and the soybean oil that is poured from the measuring cup.
The frying pan is made of 2mm-thick translucent plastic to allow users to see the information that is displayed on the screen.
The hardware setup is similar to that in GaussPilot.
To fry a fish in the game, a user firstly tilts the measuring cup above the frying pan to pour out the soybean oil.
Then, he or she can put the fish into the frying pan, which is distinguished from from the measuring cup by the sensing of its different magnetic field.
Then, the user can shake the frying pan to fry the fish, which action is determined by tracking the motion of the fish.
The user can flip the fish using the wooden chopsticks, which are non-GaussBits as well.
The user can continue to fry the fish, and then slide the fried fish out of the pan onto the dish.
This action is recognized from the increase in the sensed intensity of magnetic field.
Owing to the penetration of magnetic fields into non-ferrous objects, GaussBits can be manipulated on other non-ferrous objects, and still can be detected properly.
Hence, designers can combine GaussBits with other non-GaussBit objects to simulate tasks in more realistic and intuitive ways.
In daily life, people interact with physical objects by using not only their hands but also other tools.
Occlusionfree sensing can bring this experiences into tangible interaction design.
A cooking game, GaussCooker , uses two GaussBits in a cooking simulation.
They are a toy fish and a measuring cup .
The toy fish is embedded with a flippable Rollable GaussBit, which is made of a combination of a 6mm-heightx12.5mm-radius and a 10mm-heightx4mm-radius cylindrical magnets.
Each sensor element detects both N- and S-polar magnetic field intensities, in a range from 0 to 200 Gauss on a 256-point scale.
All sensor data are multiplexed and transferred to a PC through a Teensy7 2.0 micro-controller via a USB connection.
The captured bi-polar magnetic field data are 16x up-sampled using the bi-cubic interpolation method  to a 496 x 368 bitmap with the sampling rate consistently above 30fps, and map the N- and S-polar magnetic field at each sample points is mapped to a red or blue color intensity of the corresponding pixel on the bitmap, respectively.
Separate analyses of the  N-Field IN and  S-Field IS enables the connected components Ci and their feature Ci to be extracted from both field images.
The raw sensing image I consists of N- and S-polar parts, which are IN  and IS , respectively.
If the sensed intensity value is below a given noise threshold Tnoise , then it will be treated noise data and will be removed.
If the extracted Ci is too small or falls inside a larger one, then it is removed.
The remaining Ci are fitted using a rotational bounding box.
The centroid Oi of the bounding box, and maximum intensity value Imax of each Ci are then calculated.
The Oi and the Imax can be used to resolve the 3D position GaussBit.
To obtain orientation information, the filtered Ci must be further processed.
Analyzing each Oi with the corresponding Oi and Imax in both IN and IS yields the orientation information.
Within this distance, the position of hovering and the directions of roll or tilt can be resolved.
If the application involves only one Rollable GaussBit as in the GaussClock application shown, ON i N S and OS i can be used instead of Oi and Oi to increase the sensing distance.
Based on the proposed algorithm, the tilt or roll of the GaussBits can be correctly resolved, as shown in Figure 9.
The detected Ci and Ci can be used to determine whether the GaussBit is a Tiltable GaussBit or a Rollable GaussBit.
If a Ci is detected within Ci , of which the polarity is the same as Ci , then this Ci -Ci pair is regarded as a Tiltable GaussBit.
On the contrary, if an N-pole Ci is within a predefined threshold distance of an S-pole Ci , then this Ci N -Ci S pair is identified as a Rollable GaussBit rather than two Tiltable GaussBits.
For a Tiltable GaussBit, the projected position onto the 2D plane is Oi , and Imax determines the hover height.
The direction is given by the vector v = Oi - Oi , and the angle of tilt can be determined from ||v||.
An earlier study  revealed that the sensing performance becomes worse as the sensing distance is increased.
Therefore, an in-lab measurement was made to determine the maximum sensing distance of the proposed algorithm.
The five GaussBits that are demonstrated in the four applications, GaussClock, GaussNavigator, GaussPilot, and GaussCooker, are evaluated here.
A calibrated robot arm, shown in Figure 10, which can perform lift, tilt, and roll operations, is used to measure stably the performance of each GaussBit in the air.
The measurements started from a height of 5mm, which equals the thickness of the laptop LCD that was used in the application.
When the operation cannot be resolved, the test is terminated and the height is recorded as the maximum sensing distance of the corresponding function.
The Tnoise was set to 30 Gauss to filter out the unwanted noises, and the k was set to 40 Gauss to extract features.
Figure 10 shows the specifications of the five tested GaussBits.
The sensing distances of the tested GaussBits range from 17mm to 44mm , as the magnets that are embedded inside the GaussBits varied among the applications.
Within the sensing range, the direction of tilt or roll is correctly resolved as shown in Figure 10.
Using stronger magnets and/or using more sensitive Hall sensors for sensing can improve the detection range.
The green lines in Figure 10 represent the tilt angles.
The length of the green line is proportional to the actual tilt angles of the Tiltable GaussBits.
However, different Tiltable GaussBits provide differently shaped magnetic fields, the sensed tilt angles vary.
Proper calibration is therefore required before tilt angle can be enabled as a feature to be tracked.
Another limitation is that when the user tilts the magnet by more than 45 , the system may misinterpret a Tiltable GaussBit as a Rollable GaussBit if magnet is as thin as that used herein.
We expect more sophisticated learning and classification techniques to eliminate this ambiguity in future.
Generally, all of the tested GaussBits have a large enough sensing distance to support the intended interactions, and the sensing algorithm initially proves the concept.
Magnetic field between multiple GaussBits interference with sensing.
One of the primary advantages of the tangible user interface is the space-multiplexed input .
To realize space-multiplexed input, we have implemented the multipletangible tracking algorithm.
However, two major challenges, interference and identification, are needed to be solved.
In this section, we discuss these challenges and propose the possible solutions.
Ring-shaped magnets are used to describe how the shapes of magnetic fields can be used to identify GaussBits.
A straightforward method for identification is to carve a gap in the side of a ring-shaped magnet, as shown in Figure 13.
The position of the gap yields the orientation of the magnet .
The length of the gap can be used to identify the magnet .
This ID method retains the single-piece property of GaussBits, but the ID design space is limited to the size and shape of magnet.
Another method for identification is to attach small cylindrical magnets to the side of a ring-shape magnet as shown in Figure 13.
Since the magnetization of the attached cylinders opposes that of the ring as shown in Figure 13, the cylinders can be easily discriminated from the ring.
Accordingly, if the cylindrical magnets are attached asymmetrically, then the combination of magnets can not only yield the orientation of roll, but also identify the object, as shown in Figure 13.
This ID method provides ease of prototyping and facilitate identification.
Nevertheless, combining multiple magnets enlarges the GaussBits and may require casing to fix the magnets around the ring.
Nearby magnetic fields can easily interfere with a GaussBit, making the management of multiple magnetic tangibles on the display difficult.
Our algorithm already filters out any unwanted magnetic field that may interfere with tracking.
However, the shape of the magnetic field may be distorted by a very nearby field, and the fields may merge.
For examples, as shown in Figure 11, when two 3mm-heightx15mm-outerradius ring magnets are placed on a 5mm-thick laptop LCD, to the back of which is attached the Hall-sensor grid, they have a minimal interference-free distance of 11mm when they are in the same polarity.
At shorter distances, unexpected results are obtained.
Under the condition of opposite polarities, each of the positions of the magnets can be resolved even when they are attracted to each other, but the strong attractive force may impede user interactions.
To solve the above problem, a straightforward solution is to impose physical constraints , such as a firm casing to prevent the magnets from moving too close to each other, as shown in Figure 12.
Two methods identifying rollable magnets while determining the orientation of roll.
Scalability of shape as ID: Since multiple magnets are attached to each others in the identification method, scalability should be considered because of interference.
For the ID design that is shown in Figure 13, a 3mm-heightx4mmradius cylindrical magnets where attached around the central ring magnet as a payload, which had a minimal interferencefree distance of 9mm.
Hence, the 3mm-heightx19mm-outerradius magnet had a 7-bit ID space, as shown in Figure 13, in which the asymmetric patterns can be used to provide roll information as well.
When a user lifts or tilts the GaussBits from the surface, the image of the magnetic field becomes blurry, potentially shrinking the ID design space.
The ID design in Figure 13 was tested on a 5mm-thick LCD panel.
Its ID was detected robustly when the GaussBits hovered 9mm above the display or when they were tilted with a pitch or yaw of 15 degrees on the display.
Generally, although the capability of using shape for identification is limited and the number of IDs is proportional to the resolution of the sensing platform, this method is still usable for applications that require only a few tangibles.
GaussBits complement other identification techniques to increase the number of ID numbers.
GaussBits can be enhanced by using an  NFC tag, or  capacitive-based tag.
To understand how this enabling design space can be applied to design TUI applications for portable displays, eight designers  were recruited from a design school to participate in an explorative workshop.
All of them were senior graduate students, and had more than a year of experience of participating in brainstorming workshops.
If many IDs are required, then GaussBits can be combined with other passive ID techniques, such as the use of an NFC tag, by attaching the passive NFC tag to the bottom of a GaussBit, as shown in Figure 14, or the use of capacitance tags, by deploying a conductive pattern to the bottom of a GaussBit, as shown in Figure 14.
Combining both techniques provides the advantages of both.
The comparison table  clearly illustrates the benefits of combining GaussBit with NFC or TUIC-2D  tags.
Especially, when combined with the capacitive TUIC-2D passive tag, a Rollable GaussBit can effectively reduces the required size of TUIC-2D tag because its magnetic field can provide registration information, such as the orientation and position of the tag, as shown in Figure 14.
Therefore, the smaller tag is better suited smaller portable capacitive multitouch displays, such as in smartphones.
First, relevant fundamental knowledge, including the available interaction set and limitations of this technology, is presented.
Then, the four applications herein were presented to the designers to allow them to experience the technology .
Then, paper clay, various kinds of magnet, stacks of 3M post-it memos, and white paper were distributed to the designers.
With the paper clay in hand, designers could make tangible prototypes while brainstorming, and share their thoughts through the think-aloud protocol.
To ensure the quality of the discussion, participants were split into two equally sized groups.
Each group engaged in an explorative workshop that lasted for two hours, and all activities were video-recorded.
During the two-hour workshop, various ideas were generated and discussed.
Those ideas can be roughly divided into four categories, which were real-world simulation, entertainment, toolkits, and display as a tool.
Real-world simulation: By shaping the tangibles into the desired form, designers can easily simulate the tasks from the real world.
For example, one designer thought about attaching a handle to the ring-shaped GaussBit to simulate a magnifying glass, to assist with interior design tasks, or to help the tourists navigate a city map.
Other ideas, such as gardening with physical tools , or sculpting with a knife,
Some tasks from the real-world simulation are proposed like  wielding an axe to chop a tree;  using a metal detector to hunt for treasure, and  fishing with a bait made of a GaussBit.
The designers also felt that they could easily use their common knowledge to perform these tasks.
Entertainment: Since most downloaded applications on mobile devices are games, some designers thought that tangible objects could be designed to enhance the experience of gaming.
A range of games were considered.
They included holding a toy car for racing, hunting for treasure using a metal detector , and fishing with a rod with a magnet as the bait .
Games with educational purposes, such as teaching color mixing using different color bottles, teaching chemical reactions by treating each tangible as a particular chemical solutions, or teaching invisible magnetic interactions by displaying magnetic flux were proposed.
Designers felt that holding a physical controller make game playing more engaging.
Toolkits: Rather than designing a general-purpose tangible, designers thought that a series of specific-designed tangibles as toolkits would be more useful for some applications.
For example, a doctor requires different medical instruments to cure a virtual patient, and a gardener requires various tools to planting virtual flowers or watering virtual plants .
The designers thought that such tools could be placed on or around the device, and that users could choose the required one and use it to interact with the display.
Display as a tool: The designers tried to utilize their handheld devices to interact with the GaussBits.
One designer said that rather than moving a GaussBit above a display, users could fix a larger GaussBit on the table and move a mobile display to explore around it; then, the display would augment the related information about the object from the distance and angle between the device and the GaussBit .
They also thought that the GaussBits could support remote collaboration with a shared working space.
This work is limited in several ways, which we intended to overcome in future work.
First, the range of application is limited by the resolution and form factors of the hardware prototype.
Better manufacturing of the sensor hardware can increase the sensing resolution, and different form factors can be used with various portable displays, such as flexible OLEDs.
Second, although the detection with the proof-ofconcept sensing algorithm, which is designed based on experimental data, is effective, exploiting the essence of magnetism is a promising way to further improve the performance of this technology.
Finally, the current hardware prototype is not easy for designers and developers to use.
We believe that developing an easily adoptable prototyping toolkit will lead to more interesting applications and provide a platform for further research into near-surface tangible interaction design.
In this work, magnetism is utilized to enable tangible interactions in the near-surface space of the off-the-shelf portable displays.
Two types of GaussBits, Tiltable GaussBits and Rollable GaussBits, are introduced.
They can be robustly tracked in the near-surface space by the developed sensing algorithm and the prototype Hall-sensor grid.
Since the sensing mechanism is occlusion-free, non-ferrous materials can be used to shape the GaussBits.
How the enabling technology can enrich the mobile interaction experience is demonstrated using four applications, which are GaussClock, GaussNavigator, GaussPilot and GaussCooker.
These applications show how can leverage their spatial knowledge using easily understood metaphors to carry out interactions.
The explorative workshop also revealed that the interaction design space that was enabled by the proposed approach is easily applicable, and it suggested many promising directions for future developments.
GaussBits advance tangible interactions on portable displays by providing occlusion-free 3D interactions in the nearsurface space.
We hope that the broader CHI community can apply this technique to develop more novel designs to exploit the quiescent meanings  of tangible interactions.
We gratefully acknowledge the helpful comments of the Associate Chairs and the anonymous reviewers.
We also thank Neng-Hao Yu for his valuable comments on the capacitance tag technology.
