We introduce a framework for supporting crowds of participants in collaborative virtual environments .
The framework is realised as an extension to our previous spatial model of interaction and aims to provide greater scaleability and flexibility for communication between the inhabitants of virtual worlds.
Our framework introduces an explicit crowd mechanism into CVEs in order to support the formation and activation of different kinds of crowd with different effects on mutual awareness and communication .
We present a demonstration application called the Arena - a shared space for staging on-line performances in front of a live audience.
Our framework provides CVE application developers with system level mechanisms to deal with the following issues: * what effects can crowds have on awareness and communication in CVEs and how might they be represented in different media?
Our approach is therefore concerned with the mechanics of managing awareness and communication among human participants in crowded CVEs.
Our work is concerned with participation in crowds as opposed to simulation of them and our approach anticipates that higher-level crowd behaviours will emerge if appropriate underlying mechanisms are provided.
However, as we shall discuss later on, it may be beneficial to combine the participation and simulation approaches in the future.
At a technical level, our notion of crowds is realised as an extension to our previous spatial model of interaction .
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows.
The following section considers the motivations for introducing an explicit crowd mechanism into CVEs.
We then introduce the underlying mechanism of third party objects as an extension to the spatial model.
Following this, we discuss how third party objects can be used to create a variety of different kinds of crowds in CVEs.
Finally, we present a demonstration application, implemented using the MASSIVE-2 system, called the Arena, which combines static and dynamic crowds with a structured space so as to create a venue for on-line performances.
Our aim is to introduce and demonstrate a framework for supporting crowds in collaborative virtual environments .
This framework is intended to support the development of more scaleable CVEs than has been possible before whilst maintaining a high degree of flexibility with respect to communication and participation.
More specifically, we anticipate future CVEs that will support hundreds or even thousands of simultaneous participants engaged in real-time graphical, audio, textual and video communication with one another.
Potential application areas of such technology include conferences, lectures, training and simulation.
However, the key application area considered in this paper is that of entertainment and in particular, audience participation in online events of all kinds .
Indeed, when coupled to development of Interactive TV platforms , our framework might eventually help in the creation of new forms of socially active mass entertainment - Inhabited TV if you like.
Our paper focuses on the specific issue of introducing a flexible and dynamic notion of crowds into CVEs.
Permission to copy without fee all or part of this material is granted provided that the copies are not made or distributed for commercial advantage, the ACM copyright notice and the title of the publication and its date appear, and notice is given that copying is by permission of the Association for Computing Machinery.
To copy otherwise, or to republish, requires a fee and/or specific permission.
Our first motivation is scale.
Current CVEs support at most a few tens of simultaneous users.
There are several dimensions to the problem of scale.
First, can the network exchange rich information about many simultaneous participants sufficiently quickly and reliably so as to engender a sense of co-presence?
This is a major limitation for systems based on unicast network protocols but will eventually become an issue even for systems which utilise more network efficient multicast protocols.
Second, assuming that the network can deliver this information, can the computers involved process and render it?
Third, even if the combination of network and computer can deliver and display the information, can individual participants make sense of it?
This leads us to our second major motivation, that of legibility and structure.
Some initial evidence for this is provided by recent work on enhancing the legibility of information visualisations through the introduction of districts and related features such as landmarks, edges, paths and nodes .
Our final motivation involves generating a sense of masspresence for specific classes of application.
Audiences play a key role in various real-world events such a theatre, concerts, sports, exhibitions, fairgrounds, trade shows, rallies, demonstrations and even town centres and public spaces.
A crowd mechanism might therefore enhance or even create a sense of audience presence and participation in CVEs and might open up opportunities for new forms of social interaction.
Thus, aura collisions lead to connections being established.
This in turn is negotiated through focus and nimbus.
Focus is a sub-space representing the attention of the observer and nimbus is a sub-space representing the projection of information by the observed.
The observer's awareness of the observed is then some function of the observer's focus on the observed and the observed's nimbus on the observer.
Third party objects have been introduced in order to address these problems.
A third party object is an independent object which affects the awareness between other objects.
Our framework for realising crowds in CVEs is based on our previous spatial model of interaction and in particular, on a recent extension to the model called third party objects.
The spatial model defines mechanisms for the management of awareness and communication in shared virtual spaces .
Three general points should be noted about third party objects from the outset.
Second, as they are objects in their own right they may be embodied, mobile or fixed, dynamically or statically created and may apply their effects recursively to one another.
Adaptation involves the manipulation of existing awareness relationships between objects.
In this sense, third party objects are a generalised notion of the adapters that were defined in the initial spatial model.
Secondary sourcing involves the introduction of new indirect awareness relationships between objects in order to enable new transformed flows of information between them.
Typically, secondary sourcing involves the consumption of information from an external group of objects, its transformation in some way and its subsequent retransmission in order to provide a common view of the group.
Various filters may also be applied at different stages of this process in order to reduce level of detail or to select key information.
At the heart of secondary sourcing lies the problem of creating a single aggregate view or stream of information from a number of sources.
We will provide concrete examples of these classes of transformation when specifically discussing crowds later on.
For example, one might become a member of a room by crossing its boundary.
This turns out to be a useful case for crowds .
Given that they are independent objects in their own right, third party objects might be created and destroyed in any of the ways associated with normal objects.
It is also necessary to consider the issue of who creates and destroys them.
Again, there are three cases to consider: * the system - third parties might be automatically created or destroyed by the CVE operating system according to network and system load factors.
Next we consider the circumstances under which different combinations of these effects are applied.
The activation of third party objects is based on the awareness relationships between the third party and the other objects involved.
Thus, referring to figure 1, the activation of T depends on four possible awareness relationships: T's awareness of A and B respectively and their awareness of it.
In figure 3 we identify three particularly interesting cases from among the various possibilities.
Before going on to consider how they can support the introduction of crowds into CVEs, we first briefly list a number of representative broader applications of the third party mechanism: * bounded rooms and buildings - the creation of membership activated regions of space whose boundaries might have different effects across different media and which might be hierarchically combined to form arbitrarily complex virtual buildings.
The district could also provide awareness of the presence of other individuals within that district.
This concludes our general introduction to third party objects in the spatial model.
The following section now considers how they may be used to support crowds.
Developing appropriate aggregation techniques is clearly a critical issue for building useful and convincing crowds.
Although the details of particular techniques will be application specific and are therefore beyond the scope of this paper, this section does propose an initial classification of approaches according to the two dimensions of general approach  and the medium involved.
Crowds can be realised as a specific class of third party object which support potentially large groups of people  in CVEs.
We now consider the following aspects of crowds as third party objects: effects on awareness, representation, activation and membership, creation and destruction, mobility and generation and behaviour.
We propose that, in general, crowds should have an asymmetric effect on awareness.
From the "outside", such as when perceived from a distance or from the perspective of a non-member, individuals within the crowd are hidden  and, instead, are replaced with an aggregate view of the whole crowd .
Typically, they will also be aware of those outside of the crowd on an individual basis.
Indeed, in some cases the crowds may even amplify the awareness that those inside have of those outside such as in the case where people in an audience wish to be maximally aware of the performers at an event.
Thus as a member of a crowd, I can communicate with nearby people who are also in the crowd, and can perceive those outside of the crowd in detail, although they may only perceive me in as much as I contribute to the aggregate view of the crowd.
Of course, given that they are third party objects, crowds may contain other crowds, thereby applying these effects recursively to one another.
Each entry in the above table refers to a possible technique for aggregating many sources in a given medium into a single output.
This aggregate may then be filtered and translated to create a final representation in some  medium.
Note that we have defined an additional medium called events, which covers application defined events and protocols ranging from the general presence and location of objects through to specific events such as pressing an "applaud now" button on a user interface.
Several of the entries in this table suggest the application of well known techniques.
For example, selection across any of the media could utilise a range of floor control and scheduling algorithms such as round robin, random selection, most active, currently active and so forth.
It may also be possible to adapt existing text manipulation techniques for the text medium, including digestifying ds used on newsgroups and automatic abstracting and indexing.
Combination in the graphical medium might involve the creation of a new super-object whose parts are defined by the individual sources.
Although not inherently scaleable in itself, this approach could be combined with automatic level of detail techniques.
Video tiling provides a way of combining multiple video views into a single view, although this approach would appear less scaleable.
Two current systems can be associated with two of the entries.
The Paradise project has been exploring the use of graphical abstraction techniques to produce aggregate views of groups of objects for use in distributed simulation .
Their approach generates statistics about graphical objects  and these aggregations are then used to generate graphical representations.
This approach could also drive the playback of video samples or graphical animations.
Two further entries in table are worthy of special note as they would appear to pose great difficulties.
These are the combination of audio signals and the abstraction of video signals.
In the everyday world one never perceives a combination of audio signals that are not already superimposed.
Other than having two ears , there is therefore no general way of distinguishing an individual audio signal from among a combination .
Conversely, although one might somehow use morphing techniques to blend video images together, in the real world one rarely perceives superimposed visual images  and so, as humans, we have no apparatus for usefully dealing with an abstraction of visual signals.
In other words, we suspect that the nature of our audio and visual perception will make the development of useful audio combination and video abstraction techniques especially difficult.
We identify two general styles of activating crowds.
Thus, the crowd can determine which objects are members and which are not and typically operates such that: members are normally aware of both members and non-members; non-members are normally aware of non-members; but that non-members are only aware of members through an aggregate view.
Our second class of crowd is based on the hybrid approach .
This operates as for the membership based example with one key difference.
Whether a non-member perceives individual members or not depends on how aware they are of the crowd.
This allows people outside of the crowd to "unfold" it just by looking at it hard enough, even if they are not themselves members.
In essence, both classes of crowd use the idea of membership to determine whether or not an object contributes to the aggregate view.
The difference is the basis on which that view is perceived by others - according to how aware they are of the crowd or vice versa.
It should also be noted that, just as awareness is potentially a multi-valued quantity in the spatial model, so then is the idea of membership.
One can extend these examples to include multiple levels of membership which activate different combinations of effects.
Crowds can be created and destroyed at all three of the levels identified previously, by the system, application developers and the participants themselves.
However, the first two are of particular interest.
The system might automatically introduce crowd objects into an environment in order to manage system load by reducing the number of individual awareness relationships to be considered.
This might be done to handle a sudden mass of new arrivals into an environment.
The temporary introduction of a crowd object might help smooth this process and the crowd could then be removed once the major movements had settled down and a new phase of activity was underway.
Adopting a longer term view, the structure of a virtual environment might be used to predict where crowd objects could usefully be located.
For example, in a persistent environment such as a virtual town, it may be useful to associate a crowd with key locations such as squares, major pathways and junctions.
Indeed, recent research into the structure of virtual environment inspired by urban planning theory has pointed towards there being a direct causal relationship between the structure of a virtual environment, the navigation strategies employed by its inhabitants and the places where social encounters are likely to occur .
In short, given knowledge of the former two, it may be possible to predict the latter.
Such knowledge would suggest in advance where crowd objects might most beneficially be introduced into the environment.
This suggests the use of our framework to create a library of architectural components with associated crowd properties.
Indeed, the use of such agents is going to be essential for initial testing of systems .
The automatic generation of crowds raises the question of whether it might be possible to introduce, control or re-inforce crowd behaviours among human participants.
In this section we present a prototype application of our framework.
This prototype, called the Arena, realises a virtual space for on-line performance to a live audience.
In this case, the performance is a simple interactive ball game between several participants.
The Arena demonstrates the following features of our framework: * the use of third party objects to support crowds.
The Arena has been implemented using the MASSIVE-2 system, a general purpose CVE which supports the extended spatial model of interaction and provides a platform for creating different kinds of third party object .
Like its predecessor, MASSIVE, the system allows users to interact using graphics, text and audio media.
MASSIVE-2 relies heavily on the use of multicast networking protocols in order to achieve efficient networking.
New objects which become members of the third party are automatically invited to join this multicast group.
Beneath the surface, this is mapped onto a dynamically evolving hierarchy of multicast groups.
It is this highly dynamic use of multicast that allows MASSIVE-2 to achieve both scaleability and flexibility.
The Arena is housed in a bounded space - a static, graphically embodied third party object whose effects are to completely attenuate awareness between members and nonmembers.
Membership is achieved simply by crossing its boundary.
Thus, those on the outside  cannot hear or see what is happening on the inside and vice versa.
Within the Arena space there are two further third party objects, both of which are static crowds.
These are used to locate the opposing supporters .
They are membership based crowds which are created when the application is initialised and whose position is fixed.
They support two kinds of aggregation algorithm: * in the graphical medium, each crowd provides an aggregate embodiment whose size increases according to the  of the number of its current members.
Thus, as more people enter the crowd, so the size of its aggregate view increases.
Our current crowd embodiment is similar in appearance to that of the individual participants so that the crowd takes on the appearance of a giant sized person.
The area between the static crowds represents the performance space.
For the performance we have created a simple ball game  where several participants bat a graphical ball backward and forwards over a net.
Of course, they can talk to each other as well.
The presence of the two crowds inside of the Arena space gives rise to several different modes of awareness between its inhabitants.
Referring to figure 4, C and D, who are in the same crowd, have normal mutual awareness of one another, have full awareness of the performers, B and A, but only perceive E in as much as they contribute to their crowd aggregation.
As performers, A and B have full mutual awareness but only perceive the audience members, C, D and E through their respective crowd aggregations.
One or more dynamic crowds can be created outside of the Arena in order to handle the sudden outflow of participants at the end of the event.
Although they use the same aggregation techniques, these differ from the static crowds inside the Arena in several respects: * they are mobile such that, at any given time, they assume the mean position and orientation of their members.
Thus, even at a distance, one can unfold these crowds by raising one's focus sufficiently.
In order to test and demonstrate this application we have also implemented some simple agent based crowd members who may occupy the Arena along side its human participants.
Figure 5 shows how the Arena appears from within the performance space and includes two red players, two blue players, the red and blue crowds  and a scoreboard.
Figure 6 shows how the Arena appears to a member of the red crowd.
In this case, we can see several nearby individual members of the red crowd, the performers and a secondary source view of the more distant blue crowd.
We have also presented a demonstration of our framework based around an application called the Arena - a virtual environment for staging different kinds of performance in front of an audience - which has been implemented using the MASSIVE-2 platform.
Having established this general framework, further research is now required.
First, research is needed into alternative and more powerful aggregation techniques for different communication media.
Second, it may be beneficial to create a "library" of higher level building blocks for creating different kinds of crowds.
Such a library might represent a set of standard architectural building blocks for virtual worlds that could easily be accessed by application developers without the need for extensive programming.
Given that these various issues can be addressed, we anticipate that our framework may become a significant component in constructing mass participation social electronic environments and that, in the future, such technology could have widespread applications in many areas of life including arts, entertainment, leisure and culture.
Our paper has been concerned with supporting crowds of participants in collaborative virtual environments.
Specifically, we have introduced a framework for reasoning about and developing different kinds of crowds with different effects on spatial awareness and communication.
This framework is based on an extension of our previous spatial model of interaction called third party objects.
The key points of our framework are: * crowds can play a significant role in configuring communication and awareness.
In particular, they may introduce aggregate views of their members.
Greenhalgh, C. M. and Benford, S. D., Introducing Regions into Collaborative Virtual Environments, Internal report available from the authors of this paper .
Greenhalgh, C. M. and Benford, S. D., MASSIVE: A Virtual Reality System for Tele-conferencing, ACM Transactions on Computer Human Interaction , 2 , pp.
Ingram, R. J., Bowers, J. M. and Benford, S. D., Building Virtual Cities: Applying Urban Planning Theory to the Design of Virtual Environments, Proc.
Sime, J. D., Crowd Psychology and Engineering: Designing for People or Ballbearings?
Singhal, S. K. and Cheriton, D. R., Using Projection Algorithms to Support Scalability in Distributed Simulation, Proc.
1996 International Conference on Distributed Computing Systems, IEEE, 1996.
