Trajectory-based interactions, such as navigating through nested-menus, drawing curves, and moving in 3D worlds, are becoming common tasks in modern computer interfaces.
Users' performances in these tasks cannot be successfully modeled with Fitts' law as it has been applied to pointing tasks.
Therefore we explore the possible existence of robust regularities in trajectory-based tasks.
We used "steering through tunnels" as our experimental paradigm to represent such tasks, and found that a simple "steering law" indeed exists.
The paper presents the motivation, analysis, a series of four experiments, and the applications of the steering law.
Due to its accuracy and robustness, Fitts' law has been a popular research topic.
Numerous studies have been conducted to explain , extend  and apply Fitts' law to various domains.
The value of Fitts' law in human-computer interaction research can be readily appreciated.
Taking input device research as an example, it was nearly impossible to compare device performance results from different studies until the Fitts' law model was applied .
Without Fitts' law, performance scores  are only meaningful under a set of specific experimental conditions .
With Fitts, these scores can be translated into a performance index  that is independent of those experimental details.
What Fitts' laws revealed is a somewhat intuitive tradeoff in human movement: the faster we move, the less precise our movements are, or vice versa: the more severe the constraints are, the slower we move.
Paul Fitts  formulated such a tradeoff in three experimental tasks  that are essentially in one paradigm: hitting a target over certain distance.
In human-computer interaction, such a paradigm corresponds to a frequent elemental task: pointing/target selection.
However, it is obvious that Fitts' law addresses only one type of movement.
Fitts' law is not an adequate model for these trajectory-based tasks.
Simply by trying to write with a mouse one would realize the marked difference between a mouse and a pen .
Yet formal studies in Fitts' law paradigm  showed little performance difference between these two types of devices.
Clearly the user interface / input device studies carried out in the Fitts' law paradigm are not sufficient for today's practical needs.
It has long been proposed that in addition to pointing , pursuit tracking, free-hand inking, tracing, and constrained motion should all be considered as testing tasks for input device evaluation .
It has been argued that the advancement of HCI lies in "hardening" the field with quantitative,engineering-like models .
In reality, few theoretical, quantitative tools are available in user interface research and development.
A rare exception to this is Fitts' law .
Extending information theory to human perceptual-motor system, Paul Fitts found a formal relationship that models speed/accuracy tradeoffs in aimed movements.
It predicts that the time needed to point to a target of width and at distance is logarithmically related to the inverse of the spatial relative error , that is:
Are there any other regularities in human movement that can be modeled in simple mathematical equations?
If so, we would have a richer set of quantitative tools for both motor control research and for user interface evaluations.
The current work is one step toward such a goal.
In order to address trajectory-based tasks, the experimental paradigm we choose to focus on is steering between boundaries .
A simple example of such tasks is illustrated in Figure 1, where one has to draw a line from one side of the figure to the other, passing through the "tunnel".
We hypothesized that for a given amplitude  and variability , the time needed to perform this kind of operations should depend directly on the amplitude and the path width, in accordance with a formal model.
Experiment 1 shows that a steering task with constraints on both ends  follows the same logarithmic law as Fitts' tapping task.
This serves as a stepping stone towards formulating relationships between movement time and continuous constraint in steering tasks.
If the time needed to over distance follows Fitts' pass two goals of width law, what happens if we place more "goals" on the trajectory?
And what will the law become if we place infinite number of goals?
Clearly, the resulting task is the straight tunnel steering task we proposed in the Introduction .
Note that the purpose of such a recursive analysis is to formulate a hypothetical relationship for the steering task; it is not to offer an explanation with psychomotor or neuromotor understanding of the steering control process.
If C tends to infinity, the task becomes a "tunnel traveling" task.
The difficulty to move from goal 1 to goal +1 via goals 2, 3, , is:
Thirteen subjects participated in this experiment.
The design of the experiment was the same as the previous one: fullycrossed, within-subjects factorial design with repeated measures.
Similarly to experiment 1, this experiment included a warm-up session and the data collection session.
Each combination of amplitude and width was tested with 5 trials.
In this experiment we wanted to test if our method could be applied to linear trajectories but with a non-constant path width.
The simplest configuration that satisfies these properties is a narrowing tunnel, shown on Figure 6.
Subjects were asked to draw a line through the tunnel as quickly as possible.
At the beginning of each trial, only the rectangle, as presented by Figure 4d, was presented on the screen, in green color.
Pressing on the stylus tip resulted in a blue line being drawn.
The line color then turned red when the cursor crossed the left side of the rectangle, and both the rectangle and the line turned yellow when the task ended, as the stylus crosses the right side of the rectangle.
A beep was also emitted when changing conditions.
The crossing of the left and right sides of the rectangle was taken into account only if proceeded from left to right.
Crossing the "sideways" of the path results in the cancelation of the trial and an error being recorded.
Figure 6: Narrowing tunnel Such a task can also be decomposed into a set of elemental goal passing tasks, for which we can calculate the index of difficulty.
But this method and the resulting expression of the index of difficulty  is somewhat complicated compared to the simplicity of the tunnel shape.
We thus applied a new, simpler method to compute the index of difficulty for this task.
The new approach considers the narrowing tunnel steering task as a sum of elemental linear steering tasks described in experiment 2.
Figure 7 shows such a decomposition.
To obtain the ID of the entire path, we just have to sum all along the path, that gives:
Figure 9: Integrating along a curve To establish a generic formula, we introduced the curvilinear abscissa as the integration variable: if is a curved path, we define the index of difficulty for steering through this path as the sum along the curve of the elementary indexes of difficulty.
Finally, the starting position clearly influences the difficulty of a steering task.
For instance, the performance likely depends, in Experiment 1, 2, and 3, on whether steering is performed from left to right or from right to left, and in experiment 4, on both the centripetal / centrifugal and clockwise / counter clockwise directions of steering.
Steering is then probably related to handedness.
Figure 15: Interacting with menus Selecting an item in a hierarchical menu involves two  linear path steering tasks: a vertical steering to select a parent item, followed by a horizontal steering to select a sub-item.
Applying the results from experiment 2, we can model the time to select a sub-menu as the sum of the vertical and horizontal steering tasks.
Due to space limitation, we have to leave out many more detailed variations of the laws we proposed and verified.
It should be pointed out, however, that there are various limitations to these simple laws.
First, due to human body limitations , there are upper bound limits to the path width that can be correctly modeled by the these simple laws.
Exceeding these limits leads to the saturation of the laws described above.
These limitations are the reason why we had to remove the greatest widths when analyzing linear relationships between speed and path width for the local law.
Second, the local law can be modified to take path curvature into account.
Indeed, our local law could be compared to the law introduced by Viviani et al.
4 We assume here that horizontal steering and vertical steering are driven by the same law.
A further study is planned to prove this assumption.
Moreover, the coefficient involved in these two laws are likely to be different, but of the same order of magnitude.
The calculation performed here are considered as approximations.
Therefore, assuming that d is, on average, half the number of items in the menu, the greater the number of items is, the greater the quotient  should be.
By analogy to IP in Fitts' law, in equation 13 and in equation 20, can be used as indexes for performance comparisons.
Device  and limb  comparisons have been done with Fitts' Index of Performance in pointing tasks.
By applying the steering law, we plan to study performance differences among various input devices such as mouse, stylus, isometric joystick, and trackball.
Fitts' law is one of the very few robust and quantitative laws that can be applied to human-computer interaction research and design.
A great number of studies have been conducted to verify and apply Fitts' law.
We carried the spirit of Fitts' law a step forward and explored the possible existence of other robust regularities in movement tasks.
In this study, we first demonstrated that the logarithmic relationship between movement time and tangential width of target in a tapping task also exists between movement time and normal width of the target in a "goal passing" task.
A thought experiment of placing infinite numbers of goals along a movement trajectory lead us to hypothesize that there is a simple linear relationship between movement time and the "tunnel" width in steering tasks.
We then confirmed such a relationship in three types of "tunnels": straight, narrowing, and spiral, all with correlations greater than 0.96.
We then generalize the relationships in both integral and local forms.
The integral form states that the steering time is linearly related to the index of difficulty, which is defined as the integral of the inverse of the width along the path; the local form states that the speed of movement is linearly related to the normal constraint.
The regularities presented in this study may enrich the small repertoire of quantitative tools in HCI research and design.
Device comparison and menu design are just two of the many potential HCI applications.
This research was undertaken under the auspices of the Input Research Group of the University of Toronto, directed by Bill Buxton who has made substantial contributions to the development of this paper.
The work was supported by  the Centre d'Etude de la Navigation A erienne , the Information Technology Research Center of Ontario , Alias|Wavefront Inc., the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada , and the IBM Almaden Research Center.
We are indebted to the members of the IRG group for their input.
We would also like to thank Wacom Corporation Inc. for their contributions to the project.
We particularly like to thank Thomas Baudel of Alias|Wavefront, St ephane Chatty of the CENA, and William Hunt of the University of Toronto for their helpful comments on the project.
