We present a qualitative study of 35 United States households whose occupants have made significant accommodations to their homes and behaviors in order to be more environmentally responsible.
Our goal is to inform the design of future sustainable technologies through an exploration of existing "green" lifestyles.
We describe the motivations, practices, and experiences of the participants.
The participants had diverse motivations ranging from caring for the Earth to frugal minimalism, and most participants also evidenced a desire to be unique.
Most participants actively and consciously managed their homes and their daily practices to optimize their environmental responsibility.
Their efforts to be environmentally responsible typically required significant dedication of time, attention, and other resources.
As this level of commitment and desire to be unique may not generalize readily to the broader population, we discuss the importance of interactive technologies that influence surrounding infrastructure and circumstances in order to facilitate environmental responsibility.
These efforts seek to ameliorate environmental problems by making technologies that are materially more environmentally responsible, and by influencing and helping people to be more environmentally responsible.
As Blevis suggests, these designs implicitly choose among or inform choices of future ways of being .
But this is a nascent research area, and there is not a clear picture of the ideal that is being designed for - when we as researchers say we are trying to encourage people to be "more environmentally responsible," what exactly do we mean?
In this work, we report a qualitative study of "green" individuals in the United States who have made significant accommodations to their homes and lifestyles in order to be more environmentally responsible.
Our goal is to inform future design efforts by presenting concrete information about existing green practices and beliefs.
Our contributions are as follows: We describe the motivations, practices, and experiences of committed green individuals.
We use our findings to inform the space of potential ideals.
We discuss how realistic it would be for the broader population to approach the ideal represented by these individuals, and we propose technologies that might bridge differences between committed green individuals and the broader population.
We further consider the obstacles that our participants have faced and the strategies they have employed in order to become more environmentally responsible and discuss how these inform the design of persuasive  and interactive technologies.
While our investigation covered a wide range of topics, we focused in particular on questions such as the following: How are environmental values enacted in everyday life?
What personality factors and life experiences motivate green behavior?
What role did technology play in our participants' efforts to be environmentally responsible?
Did our participants approach environmental choices rigidly or flexibly?
Is being a green a private or a public act?
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows.
In the next section, we review related work.
We then discuss our participants and method, findings, design implications, and conclusions.
Growing concerns about global warming, natural resource depletion, and environmental degradation have prompted action by private individuals, governmental and regulatory bodies, non-governmental organizations , corporations, and the academic and industrial research community.
As eloquently argued by Blevis , the CHI community has much to offer in this arena.
Humancomputer interaction research has a well-established tradition of attention to socially relevant issues , including some initial explorations of environmental sustainability, e.g., .
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Other work has focused on the material effects of the creation, use, and disposal of interactive or pervasive technologies .
Our study seeks to inform such efforts through a holistic investigation of environmentally responsible practice and experience.
The participants in our study are representative of a broader trend in environmentalism in which people are informed and inspired by a wide range of affiliations in ways that preclude social scientists from defining their motivations and actions as traditional social movements .
Accordingly, unlike previous social research concerning environmentalism as a social movement , we embrace the decentralized and sometimes contradictory character of contemporary environmental action, and situate our participants in terms of social networks that can facilitate environmental communication and action .
As an extension of this position, we approach activism as only one component of environmental action that is not necessarily  central to the identity or values of our participants.
Therefore, unlike social investigations of environmentalism that prioritize activism, e.g., , our research focuses more distinctly on material culture and domestic practice as vehicles for understanding environmental values.
This approach also provided us with a means of considering the role of technology for this population, as well as laying the groundwork for potential extrapolation to broader populations.
We view such extrapolation interpretively in terms of experiences and do not attempt to map our findings to United States demographics .
We used an organic recruiting process that leveraged contacts in green movements, contacts made at green home tours, and advertising in community email lists.
Research participants were selected with an eye toward diversity in socio-economic status, age, gender, home size, amount of experience with environmentalism, and aesthetic preference.
Almost all participants were adults, at a variety of life stages.
Participants had a range of occupations , although the sample particularly emphasized people involved with the green building industry .
The majority of our participants might be considered "bright green environmentalists," who believe technology is a resource for achieving gains in sustainability  .
We selected research participants who had chosen environmentally responsible home systems, features, and/or construction, e.g., use of reclaimed materials, solar panels, automation systems to improve energy efficiency, etc.
We chose to focus on such participants because modifying one's home represents dedication: the process requires significant expenditure of resources; the home is strongly connected to personal identity and daily practice ; and changes to home systems and structure are generally long-term, as they are not trivial to modify or undo.
Further, opportunities for technological intervention abound in the home , and green buildings are of high strategic importance from an environmental perspective .
The homes were in urban, suburban, and rural areas , and were predominantly single-family detached homes, although a few were in affordable rental housing or intentional communities.
The homes took many physical and aesthetic forms, from high-end modern structures to off-the-grid Earthships.
We conducted home visits from October 2006 through February 2007.
Visits typically lasted two to three hours, and consisted of a semi-structured interview, a participant-led tour of the home, and activities such as drawing and annotating maps of the home, a projective timeline exercise, and/or a photo-elicitation exercise .
All visits were video-taped and photographed.
All visits were transcribed verbatim, resulting in a corpus of approximately 3,000 pages .
We performed an affinity clustering on a subset of the textual data to identify emergent themes .
We also performed a visual analysis, informed primarily by discourse analysis, of the approximately 5000 field photographs .
Our research team included a social anthropologist, an environmental psychologist, and a computer scientist, so our analyses were informed by these perspectives .
We visited a total of 35 homes and interviewed a total of 56 participants , as well as interacting informally with additional household residents.
We focused our initial exploration in the United States because its high rate of resource consumption in proportion to population makes it a clear candidate for technologies to support environmentally responsible lifestyles .
The United States was also a strategic choice because the American suburban lifestyle and culture of consumption, which has been extensively critiqued as environmentally unfriendly, has become a worldwide aspiration, contributing to pollution and heavy resource consumption in areas such as China and South America.
Within the United States, we chose field locations to represent areas that have strong activity in the green movement, and to represent diverse climatic, cultural, and economic conditions.
Accordingly, we visited homes in Portland, Oregon; Bend, Oregon; the San Francisco Bay Area, California; Santa Barbara, California; Los Angeles, California; Taos, New Mexico; and Albuquerque, New Mexico.
In addition to the home visits, we also interviewed several experts on topics such as sustainable development, green building and remodeling, and the design and construction of pre-fabricated homes.
Our study included a highly diverse set of participants, and we found many different motivations for "greening" homes.
This wide range of motivations can be clustered around perspectives that predominantly reflect three areas of influence: counterculture bio-centric activism; American frontier self-reliance and rugged independence; and trendfocused utopian optimism.
While these clusters do help identify themes, they are not mutually exclusive and often blend and overlap.
Borrowing from post-structural identity theory within anthropology, e.g., , these clusters can be seen as sets of influences that are representative of larger cultural and historical trends related to environmentalism as a social phenomenon in the United States.
Therefore, we might see a participant's identity as the embodiment of fluctuating, multiple, and sometimes contesting cultural influences from which they sample to develop a point of view on the environment.
Among participants who tended to be most influenced by counterculture bio-centric activism, motivations often focused on stewardship of the Earth.
This was expressed as a form of respect for the planet, a desire to protect it and keep it free of industrial contamination.
Some described this position in Christian terms, and saw environmental adaptations to their home as a form of religious duty.
Other participants cited spiritual beliefs that might be categorized as "hippy," "New Age," or neo-pagan .
Some of these motivations were linked to a general anti-establishment perspective which condemned "mainstream" anthro-centric views of the natural world as a resource for production instead of as a global ecosystem in which humans play a role.
Perhaps less obviously focused on spiritual practice, but still influenced by countercultural and bio-centric perspectives, were participants who cited a set of motivations they viewed as holistic: health, environmental conditions, social justice, and personal development.
In many cases, this also included a sense of ethical responsibility to future generations and the desire to create a healthy physical environment for one's children.
This was expressed in the form of growing aversion toward dependence on foreign oil, which frequently led to a focus on forms of alternative energy.
Finally, some participants were motivated by the desire to set themselves apart from others through trend-setting actions taken in the interest of environmental sustainability.
This desire often manifested as bold statements expressed through material possessions such as hybrid cars, high-design houses, or clothes made of organic or recycled materials, and sometimes extended to occupation, hobbies, and other practices.
This motivation was identified in some architects, entrepreneurs, inventors, and developers, and could easily encompass the rise of "eco-chic" celebrities.
Many of these motivations are based on values shared with larger segments of the United States population.
Consistent with the growing interest in environmental issues , this suggests that green practices have the potential to reach a broader population.
For many of our participants, living in a green home meant constant activity to keep it in tune with nature's changing state and rhythms.
Residents of passive solar homes minimized energy use and maximized comfort by constantly reconfiguring windows, doors, skylights, solar panels, etc.
For example, at the end of the day, many participants opened strategically chosen windows on lower floors in combination with skylights to create a "thermal chimney" effect that pulled fresh, cool night air in through the lower windows and flushed stale air out through the skylights.
Keeping the home in tip-top shape was another strategy to increase efficiency - for example, clean solar panels or clean refrigerator coils are significantly more efficient than dirty ones .
Consistent with this ongoing configuration and maintenance, many participants directly or indirectly used the metaphor of "living on a ship" when referring to the experience of living in their green home.
You have to close the big thick curtains during this point in time and then open them at that point."
You have to be engaged.
If you disengage, she will not work for you.
She will not do the stuff she's supposed to do."
But it's not passive as far as the occupants, because the occupants have to be active."
Strong self-reliant tendencies of some participants can be seen in motivations such as frugality and minimalism.
These participants tended to focus on limiting themselves to necessary essentials and practicing strict conservation methods.
They valued quality and product durability and longevity.
For some, this frugality and conservation manifested through an adherence to a Do-it-Yourself  mentality in which creativity, ingenuity, inventiveness, and practicality were highly valued and were put to use to sidestep mass production and consumerism in the interest of the environment.
In learning to time their behaviors to optimally care for the home, participants acquired an increased awareness of daily and seasonal rhythms.
Variety was further introduced by many of the homes' strong connection to natural views and light and the resulting sense of "living outside," as well as by the diverse and responsive character of specific places throughout the home .
These varying natural rhythms, combined with the diversity and dynamism of places throughout the home, had the pleasurable effect of making home life richly textured, engaging, stimulating, and restorative .
Many participants developed a new sense of the home as "alive," as a structure that wakes with the sun and is put to rest at night.
And to me it is a feminine air.
I mean I just feel like the Earth is giving me a hug in this house... for me this structure is a living being that is allowing me to live within her.
And if I take care of her, she'll take care of me...
It's sentient because we're here to help her do what she needs to do.
And by helping her do what she needs to do, she gives us what we need... the house is a family member."
It's quite--it actually can be really cool and meditative."
So it is like this awesome house and  associate it with me and I feel I am an imposter, if you will.
But I think, you know, it says I'm cool, I hope...
I have a friend that says `If they don't think you are cool wait until they see your house, and they'll really think you're cool.'
I try to at least be aware, be mindful.
To consider every thing beyond me.
So if I'm unclogging a clog, I want to be very mindful to what I'm putting in there so that I don't kill everything else or myself while I'm doing it.
The energy that I use.
Do I need to hang it up versus drying it as a means of saving or conserving?
Those questions are always in my mind.
That's the best way I can say it."
It's about thinking, `Okay, I'm making a cake and I need eggs and cream and milk and this and that.
And I'm going to open the fridge once, and I'm going to get all that stuff out.
And then, I'm going to open the fridge once, and put all that stuff back in.'
Instead of... open it up... the energy's just pouring out the door.
So, I mean truly, the lifestyle for me is a bunch about just being aware."
But I mean, in my politics, the only thing we have to vote with in this country that really gets heard is our dollar.
And until that changes, every dollar is a vote.
Every penny is a vote.
And I have to think really consciously about how I do that."
I turn off the monitor.
I turn off the computer.
As soon as the computer shuts down, I turn off the power strip and I turn off the power conditioner.
I try to cut out every extra ounce of anything.
Does it take me a little bit longer?
Do I have to get used to it?
I mean, I can get used to that.
That's not a big deal... You know, it takes a little time.
But my time is--you know, the planet is worth my time."
Such investment of time, labor, and attention often characterized other areas of the participants' lives as well.
Note that while our sample included a number of wealthy participants, it also included a number of participants of more modest means, e.g., participants who lived in low-income housing, as well as a number of middle-class participants.
Many treated green efforts as a high overall priority in their household budgeting, and many also found cost-effective but time-consuming ways to express environmental values.
For example, some participants spent extra time to take public transport or to coordinate carpools.
Others took the trouble to bring their own Tupperware to restaurants when getting take-out food in order to avoid disposable containers.
While participants made decisions deliberately and considered them to have serious consequences, the decisionmaking process often took on a game-like or playful nature.
Participants were engaged by these modest mental challenges, and frequently performed complex analyses to determine their preferred course of action.
For example, household members might debate the relative advantages of buying an appliance from a local vendor versus buying it online, coming up with creative pros and cons related to the overall transportation costs for the different options.
Participants also derived satisfaction from the cleverness and resourcefulness of their green solutions.
And when we meet each other it's like, `How many miles are you getting?'
How are you getting fifty?'
And there are all kinds of tricks and you get really competitive, not only with yourself but with other Prius drivers."
Over time, this intense consultation of data was gradually replaced by an innate sense of how the home systems performed under different conditions.
After roughly one to one-and-a-half years, the home owners had experienced all the natural seasons and had mastered and internalized the operation of their homes.
By this point, their interest in the monitoring systems had often decayed.
I can almost on a daily basis walk in the front door without even looking at a meter and know how much power we produced just by knowing the time of year, how much sun we got from the day.
And you just--you live with it every day, you get to a point where it's like your own little data logging .
You know, I'll walk in and I'll say, `Oh, we made about 5 kilowatts today,' and I'll look and we'll have made about 4.95."
I was going on all the time just to see--I'd turn stuff on, I'd turn stuff off, just to see if it was making a difference.
For many participants, this continuous computation and estimation touched on almost all areas of their lives, from purchasing decisions to mundane activities.
Participants were particularly curious to assess how their homes were performing, and were eager to figure out how to operate the systems and features in their homes to maximal effect.
Many green homeowners enthusiastically monitored data such as weather readings, amount of energy produced by solar panels, and amount of energy consumed.
Tracking the use and generation of resources helped them tune their homes, and records presented concrete evidence of their contributions to improving the environment and allowed them to calculate the financial rate of return they were receiving on their investments, e.g., energy savings on their utility bills.
Participants found the data personally motivating and were often eager to share it with others who were considering building green, in order to inform and motivate them.
Some participants also described instances in which friends or acquaintances with similar systems would compare data in order to better understand their own performance.
Variations in system performance are often related to differences in microclimates of homes 
Some participants became so fascinated with this monitoring that they came to consider themselves "data geeks."
Most data logging was done manually, often as part of a daily ritual .
Participants were interested in more efficient ways to track data, but were reluctant to adopt any monitoring system that might involve the use of more energy .
I mean, you become a total data freak because now I'm all about... how am I doing?
Have I put too many lights on and how much am I using?
And I want to really keep track of it."
When I go to bed, I go and lock the doors.
I shut off the lights and I come down here  and I log this and I log that and it has just become part of my routine.
The end of my day."
We think that's pretty substantial for a little house like this."
Despite the reduced interest in their static, existing methods for data monitoring, participants explained that more advanced data collection and analysis tools would be useful for identifying high-leverage changes that could be made to the homes and for troubleshooting existing systems.
Even for these attentive, active and knowledgeable homeowners, problems with the home  were often difficult to detect or diagnose.
Participants oriented to green living as an evolving and continuous process.
Becoming green was not considered to be a discrete or bounded act, e.g., buying or constructing a green home.
Rather, participants had a strong sense of progressively developing increasingly advanced behaviors and strategies, and of striving to become increasingly environmentally responsible over time.
Similarly, the homes in which they lived often become more green over time, in an evolutionary or piecemeal fashion .
You know, that's the problem is it becomes daunting... do it one thing at a time... pick one or two things that are really important to you, and that makes a difference... give people a break... as much as, you know, we want everybody doing the right thing, it takes time."
To start not doing things automatically but doing things as a result of thought and analysis, you know, of what would be a better way to do this."
Once participants had established a certain level of competence and/or they had achieved a specific goal , they would then turn their attention to a new challenge, often a more advanced behavior in an area they had already explored, or perhaps a more elementary behavior in a previously unexplored area.
While addressing this new challenge, participants typically fully maintained habits formed during previous phases.
This evolution was often associated with a distinct narrative order, a natural strategic sequencing of modifications to behaviors, activities, and purchasing.
Naturally, paths were individually tailored, but certain sequences were considered more logical than others due to factors such as expected environmental benefit and personal readiness.
Participants typically had a strong sense of where they  were on the path to more sustainable living, and what the next steps should be .
As discussed further below, they were highly motivated to teach the path, to take visible actions to inspire others to follow the path, and to illustrate the path by example.
And working this way the whole time.
What you want to do is get people to step on the path and acknowledge that every decision they make has a consequence.
And you can do that in a way that's not guilting people.
You just understand... we're making all sorts of decisions that are consequences.
But if you're conscious about it, you start to change what you do.
And then you never go back... you can ask  about how you buy a pen.
Or how you buy a computer.
Or where you're gonna--which movie you should go see.
You know, kind of go through anything if you want, and say, `What are the impacts that are going to come from this decision I'm making?'
And I think that's what we want people to just start doing.
Just be a little more conscious and aware."
Ken: "But we always asked the question and I think we spent months trying to find just the right tile."
How-- everything that we're touching, let's see how we can make it green... Just do a thoughtful process and if it's not green, you know, that will be fine, too, but just let's try and make it as much green..." - Shirley "We made the best choice we could at the time and now we've acquired more information and we'll be upgrading that system...
You learn a little, you know--One of my favorite quotes of all times is by Maya Angelou... someone asked her about `Do you have regrets about decisions you've made in your life?'
And she says, `You do the best you can and when you know better, you do better.'
That's kind of a great way to look at everything.
Don't beat yourself up for not knowing.
You can't see the future.
But when you know better, you do better."
Participants mentored others to stage their behavior appropriately and realistically.
They were also eager to construct and advocate green experiences that were sufficiently aesthetic, comfortable, affordable, and convenient to appeal to the "mainstream."
They were anxious to correct historical perceptions of green homes as "ugly" or "weird," emphasizing that green buildings can be very beautiful.
They were also eager to communicate that being green is not necessarily a sacrifice, offering benefits such as financial savings, or better health through improved food quality and improved indoor air quality.
Participants generally demonstrated a strong acceptance of where they and others were on the path.
They pragmatically weighed different factors  when making decisions, and honestly assessed the impacts of the options.
Many participants emphasized that it was important to reflect on every choice and thoroughly consider green options, but they accepted the fact that in the end, not every decision was maximally green, particularly at earlier stages along the path.
Ken: "We always asked, in each step of the--every decision we made we've asked the sustainable question, like what can we get that would have more recyclable content?
Or what can we get that would be less toxic or, you know--" Elizabeth: "Or more energy efficient."
Ken: "And we didn't always win the battle."
Many participants wanted to bring about broad social change that would benefit the environment.
They viewed their personal decisions as a way to influence other people towards more environmentally responsible behavior.
They constructed homes and lifestyles that were intended to serve as literal demonstrations for others, and they felt that living by example was an important type of activism.
Further, those who had green occupations often felt that they needed to live the cause in order to promote it most effectively.
This was really a global decision as far as how we would like to see the world, and how we want to participate and show people that it doesn't mean you have to live in a yurt with certain sacrifices that, I think, some people kind of attribute to solar, though that is changing rapidly."
When I drove that car, I was doing something right every second and it changed my life... You know, I'm always politically active... We were doing stuff, but suddenly I had this thing that took me into the world, that immediately identified me to anyone who looked at me where I stood.
And people stopped me on the street and asked me about my car.
And I put information flyers underneath the windshield so people could pick them up.
Many participants sought instructional roles, for example by teaching classes or by routinely giving tours to teach people about the green features in their homes.
Some homes had had thousands of visitors, and some homes even had descriptive labels and signs permanently on display throughout.
Some participants also spoke of making choices in their homes that were optimized for influencing others rather than for personal preference.
I mean that's my calling in my life is to be a teacher and a leader.
And once you have the knowledge you can't turn back.
So I'm responsible for that.
And I can't talk or teach about it without living it.
Or else I'd be a hypocrite.
So everything I do I try to just promote that..." - Cecilia "Everything here is to learn."
And being curious... Oh, this place is a spectacle.
You see people looking all the time.
Our participants' lifestyles appeared to require an independent spirit.
Many of our participants reported that they had faced numerous challenges in their efforts to become more environmentally responsible, and expressed that support from community, government, corporations, etc.
For example, the existing institutional hierarchy of financial institutions, contractors, and licensing and permitting authorities often provided poor support for those who wanted to build green homes.
The participants fought not only to be more environmentally responsible themselves, but also to change the system.
Although they did not win every battle, they were determined, and pushed on in the face of adversity.
In many cases local community members also took the initiative to seek out our participants for advice and instruction.
Whether participants were "proselytizing" or responding to requests for information, they had learned to craft strategic messages and to strike an effective tone .
I mean, we use it in our own lives but we feel really good about being a resource.
We almost feel obligated to be a resource to other people.
So when people ask us the question we hope we know the answer to it.
And so we really try to accumulate this information with the intent to share it...
This is how we live our lives.
And they think that that makes us credible.
And I think we've kind of finally, or I've finally--you've been longer at this than I have .
But finally come to accept that ability to play that advisory role."
Our participants generally felt their efforts were rewarded.
Through the process of pursuing their environmental goals and creatively solving problems, participants gained a strong sense of empowerment and a confidence in their ability to accomplish difficult  tasks.
The participants generally seemed optimistic about the state of the world and saw their pro-environmental activities as contributing to the planet's health.
The participants also generally seemed happy and exhibited high levels of psychological well-being , but it is not possible to establish a causal relationship between these factors and their environmentally responsible choices.
Another benefit for many participants was a sense of uniqueness; many participants had built a distinctive identity based on the fact that they saw themselves as separate from the "wasteful" masses.
Many participants also appeared to have a strong drive to differentiate themselves from society as a whole.
The adoption of distinctive opinions and the sorts of behaviors demonstrated by our participants are consistent with a higher need for uniqueness than is generally seen in the American population .
You know, a lot of people stop and stare.
And that was... something I never foresaw or really, had never really thought of... Bikes, walk.
Slow drive-bys and they turn around..." - Ken "... just driving by and they slow down, roll down the window, and stare at the house."
Because of their ability to nonverbally communicate important aspects of one's self-concept , homes are a particularly valuable way to signal uniqueness .
The participants' homes were often unique and even exotic due to environmental features and/or site-specific or custom design and construction , as well as personalized and deliberate interior decoration.
I mean, to have built this house twenty-four years ago."
I am not the type of person to be sucked in with status quo."
I suggest you talk to her about some of the challenges she faced at that point and how she worked through them."
Our participants enjoyed expressing their green identity.
Social networking and virtual technologies could be leveraged to allow users to express personal green actions and values, and to make green choices appealing.
Making actions and results visible could also engage users in the types of competitive conservation we observed in our participants.
Our participants enjoyed creatively identifying and assessing environmentally friendly courses of action.
Posing mental puzzles appeared to be more engaging than simply facilitating awareness or prescribing behaviors.
Based on our participants' descriptions of their personal evolutions, our findings suggest that persuasive technologies that cleverly pose modest mental challenges and interactive visualization techniques that help users explore the potential outcomes of different actions would be excellent tools for engaging and informing people at different levels of commitment.
Also recall that while participants' found their systems fascinating at first, they lost interest over time as they themselves became more competent while the data and interpretative tools remained the same, suggesting these technologies would be more effective if they evolved over time along the same path as the user in order to keep pace with their deepening commitment and understanding.
Our study has a number of implications for the CHI community's efforts to design for sustainability.
While space limitations prevent us from discussing all of these here, we hope the findings above can be creatively appropriated by designers, and in this section we focus on some directions which we feel are particularly promising.
Efforts to encourage individuals to make personal environmentally friendly choices 
Such efforts essentially assume a fixed set of options, and focus on encouraging individuals  to choose "good" options from this set.
This approach is well-aligned with traditional HCI perspectives and lends itself well to established design, measurement, and evaluation techniques.
Our findings regarding our participants' real-world strategies for successfully influencing their own behavior and the behavior of others have numerous implications for the design of such persuasive technologies , for example: Depth-based Learning.
We were struck by the manner in which participants developed competence in a depth-based manner, focusing on specific areas.
By contrast, many advice systems  present tips or recommendations for green actions in a breadth-based manner, for example proposing "top 10" lists of unrelated but "easy" actions.
Our findings suggest that it would be more effective to provide focused programs that engage users in the motivating and stimulating process of developing expertise.
Ideally such programs would be tailored to relate to the users' primary motivations, e.g., a user with health motivations might begin with a program to improve indoor air quality, while a user with minimalist tendencies might begin with a program to minimize the production of material waste.
Mentoring was highly valued by our participants, and is likely most effective when mentor and mentee are well-matched in terms of interests and motivations.
For our participants, the pursuit of environmental responsibility often became an ardent hobby, or even the fundamental organizing principle in their lives.
Due to numerous institutional, infrastructural, societal, and material challenges in the current conditions in the United States, environmentally responsible behavior involved  significant and continuous dedication of time, mental attention, and/or money.
While our participants found this pursuit highly rewarding, many individuals in the broader population might have other priorities or might find these practices inconvenient.
It seems unlikely that a large percentage of the broader population will be willing to allocate such significant resources to maximizing their environmental responsibility.
Consider for example those who live the "busy" lifestyle that has been extensively discussed as common to many American families .
This lifestyle is typically accompanied  by a heavy emphasis on convenience and time-saving measures.
Rather, it requires either a profound change in values and lifestyle, or a profound change in the circumstances in which individuals are positioned.
Many participants made it clear that being environmentally responsible would be easier if circumstances were different , e.g., if better public transportation were readily available, if environmentally responsible products were the default options in retail and grocery stores, if permitting processes for buildings favored environmentally responsible choices, etc.
Finally, consider arguments made by Monbiot and others that urgent and significant change is required in the immediate future, that small changes made by large numbers of people will not be sufficient to mediate the current environmental crisis .
These points argue for the vital importance of facilitating changes to the circumstances that surround individuals, as a complement to efforts to facilitate change within individuals.
Our findings therefore support Williams' argument that some of the greatest potential environmental gains for technological interventions relate to infrastructures and the institutions that control them .
Consider for example the use of compact fluorescent lights.
One can design tools to persuade people to use these instead of incandescent lights.
Alternatively, Australia and California are exploring legal measures to directly ban the use of incandescent lights .
Of course, in addition to prohibiting undesirable actions, regulation and policy can also make positive prescriptions and stimulate innovation that leads to new, positive options.
The CHI community can make substantial contributions to efforts to influence policy, regulations, and infrastructure, by developing interactive technologies that target large-scale systemic and institutional change.
Some of the following areas are particularly promising because they offer high returns in terms of real-world impact and they involve significant HCI research challenges: * Digital democracy.
How can interactive technologies help people effectively express their opinions to their government representatives?
Will electronic letters be taken as serious indications of users' commitment to environmental issues?
How can users express commitment and ensure that their contributions are not minimized because it is "easy" to forward an email or sign an online petition?
Can content creation tools help users craft compelling arguments to lobby for environmental policy change?
What would persuade people to analyze and share data in order to influence government, regulatory, and corporate action?
What collaborative editing tools can be developed to support environmental analysis by local communities?
How are digital tools appropriated by existing activist groups in their pursuit of environmental justice?
How can social networking tools help environmental communities organize and coordinate?
How can communication technologies provide leverage and help small groups maximize their impact on global issues?
How can online tools help ad hoc groups of disparate individuals effectively communicate with massive institutions?
How can technology facilitate group decision-making that leads to high quality proposed solutions, given that collectively developed solutions are often mediocre?
What design principles underlie systems that attract people to participate?
We have presented a qualitative study of 35 United States households whose occupants have made significant accommodations to their homes and behaviors in order to be more environmentally responsible.
We have described the motivations, practices, and experiences of the participants, and we have discussed implications for sustainable interaction design.
To complement this work, it would be worthwhile to study individuals with widely varying levels of commitment to environmental responsibility.
Further, it would be valuable to study environmental practices in other cultural contexts, such as developing regions and Europe.
These regions are understood to have different perspectives on sustainability, and practices in such cultural contexts will almost certainly lend additional insights for sustainable interaction design.
We gratefully acknowledge our participants for their kindness in welcoming us into their homes.
We thank the reviewers for their valuable suggestions; Paul Aoki and Brooke Foucault for insightful discussions; and Ryan Aipperspach, Shellie Collier, Sue Faulkner, Diane Loviglio, Steven Schindler-Russo, and Christy Snyder for valuable comments and assistance with recruiting and videography.
Computer Game Designed to Raise Awareness of Domestic Energy Consumption.
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol.
Bayet, F. Overturning the Doctrine: Indigenous People and Wilderness-Being Aboriginal in the Environmental Movement.
Berger, J., and Heath, C. Where Consumers Diverge from Others: Identity-Signaling and Product Domains.
Berglund, E. Know Nature, Knowing Science: An Ethnography of Local Environmental Activism.
Beyer, H., and Holtzblatt, K. Contextual Design: Defining Customer-Centered Systems.
Blevis, E. Sustainable Interaction Design: Invention & Disposal, Renewal and Reuse.
Informing Public Deliberation: Value Sensitive Design of Indicators for a Large-Scale Urban Simulation.
Brulle, R.J. Agency, Democracy, and Nature: The U.S. Environmental Movement from a Critical Theory Perspective.
Street Science: Community Knowledge and Environmental Health Justice.
Why American Families Can't Slow Down.
Stanford University Press, Stanford, CA, 2007.
At Home with Ubiquitous Computing: Seven Challenges.
Persuasive Technology: Using Computers to Change What We Think and Do.
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, Boston, 2003.
Folger, T. Blueprint for Disaster?
Value Sensitive Design and Information Systems.
The Social Movements Reader: Cases and Concepts.
Gustafsson, A. and Gyllensward, M. The Power-Aware Cord: Energy Awareness through Ambient Information Display.
Hasbrouck, J., Igoe, T., Mankoff, J., and Woodruff, A. Ubiquitous Sustainability: Technologies for Green Values.
Hasbrouck, J. and Woodruff, A.
Green Homeowners as Lead Adopters: Technological Design Inspired by Sustainable Living Strategies.
Heisley, D.H., and Levy, S. J. Autodriving: A Photoelicitation Technique.
Jain, R. and Wullert, J.
Challenges: Environmental Design for Pervasive Computing Systems.
Environmental Preference from an Evolutionary Perspective.
Environmental Values in American Culture.
Litosseliti, L. and Sunderland, J.
Gender Identity and Discourse Analysis.
John Benjamin's Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 2002.
Luke, T. Ecocritique: Contesting the Politics of Nature, Economy and Culture.
University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis, 1997.
Maffesoli, M. The Time of the Tribes: The Decline of Individualism in Mass Society.
Mainwaring, S.D., Chang, M.F., and Anderson, K. Infrastructures and Their Discontents: Implications for Ubicomp.
Leveraging Social Networks to Motivate Individuals to Reduce their Ecological Footprints.
House as a Mirror of Self: Exploring the Deeper Meaning of Home.
Maslach, C., Stapp, J., and Santee, R. Individuation: Conceptual Analysis and Assessment.
Millbrath, L. Environmentalists: Vanguard for a New Society.
Monbiot, G., and Matthew, P. Heat: How to Stop the Planet from Burning.
Ryff, C. and Keyes, C. The Structure of Psychological Well-Being Revisited.
Snyder, C., and Fromkin, H. Abnormality as a Positive Characteristic: The Development and Validation of a Scale Measuring Need for Uniqueness.
Kuckuck - Exploring Ways of Sensing and Displaying Energy Use in the Home.
Design Decisions in the RideNow Project.
Williams, A. Infrastructure and Sustainable UbiComp.
