While still falling short of the ultimate wall-sized, flat-panel, prototype Liveboards develop and evaluate meetings, meeting the importance rooms such as Nick  all presentationa project high-resolution display, have enabled us to begin to user interfaces for group and remote fits into collaboration.
Permission to copy without fee all or part of this material is granted provided that the copies are not made or distributed for direct commercial advantage, the ACM copyright notice and the title of the publication and Its date appear, and notice ISgiven that copying is by permwslon of the Association for Computing Machinery.
To copy otherwise, or to republish, requires a fee and/or speclflc permission.
The display surface  is approximately the size of an offke whiteboard and has nearly 1 million pixels, Two features of the system allow the display to be viewed comfortably at very close distances.
First, the Liveboard image is projected display.
The result is a crisp, stable image which can be viewed comfortably by a group of people The standing around the Liveboard.
In addition, the cordless pen is easy to pass among participants.
For these reasons, the pen is a particularly appropriate technology for group interaction around a large display surface.
In order to minimize the depth of the cabinet, the optical path is folded twice, as shown in Fig.
We found it necessary to exclusively use front surface mirrors in order to eliminate secondary reflection images.
In order to make chose a 600W light source.
Having such a record has been found to be very useful in returning attention of work groups to previous The Whiteboard has multiple rapidly switched, providing drawing For space.
A sweeping gesture to the right is used to bring up the next slide, while manipulation vertical gestures are used for directscrolling.
Perhaps most striking is the fact that while most respondents have used the Liveboard at least once, a significant number of those who have used it  do not know how to turn it on.
Users have reported general feelings of discomfort at the idea of walking up and just trying things.
Some are intimidated by the size of the Liveboard, while others express fear of making a mistake by their and damaging it.
Still lack of UNIX knowledge.
Not surprisingly, the Liveboard is most often used for meeting facilitation 
Of the different software applications that can be run on the Liveboard, the Whiteboard meeting tool is the oldest and most well publicized in the PARC community.
For the person working at the Liveboard screen, the user interfaces notebook Liveboard difficult believe floating required seated small for to that of most workstations and inadequate.
The computers are is large enough that fixed buttons can be locate, either and awkward input, to reach.
Before building the current Liveboard pen, we constructed several prototypes in an effort to understand the optimal size, shape and placement of buttons.
Despite these efforts, we have observed that while people readily use the pen for drawing, they find the buttons awkward and tend to avoid using them.
Clearly, a usable multi-state stylus will require semantics that are more intuitive than the current Liveboard pen.
Another important difference between the pen and a mouse is that the act of putting the pen down frequently causes the cursor to move across the screen.
This makes it difficult for the user to define an input focus and then move to the keyboard.
While users may tolerate the intricacies of UNIX in the privacy of their ofllces, we have found that in group settings, people are much less willing to take the time to solve software mysteries.
Typically, they will give up on using the Liveboard, and revert to a conventional whiteboard if they encounter problems with the software.
To be accepted in group settings, systems have robust, easy-to-use On the other hand, like the software.
Finding the compromise between these two requirements  will be central much of our future work.
E. Richley, G. Sander, D. Steinmetz and For their software contributions, we are to N, Adams, R, Allen, P, Dourish, D. D, Nichols, For their M. Theimer, contributions to S. Bly, Finally, others for M. Toho to early S. Harrison, we would like their creative and use S. to 8.
