TouchCounters is a system of electronic labels, physical storage containers, and shelving surfaces linked by specialized hardware.
The labels record and display accumulated usage information directly upon physical storage containers, thus allowing access to this information during the performance of physical tasks.
A distributed communications network allows remote access to this data from the Internet.
This video demonstrates the functionality of TouchCounters in supporting the shared use of physical resources.
The daily exchanges between people and physical objects are largely unknown and unknowable to information systems.
In addition, computing systems are poorly suited for providing information to users focusing upon inherently physical tasks.
Our hope is that by augmenting existing objects, surfaces, and structures in our physical environments, we can create natural and easily learned interfaces to digital information.
In this video we present the components, interactions, and key concepts of TouchCounters, an interface system for support of collaborative work in the physical world.
The containers are transparent plastic storage boxes with magnetic connectors on their front and bottom surfaces.
When a container is placed upon the shelf, it connects to the server through a set of docking receptacles located along the shelf.
Although this configuration does not permit tracking of box position, it does allow easy scaling of the number of containers or devices in the system.
The web server, a single-board computer with a Motorola ColdFire processor, generates dynamic HTML pages in response to web-based requests.
Usage correlation is measured both through count information relayed from the labels, and by measuring the time that a box unit is offline and therefore removed from the shelf.
Each access event is stored in a matrix of variables, which is updated continually.
Likewise, frequency-of-use information is logged in a file available online.
Yarin and Ishii, TouchCounters indicates its recent frequency of use.
When the entire set of containers is viewed from across the room, the aggregated independent displays comprise a spatial map of usage frequency.
The most heavily used items can then be rapidly identified as starting points in a search.
In addition, the relative usage data can be used to optimize box placement.
For example, the most active ones can be placed at hand- or eye-level.
The title "TouchCounters," reflects the parallel to web "hit counters" that indicate relative usage frequency.
This work has ties to past work in ubiquitous computing, augmented reality, augmented environments, and situated information displays .
Tracking the usage history of digital documents to support collaboration  is here translated to the realm of tracking physical object use.
Likewise, glyphic portraits of information spanning multiple documents were used in software visualizations like TileBars , but are here used for visualizing patterns across multiple physical objects.
Once a box is removed from the shelf, the other boxes illuminate an orange "scatter pattern" to indicate their degree of correlation to the first.
This data is retrieved from a continually updated matrix of which boxes are used concurrently.
This mode lasts for several seconds, and then returns to the default usage frequency visualization.
Since certain combinations of boxes are often used to accomplish a given task, the search for multiple boxes can be accelerated by readily available correlation data.
In addition, this information allows users to store closely related items in physical groupings.
Our group's prototyping facility, shared by a dozen students, has over 100 storage containers.
Locating a specific item is often difficult, as their physical configuration is constantly changing.
To gain some user feedback, we have fitted 16 containers with the labels and the networking hardware; the remainder were left unchanged.
Preliminary responses to this system were positive.
In particular, users liked the rapid coupling of graphics to the remote control.
In closing, we have noted the limitations of current computer interfaces in supporting physical collaboration, and have designed a lightweight information access system in response to this need.
Eventually, we hope to extend "direct manipulation" techniques into the physical world, allowing parametric queries and sorting to be performed in situ through simple physical actions.
One design goal was to use the electronic modules both as labels and as indicators--to allow direct annotation as well as automated logging of information.
By pointing an infrared remote control at the boxes, users can attach symbolic images that indicate a common association between several containers.
This data can reflect common attributes, such as ownership, or level of completion in an assembly process.
