A novel Mine-Ours-Yours  interaction design framework is proposed for designing collaborative play activities in environments that combine both private and shared interactive spaces.
A collaborative game designed on a system that integrates multiple mobile devices with an interactive tabletop was presented to demonstrate the implementation of the proposed MOY framework.
Observations from field trials involving two groups of children were used to summarize the collaborative behaviors that are likely to be observed under the different interaction design configurations.
In our opinion, this creates interesting possibilities for more effective and engaging collaborative game designs compared to the tabletop only scenario.
Firstly, is there a systematic way to view the different interaction design configurations afforded by the integration of shared and private interactive spaces?
Secondly, what collaborative play behaviors are likely to arise by incorporating each of these design configurations?
Traditionally, such skills were fostered through shared activities around a table or physical game play in the playground.
Physical co-location within a shared space is an important element in all these collaborative scenarios.
Technology such as the multi-touch interactive tabletop has provided new opportunities for game designers to create colocated face-to-face collaborative games that can emulate such environments.
Works such , ,  and  describe some of the many efforts to engineer collaborative play on interactive tabletops.
We are interested to explore the potential of enhancing collaborative play on an interactive tabletop by providing children with mobile devices that are seamlessly integrated with the tabletop.
Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Children collaborating with their mobile phones to solve a problem on the interactive tabletop.
The underside of each phone has a unique visual tag.
We developed the Integrated Multiple Mobile Devices and Interactive Tabletop  system shown in Figure 1.
A maximum of four Samsung  mobile phones interfaces with the Samsung SUR40 interactive tabletop through a unique visual tag that identifies the mobile device, its position and its orientation on the tabletop surface.
The mobile devices can communicate with each other through the shared interactive surface and game objects can seamlessly move between all these devices, as is illustrated by the animation of a boy walking from the tabletop into several aligned mobile phones.
The main objective of this work is to develop game play activities on the IMMDIT system that will promote the practice and demonstration of collaborative play behaviors among children between 4 to 12 years of age.
Johnson and Johnson  proposed five observable components that they identified as being essential for collaborative learning.
They are summarized as follow: * Positive interdependence .
Awareness that they are a team and group success also represents individual success.
An individual is observed to be helping other team members complete their task.
Individuals contribute their best effort to a group goal or to the team.
An individual is observed to be engaged with the group by demonstrating commitment and contribution to the group in order to achieve a good outcome.
Active and constructive discourse is observed among team members.
Communication may be verbal or gestural.
The group demonstrates attitudes that foster positive social relationships.
Such skills include leadership, decision-making, conflict management, turn taking, trust-building and reciprocity.
Team members analyze with each other the best way to tackle the problem and maintain an effective working relationship.
This paper proposes a novel framework for designing collaborative interactions in integrated interactive spaces such as IMMDIT.
We described a collaborative game that was designed using the proposed framework and summarized the different observable components of  exhibited during field trials with two groups of children.
Their preliminary work back in 1999 revealed both benefits and shortcoming of copresent collaboration based on their proposed technological setup.
Their findings seem to suggest that large group sizes have minimal impact on performance if the visual targets the children are required to point to are of a reasonable size.
Multiple mobile phones have also been used with shared single display in a children educational game called Electric Agent created by Ballagas et al.
Co-located computersupported activities are also available commercially.
Some examples include Sifteo Cubes , Combiform  and arcade games like Konami's Dance Dance Revolution .
Interesting observations were made by Scott et al.
When children were made to share input devices, the likelihood of disengagement and boredom increased.
However, addressing this by providing concurrent multi-user access through networked computers inhibited the development of mutual understanding of the shared virtual workspace.
There have been recent works that sought to augment the interactive tabletop with additional physical components.
They noted that this physical object seemed to promote spontaneous turn taking behavior that helped resolved conflicts on the shared surface.
Their field study suggests that the ability to combine elements of the physical world with digital content increases the scope for creativity and self expression amongst the children using TellTable.
The other physical object that has been frequently augmented to the tabletop is the mobile phone.
McAdam and Brewster  studied how mobile phones can be used as a general-purpose tangible controller on the interactive tabletop.
Their results suggest that using a tabletop and phone for a dial manipulation task is often better than interacting with the tabletop alone.
The tactile feedback afforded by the phone increases performance.
The phone option was shown to be the most suitable for 3D rotation tasks as users found it to be easy, fast and intuitive to use.
Indeed, the versatility of interaction techniques and application potential afforded by the tabletop-mobile phone combination was well studied by Schmidt et al.
With respect to the combined use of mobile devices and tabletop for collaborative game design, Shirazi et al.
Their study suggests that users prefer the easier tangible interaction of the mobile phone to the direct interaction on the tabletop.
The private interactive space inherent in the phone also appealed to the users, especially in a game like Poker.
More recently, Zhang et al.
The use of individual phones allowed players to link up and form alliances or groups in ways that was not possible on the public tabletop display.
The collaboration in the group workspace was observed to improve empathy and engagement among players.
These samples of studies and applications provide strong evidence that the incorporation of mobile phones can improve the scope and quality of interaction design and collaboration on the interactive tabletop.
This seems to support the notion of mobile phone being viewed as a personal or private space.
However, they did find that most participants in their studies felt that the benefit of engaging in co-located social interactions using their phones outweighed the potential negative implications of sharing.
Their caveat is that the interaction designer must be able to deliver useful and engaging mobile co-located experiences to the users.
This work proposes an interaction design framework that can guide the design of engaging interactive activities within such co-located private-public spaces.
Collaborative games designed on the IMMDIT system can be viewed by an interaction designer as one that features three basic interaction spaces, as illustrated in Figure 2.
We propose the Mine-Ours-Yours  interaction design framework as a means to categorize and aid the design of engaging collaborative game play scenarios on platforms that features both private and shared interactive elements.
There are six non-repeating combination pairs possible in the MOY framework.
However, Mine  and Yours  can often be interchangeable since the notion of "You" and "I" observed from a third-person's perspective is indistinguishable.
We therefore suggest three general configurations for designing interaction within these spaces.
They are the ,  and  configurations, as summarized in Table 1.
However, in terms of the type of interactions that may be solicited by these basic design configurations, we posit that all six non-repeating combination pairs  do exist and the resulting quality and nature of cooperative play behaviors for each can be very different.
The three basic interaction spaces in the MOY interaction design framework.
They are one's mobile device , the shared interactive tabletop  and the mobile device of another player .
Assuming each player in the game is given a personal mobile device and they collaborate with one another on the interactive tabletop, then the Mine  private space represents the resources, tasks and interaction available to a player on his own device.
An individual has complete control and ownership in his own M space.
The Ours  common space represents the shared resources, tasks and interaction available on the tabletop.
The O space provides a universally accessible interaction space where collaboration between the players can take place, either via their mobile device or through joint interaction on a large interactive surface.
Finally, from the perspective of each individual player, the Yours  space represents the resources and tasks available in the mobile devices of other players in the game.
This is the only interactive space a player does not have direct control over.
The existence of a physically non-accessible Y space presents interesting interaction design possibilities not available in interactive systems where only a shared tabletop is employed.
In any collaborative game that involves a group of players trying to complete a specific task or challenge using whatever solution elements available to them, the three basic MOY design configurations can be used to guide the distribution of these tasks and solution elements across the shared and private spaces.
The proposed MOY framework itself does not specify how these tasks or challenges should be designed nor what these solution elements can be.
We will demonstrate with our case study example and field trial observations that the way the task and solution elements are designed can solicit one or both of the MOY interaction types under each of the three basic of interaction design configurations proposed.
Mine is Ours and Yours is Ours  interaction design can be engineered when the solution to a shared task presented on the tabletop requires the contribution of private resources from each individual.
An example of this could be an incomplete jigsaw puzzle on the tabletop that requires a unique piece from each individual's private space.
In a MO interaction, each individual sees how his private resource can contribute to solving the shared challenge and he does so without much interference or manipulation of the private resources of other players.
On the other hand, a YO interaction will see the group freely manipulating each other's private resource in the attempt to solve the shared challenge after they have contributed their respective resource into the shared space.
YO interaction is more difficult to achieve as the shared task must be designed in a manner that the individual's tacit ownership of his private space is laid aside in deference to the need to collectively manipulate all the available resources in the shared space in order complete the task.
A more complicated task requiring certain among of group discussion and trial-and-error formulations may do the trick.
Mine is Yours and Yours is Mine  interactions can be designed by requiring players to share resources in their respective private spaces with each other in order to complete a particular task within his private space.
For example, player A needs to collect red objects to complete her tasks and player B needs to collect blue objects to do likewise.
As a result, they need to exchange private resources with one another in order to accomplish their respective goals.
There are subtle differences between MY and YM interactions.
In the case of a MY interaction, an individual voluntarily shares or gives away what is in his private space to others in order to help them progress towards their respective goals.
For example, a player observes he has several "key" objects while others have only "locked doors".
He knows that he has a resource needed by others and volunteers to give the key to each of them.
On the other hand, YM interaction results in a situation where an individual knows what she needs belongs to someone else and is encouraged to solicit contributions from another player in order to complete a task within her private space.
The YM and MY interaction designs may exist together in scenarios where mutual exchange of items is required.
In addition, constraining the exchange process so that it occurs sequentially may encourage some level of trust building, negotiation and turn taking since someone has to give first before an assumed or negotiated reciprocity takes place.
Private resources can be exchanges between individual via the shared space .
In the case of an OM interaction, it encourages an individual to gather common resources on the tabletop into her own private space.
Of all the six possible configurations, this appears to be the least cooperative in terms of intent.
Should we even consider the use of this configuration in the design of collaborative games?
Our case study observations suggest that OM-based interactions generate a great deal of excitement among the children as it taps into their intrinsic competitive nature of `grabbing whatever we can for ourselves'.
Incorporating some measure of OM interaction designs into the collaborative game may not necessarily be detrimental to cooperative play as it may increase the overall enjoyment of the game, thus providing the motivation to sustain engagement.
In the case of an OY interaction, it encourages an individual to help another player acquire common resources on the tabletop.
OY-related interactions can be designed to be either grudgingly encouraged or spontaneously altruistic.
In the altruistic scenario, an individual is able to collect the shared items on the tabletop but nonetheless gives it to another player due to her sense of fair play or empathy.
There could be a third option where the game play scenario encourages an individual to distribute shared resources equally among players to gain strategic advantage in the subsequent stages of the game.
As a study on how a collaborative game can be designed using the proposed MOY framework, we describe the design of a collaborative game that incorporates the different combinations of MOY interaction designs.
We later present observations from field trials of this game and evaluate the types of cooperative play behaviors solicited by the different MOY interaction designs.
The Collaborative Assist Retrieve Exchange game, or the CARE game is a multi-player game played on the IMMDIT platform.
This game can be played by 2 to 4 players, each equipped with a touch-enabled mobile phone that has been color-coded for easy association of ownership.
The collaborative game consists of three basic sequential stages of game play.
We describe each in turn.
The game starts with the Assist stage, where a collaborative visual-spatial puzzle, like the example shown in Figure 3, is presented to the players on the tabletop.
All players need to contribute a bridge segment on their respective phone in order to assist the boy in getting to the gift box on the other side of the river.
This is an example of a  interaction design, where an individual has to contribute private resources in his phone to solve a shared problem on the tabletop.
Without each individual's contribution, the group cannot proceed to the next stage of the game.
The Retrieve stage begins when the boy reaches the gift box.
At this point, numerous draggable wrapped presents distribute themselves on the tabletop where they can be retrieved by each player into their phone.
Figure 5 illustrates an example of an OM interaction design, in which shared resources that are distributed over the entire tabletop is being collected into each individual's phone.
Based on the notion of territoriality , each player will first gather items that are closest to where they are and may then proceed to invade the space of other players thinking everyone has an equal chance to grab as many items as possible.
There is unlikely to be much extrinsic motivation to cooperate during non-user specific resource retrieval.
A simple collaborative puzzle on the tabletop that employs a  interaction design.
Phones are color-coded to help users identify their assigned phone.
In an attempt to solicit YO interaction, the complexity of the group puzzle increases with each level of game play.
For example, an order-sensitive arrangement of different resources in each phone is now required .
This should encourage the group to evaluate what bridge construction segments they have available amongst themselves and how a workable solution can be formulated.
This process will require physical manipulation of all available resources and increase the likelihood of individuals freely sharing their private resources with others on the shared tabletop.
In addition, a countdown timer  is used as a game scoring mechanism to further motivate urgency and collaboration.
As such, each player collects presents on the shared tabletop into their individual phone without much consideration for others.
An alternative design would be to distribute all the items to one side of the tabletop, as in Figure 5.
Since all shared resources are now within the territory of only one player, there may be a higher likelihood that OY interaction may arise.
The individual may perceive the unfairness of the situation and will be encouraged to share these resources with others by pushing it to them.
However, as observed by Rick et al.
This weakens the assumption on which the proposed OY interaction design is based on, especially in groups that are naturally competitive in disposition .
We introduced an additional  interaction design in the form of an Animal Feeding stage.
In this stage, food items for each animal are distributed across the shared tabletop, one food group at a time.
Only the phone with an animal that matches the food group can collect and consume the food items.
For example, only panda bear can consume the bamboo items as shown in Figure 6.
When all items in the current food group are consumed, another food group appears.
This stage is completed when all animals are fed.
Once all the presents have been retrieved, the Exchange stage begins.
Different private challenges are issued to the players at each game level as shown in Figures 7.
Figure 8 shows the tabletop layout for the Exchange stage.
Observe that in this design, item exchange is constrained to occur between two phones at any one time.
This tabletop interaction design should facilitate social skills like turn taking, negotiation and conflict management among the players.
Items exchanged between two phones are also limited to a uni-directional transfer, which means the two players has to decide amongst themselves who is to give and who is to receive during an exchange event.
Examples of private challenges individuals have to complete on their phone during the Exchange stage.
Instructions to  collect a set of fruits and  collect picture pieces and complete a 4-piece jigsaw puzzle.
Irrespective of the type of private challenge, what is distinctive in the Exchange stage is the need for each player to acquire a specific set of items.
By `hiding' these objects in wrapped presents, our allocation algorithm can intentionally ensure that each private space has an incomplete set and/or unwanted items belonging to others.
With solution elements residing in the private space of other players, transaction of resources between users will be required.
In the MY interaction, an individual realizes that he has items he does no need and voluntarily enquires with another player if he can help by giving these items to her.
An interesting collaborative situation arising from having resources spread across physically separate private spaces is the need for users to make verbal enquiry with others in order to find out what resources are available within the community.
As a result, this same activity of exchanging items among players can give rise to YM interaction, where an individual completes her private challenge by articulating her needs to others.
Such situations could be a learning opportunity for timid children to learn how to ask for help.
Field trials for the proposed CARE game were conducted with several groups of typically developing children aged between 7 to 12 years.
We report observations on the collaborative play behaviors of two groups of children with different age, gender and relationship profiles.
Two girls  and one boy  * Group 2 - Four children  aged between 8 to 12 years.
Children are either siblings or cousins.
The other two brothers  are aged 11 and 8 respectively are their cousins.
Both groups were collaborating within a social environment of high psychological safety since they know each other well, especially children in Group 2.
An interesting difference between these groups was the gender ratio.
Group 1 has a majority of girls, while Group 2 a majority of boys.
Gender-based behavior differences were observed.
The CARE game was designed with a Practice level with no countdown timer.
Each group was allowed to play as many rounds of Practice before starting the actual game.
No further advice was given to the children except that they should try to complete the game as fast as possible and to listen to instructions from the tabletop and mobile phone.
Occasional promptings were given during the practice level when the children were unfamiliar with the way objects on the interactive surface could be brought into their phones.
MO interactions were mostly observed in the Assist stage of the game because there was a shared problem on the tabletop that requires the children to use their respective phone to help the boy cross the bridge.
All children in Group 1 demonstrated personal accountability, as each of them quickly brought their phones to the tabletop and started adjusting its alignment with respect to the other phones.
G1F2 could be heard saying "Must be straight, later he will fall down", as she cautions the group to be careful in the phone arrangement, as seen in Figure 9.
Group 2 was also observed to demonstrate MO interactions during the Practice level of the Assist puzzle.
G2F1, who was standing furthest to the left of the tabletop initiated the process of solving of the puzzle by placing her phone at the first bridge gap at the furthest left.
When the rest of the boys started placing their phone on the tabletop, G2M2 could be heard telling G2F1 to place her phone over to her own side of the bridge so that they can each place their phones in the gap closest to their respective position on the tabletop.
YO interaction was also observed in Group 1 when a G1F1  suggested to her team mates to solve the Assist puzzle by placing their phones into the respective gaps in the bridge according to their physical positions along the edge of the tabletop.
MY and YM interactions were mostly observed during the Exchange stage.
For example in Group 1, G1F1 was demonstrating positive interdependence and leadership skills when she started the exchange process by asking the group, "Who needs lollipop?"
G1F2 then exemplified an YM interaction by replying, "Me!
G1F1 then proceeded to give her lollipop to G1F2.
In return, G1F2 observed that she had multiple potato chips in her phone and then exemplified a MY interaction by saying, "I need to send you the chips."
She reciprocated by sending potato chips over to G1F1's phone .
Like in Group 1, there was significant verbal communication between the children in Group 2 during the Exchange stage.
The pair-based exchange constraint also taught the children patience and consideration for others as they waited their turn to do the exchange.
It was observed that no pair monopolized the exchange channel as they were asked to relinquish control after one or two exchanges.
G2M1 was heard saying to G2F1, "OK, move" and then took over the exchange channel from G2F1.
He then executed a MY interaction when he said to G2M2 who was at the other side of the channel, "Come, I give you Kinderjoy."
YO interactions were also observed in the Assist stage, especially when the shared problem became complicated.
As shown in Figure 9, this was observed when Group 2 was solving a more challenging Assist puzzle in level 2.
When the boy fell into the river in his first crossing, the children started to treat everybody's phone on the tabletop as common property as they figured out the correct arrangement that would worked.
Significantly more face-toface promotive interaction and group processing occurred as phrases like, "No!
I know, I know, go like this" and another saying "This one must go up".
Children in Group 1 demonstrating MY and YM interactions during the Exchange stage.
The OM interactions were observed during the Retrieve stage.
In both groups, the children got very excited as they anticipated the emergence of wrapped presents over the tabletop, which they can all collect into their phones.
When the distribution was spread evenly across the tabletop, the children in Group 1 were observed to begin collecting items around their own territory but quickly moved into the territory of the other players who were slower in gathering theirs.
The friendly competition in grabbing presents among children in Group 2 was observed to be even more pronounced.
This is probably due to their greater sense of psychological safety since all these children spend a great deal of time playing together as siblings and cousins.
When all the presents were distributed to one corner of the tabletop, all phones raced towards that that side, with bodies and arms all splayed and outstretched across the tabletop as shown in Figure 11.
The assumption that a lopsided distribution that exploited territoriality will give rise to OY interactions  seems purely theoretical, at least with these children.
Our observations suggest that respect for tabletop territoriality in a gaming environment with high psychological safety is wishful thinking.
However, in one instance, G2M1 was heard saying to the rest, "Stop fighting, it is just presents!"
This remark did not change the rest in their urgency to grab as many presents as they could.
Neither did it change G2M1's.
As insightfully suggested by Fleck et al.
On the contrary, these can be learning opportunities for children to practice negotiation and conflict management skills.
It would seem that positive collaborative behavior was not produced during OM interactions but our observations suggest that the level of excitement accompanying such competition-based activity makes the overall collaborative game more enjoyable, especially so in our observations of Group 1 and 2 because in both cases, the "present grabbing" episodes came across as fun-filled friendly competition among friends.
Summarizing the field trial observations from both Groups 1 and 2, we tabulated the types of collaborative behavior observed under the six different MOY interaction types.
We employed Johnson and Johnson's ,  five collaborative behavioral components discussed earlier as a means to label the nature of the observed collaborative interactions and discourses among the children.
The OM interaction design creating great excitement and friendly "grab your presents" competition among children in Group 2.
OY interactions were observed in the stage of the game where the children had to feed the animal picture in their phone with a matching food type.
They continued grabbing these items until G2M1 realized that only his phone with the squirrel picture was able to collect the acorns.
He then told G2M2 and G2M3, who were both trying to grab the acorn, "Pass it to me, it is not your food."
Four rating levels were then used.
If the behavioral component is consistently observed among all the players during the MOY interaction type, a high  score is given.
If it is observed more than half the time and among a majority of the players, a medium  score is given.
If it is less than half the time and only among a minority, a low  score and if it is not observed at all, a nil  score.
Table 2 summarizes the type of collaborative behaviors solicited by each of the six MOY interaction types.
MY and YM interactions could be easily realized because of the physical separate ownership of resources provided by the mobile phones in the IMMDIT platform.
The level of face-to-face promotive interaction  among players significantly increased because they could not see what resources others had and also needed others to physically place their virtual resource on the shared tabletop in order to execute a transfer.
This would not have been achievable if only virtual phones were implemented on the tabletop for each player since territoriality alone cannot enforce a strong notion of private ownership and hide private information.
The MO interactions in the Assist stage that employed some elements of enforced collaboration  did produce collaborative play behaviors such as personal accountability and positive interdependence.
However, some of the other behavioral components like social skills and verbal communication were not of the quality seen in the MY and YM interactions.
Such engagements are likely to encourage the transfer of positive game play behaviors into everyday social situations.
Interestingly, when the complexity of shared challenge on the tabletop was increased to match the problem solving skill level of the group, we started to observe significantly more YO interaction as in Figure 9.
As seen in Table 2, the YO interaction is the one that resulted in the highest quality of collaborative play.
The notion of private ownership temporarily dissolved into engaging group effort, which was directed at the "common enemy" in the form of the "challenge we need to solve".
In summary, we observed the highest levels of excitement and engagement during the collection activities  and complex shared task .
In addition, we noted gender preferences for the different MOY interactions, with the girls preferring sharing activities like item exchange  and the boys preferring present collection and shared challenges .
Despite this behavioral tendency, the ultimate compliment to our collaborative game design was gleaned during the focus group discussion sessions.
Both groups were asked whether they thought the items they collected into their phone belonged to them or to everybody.
To our surprise, every child in both groups replied, "Everybody!"
We believe that the competitive grabbing of presents in the Retrieve stage was more than offsetted by the collaborative re-distribution of private resources during the Exchange stage.
Further evidence that the children took away positive reinforcements from the game play was observed when the children were asked what they learnt from playing the CARE game.
We received replies such as "Teamwork" and "Share".
The symbiotic tension between competition and collaboration in the CARE game design is best summed up by G1M1, who when asked, "Which part of the game was most enjoyable for you?
We presented a novel MOY interaction design framework for designing collaborative play using integrated shared and private interactive spaces.
We believe the MOY interaction design framework can be extended beyond the digital domain and applied to more traditional collaborative board games for example.
It would be interesting to analyze collaborative board games such as Forbidden Island or Pandemic to see how the MOY interaction design configurations have been incorporated into their game play.
This paper provides a useful way of thinking about the process of designing collaborative play and the likely behavior that will arise with an associated MOY interaction design.
However, with each game, it is the unique design of the group tasks, private challenges, common and private solution elements that will ultimately determine the quality of the resulting collaborative play behavior and the level of engagement.
Our own experience suggest that the YO and OY interaction types will result in very rich collaborative play but they are also the most challenging ones to design.
In practice, such interaction design strategies are much easier to implement and executed on programmable interactive platforms like IMMDIT than traditional board games.
