In this paper, we present a design and an evaluation of a hand-held trackball based touch-haptic interface, named "TouchBall."
Using a trackball mechanism, the device provides flexibility in terms of directional degrees of freedom.
It also has an advantage of a direct transfer of force feedback through frictional touch , thus requiring only relatively small amount of inertia.
This makes leads to a compact hand-held design appropriate for mobile and 3D interactive applications.
The device is evaluated for the detection thresholds for directions of the force feedback and the perceived amount of directional force.
The refined directionality information should combine with other modalities with less sensory conflict, enriching the user experience for a given application.
Other researchers have looked at using small sized gyros , slider-crank mechanisms , moving weights  and rotating wheels  to create inertial sensation with limited directionality .
However, these devices suffer from a lowered perception due to the indirect nature of the sensing through the attached housing/handle of the device.
The simplicity allowed for a highly ergonomic and light weight controller design.
However, the applications were limited by the directionality  such as simple selection and browsing control.
In this paper, we present the design and psychophysical evaluation for "TouchBall," a handheld trackball based touch-haptic interface .
More specifically, the device is evaluated for the detection thresholds for directions of the force feedback and the perceived amount of directional force as well.
With the explosion and versatility of the mobile and handheld computing or interaction devices, much effort has been put into the provision of haptic feedback in addition to the usual visual and aural.
The most conventional approach has been the use of small vibrating motors, which are mostly just sufficient to indicate the occurrence of physical interaction events, namely collision.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
TouchBall mostly resembles a conventional trackball except that it houses a set of motors in two orthogonal directions in order to provide active motion.
Figure 2 shows the schematic.
The controller is designed such that the thumb is to be placed on the top of the ball in a comfortable manner.
The motors are controlled by an MCU, namely 20MHz 20MIPS ATmega48, which generates a PWM signal and communicates with a host computer through a Bluetooth module.
The entire design can be made relatively light weight  and compact with small sized motors, a solid trackball and associated control electronics .
One of our assumptions in the normal use of this device is that user's gripping force, including the force applied to the trackball through the thumb, will not vary too much among different users .
Thus in the following experiment, we only consider the perceived directionality and force generated by the device.
The goal of the first experiment is to derive the smallest detection threshold for directional feedback for this device.
Detection threshold is one of the most basic criteria in measuring human perception .
We have designated eight ego-centric directions for which the detection thresholds were investigated, North , South , East , West , North East , South East , South West  and North West .
Ten paid subjects  participated in the first experiment with the mean age of 25.5.
The subject was seated before the computer monitor and was asked to hold the device and place one's thumb over the TouchBall comfortable, and apply a "just enough" stopping force  as the track ball started to turn throughout the experiment.
The presentations of the directions were randomized.
In order to measure the detection threshold, we applied the 3 Interval, Forced Choice, One-up, Three-down Adaptive method .
One incorrect answer would increase the stimulation likewise.
The amount of increase or decrease in the stimulation was fixed.
In each trial for a particular directional feedback, a subject was given three stimulation intervals separated by 250 ms, during which only one of them would carry an actual stimulation lasting 1000 ms.
This assignment was random as well.
The initial stimulation was made sufficiently large and the detection threshold was set , at a level where the subject made the second wrong answer during the trial.
A trial for each direction lasted about 5 to 7 minutes and the whole experiment took about 2 hours.
Figure 3 shows the detection thresholds for the 8 different stimulation directions.
Thus, more force feedback was needed in general for the diagonal directions.
In particular, the W showed a significantly lower detection threshold compared to other directions  with p = 0.039 .
While the reason is unclear at the moment, it is consistent with findings from another work with a mobile torque display  who found that human hand's sensitivity was relatively lower in the diagonal direction, high in the west , and low in the east .
All the detection thresholds were below 0.1N, way below the maximum capacity  of the small motor used in our device, which hints for a possibility of even further miniaturization.
Since there was no trial session for this experiment, the data from the first session was purposely discarded, and the responses from the second and third were merged using a geometric mean.
The geometric mean for the whole subjects is computed as well in order to normalize and regularize the user responses .
Likewise to the first experiment, subjects wore headphones to block any ensuing sound from the device.
The second experiment was conducted in order to estimate the perceived intensity of the inertial stimulation.
Since the direct and accurate measurement of the perceived intensity is practically infeasible, our measurement was subjective and indirect, relying on the Absolute Magnitude Estimation methodology by .
Three independent variables, namely the stimulation wave pattern , maximum velocity of the trackball  and directions  .
Perceived intensity: Figure 4 shows the perceived force feedback intensities across different independent variables.
ANOVA revealed that there existed statistically significant  difference according to the type of the wave pattern.
The square wave produced the highest perceived intensity, and this was attributed to the fact that square wave exhibits the most differential acceleration translating to a higher resulting force.
In a similar vein, the level of the maximum motor velocity also showed statistical difference , namely the high level producing higher perceived intensity and vice versa.
On the other hand, statistical differences among the directions with regards to the perceived intensity were observed.
Twelve paid subjects with the mean age of 26  participated in this experiment.
The subjects were given 48 different types, representing 3 factors, of stimulations  in a random order, each lasting 1000 ms.
Subjects were asked to name the direction of the stimulation, among the eight possible, and rate the intensity by a numbered score in one's own scale .
Thus, no reference nor guideline was given for the intensity rating.
Three sessions  were carried out for each subject.
Percentage correct for directions: Figure 5 shows the percentages of the correct answers for identifying the direction of the stimulation.
Tomohiro Amemiya, Hideyuki Ando, Taro Maeda: Haptic Navigation for Broad Social Applications by Kinesthetic Illusion of Pulling Sensation.
M. Morioka and M. J. Griffin.
Thresholds for the perception of hand-transmitted vibration: Dependence on contact area and contact location, Somatosensory and Motor Research, vol.
Perceived Magnitudes of Vibrations Transmitted Through Mobile Device.
In Proceedings of the Symposium on Haptic Interfaces for Virtual Environments and Teleoperator Systems , 139-140.
P. Lamore and C. Keemink.
Evidence for diferent type of mechanoreceptors from measurement of th psychophysical threshold for vibrations under different stimulation conditions.
J Acoust Soc Am, vol.
Trasformed up-down methods in psychoacoustics.
The Jounal of the Acoustical Society of America, vol.
MacLean, K. E., Shaver, M. J., Pai, D. K. Handheld Haptics: A USB Media Controller with Force Sensing", in Proceedings of the IEEE VR2002 10th Symposium on Haptic Interfaces for Virtual Environment and Teleoperator Systems , Orlando, FL, .
J. J. Zwislocki and D. A. Goodman.
Absolute scaling of sensory magnitude: a validation.
Psychophysical Characterization and Testbed Validation of a Wearable Vibrotactile Glove for Telemanipulation.
Allison M. Okamura, Jack T. Dennerlein and Robert D. Howe.
Vibration Feedback Models for Virtual Environments.
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation .
H. Yano, M. Yoshie, H. Iwata, "Development of a Non Grounded Haptic Interface Using the Gyro Effect," Proc.
On Haptic Interfaces for Virtual Env.
In this paper, we presented a trackball based touch haptic interface which leverages upon the sensitivity of the human tactile sensation, which leads to a compact and hand-held implementation.
The use of trackball enables a simple solution to proving richer directional cues.
Our experiment indeed shows that with a relatively low amount of force application, the user is able to clearly perceive them both magnitude and direction-wise.
Such a device will have a number of applications for 2D and 3D interaction.
Brewster, Stephen, Chohan, Faraz and Brown, Lorna.
Tactile feedback for mobile interactions.
Mobile Torque Display and Haptic Characteristics of Human Palm.
