While there is increasing interest in creating eyes-free interaction technologies, a solid analysis of why users need or desire eyes-free interaction has yet to be presented.
To gain a better understanding of such user motivations, we conducted an exploratory study with four focus groups, and suggest a classification of motivations for eyes-free interaction under four categories .
Exploring and analyzing these categories, we present early insights pointing to design implications for future eyes-free interactions.
In this paper, we present a user-centered exploration of user motivations in choosing eyes-free technologies for mobile interaction.
To assure a wide range of user feedback, we held four focus groups with twenty-two participants in total and identified ten typical user motivations for eyes-free interaction, classified into four categories  as defined by the intersection of two dimensions .
Interaction with and through mobile devices tends to rely primarily on users' visual attention.
However, visual attention is a limited resource and is often heavily taxed by contextual factors in mobile environments.
Researchers and designers have recently tried out alternative modalities such as acoustic and haptic to assist interaction with mobile devices and minimize the reliance on visual attention, also known as eyes-free interaction .
When designing such interactive systems, an important principle, as argued by Alan Cooper , is to satisfy the needs and desires of the user.
It emphasizes that we perform tasks in order to achieve specific goals.
Applying this principle to the design of effective eyes-free interaction requires an understanding of user motivations in order to provide the best way to support eyes-free interaction.
Twenty-two participants  from a diverse background , biology  and Chinese studies , 8 working professionals from different industries: banking , telecommunications , education , and IT  were recruited for our focus groups.
All participants had more than 5 years of experience in using mobile devices.
Each focus group had 5 or 6 participants.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Four focus groups were conducted.
Each of them lasted approximately 90 minutes with the following five steps.
In many environments interaction with mobile devices is interfered with or prevented by the characteristics of that environment.
As participants indicated, extreme lighting conditions are a major source of interference to visual perception  , which can be either too bright or too dark.
In the former situation, participants complained that overly bright situations, such as direct sunlight, often make the screen unreadable, "It's hard for me to read the text while walking in bright light.
So I have to try to find a place without so much light."
For example, it is hazardous to switch visual attention between a mobile device and the road while driving.
Nonetheless, such simultaneous usage is often unavoidable: "Everyone knows it's dangerous to use mobile phones while driving, but I just want to use it.
I think it's a part of my life."
Each focus group was filmed; the recordings were transcribed and coded based on the Grounded Theory  by the two experimenters.
Via clustering and merging, ten motivations for using eyesfree interaction in mobile context  emerged from the focus groups.
We identified the properties of each motivation and found that they were related to specific settings and originated in either the physical or human realm.
Based on this observation, the ten motivations were categorized along two orthogonal dimensions as shown in Table 1.
As indicated by Palen et al.
However, in some situations overtly using a mobile device is socially inappropriate , while some other situations raised privacy concerns .
In some social settings, openly interacting with mobile devices is unanticipated and sometimes unacceptable.
For instance, while talking with others, frequently playing with mobile phones is impolite and may leave a bad impression on the other party.
In that case, users can be motivated to use eyes-free interaction to reduce the perceived interference between mobile interaction and the surrounding social activities to maintain social respect  to others , "When I was doing a presentation, a phone call came and I felt the vibration.
I couldn't take it out because it was impolite.
So I just reached into the pocket and pressed the end button."
In that case, avoiding the interruption to the social activities  can motivate users to adopt eyesfree interaction .
For example, one participant described such a situation where eyes-free interaction can facilitate quick responses - "I often text messages in class.
The first dimension is the context dependency, which can be either contextual or independent.
The second dimension is the realm, which can be either physical or human.
Crossing these two dimensions results in four categories: environmental, social, device features, and personal.
Now, we present, examine, exemplify, and discuss the ten motivations  by category.
So sometimes I missed some appointments."
More specifically, interaction relying on visual feedback has the danger of leaking private information to others in social contexts  .
As one participant indicated, "I am always worried that my password could be seen by others when I am in a queue."
An underlying reason may be that some users perceived the cognitive/physical effort for eyes-free interaction  to be lower than for visual interaction.
For example, one participant mentioned, "When I enter the library, I need to switch my phone to silent mode.
But it's troublesome to take the phone out.
So I like to do it in my pocket without looking at the phone."
Sometimes, users would like to use eyes-free interaction with their mobile devices due to the physical constraint of the devices themselves.
In order to overcome inconveniences  caused by device constraints, users are motivated to adopt eyes-free interaction.
Participants mentioned two types of inconveniences related to eyes-free interaction on mobile devices.
On one hand, devices designed with small or even no screens  make interaction using visual feedback difficult and/or irrelevant .
For example, "There is no screen on my iPod shuffle.
But I can operate it very well just with the audio feedback."
So I have to frequently suspend the phone conversation to look at th e screen.
Although our investigation has covered a variety of different motivations, this is meant to be a list of representative motivations instead of an exhaustive one.
We expect the categorization suggested will help to identify more user motivations in the future.
Still, we believe this list provides a solid initial basis for discussion of design insights for the diversity of motivations, the concurrency and shifting of motivations, and related design implications.
Our results have shown that there is a diversity of motivations for eyes-free interaction, ranging from environmental constraints to personal intentions.
Designing a single eyes-free solution to cover all those motivations is challenging and perhaps undesired, but it is essential for designers to be aware of this diversity.
However, in order for such inventions to be widely adopted by users, mechanisms to adapt and customize them to various user motivations may be key.
By exploring the diversity of motivations, we also surprisingly find that personal intentions may play an important role in motivating eyes-free interaction.
On one hand, this reveals future potential innovations such as the design of eyes-free systems for entertainment.
On the other hand, perhaps more significantly, it highlights the role of enjoyment when designing eyes-free interaction.
In addition to achieving practical goals, eyes-free interaction is also motivated by personal factors.
In this category, the motivations  are more intrinsic to the users themselves and not necessarily dependent on devices or contexts.
Some participants indicated that they would like to use eyes-free interaction just because they thought it was fun to use .
The joy is generated from the unusual experience and the resulting sense of accomplishment.
As one participant said, "I can experience very different things when I am using eyes-free interaction.
I think I am very good if I can succeed."
One participant said, "It's cool to show my friends that I can use my phone without using my eyes.
I think they envied me and I felt proud."
It is important for designers to understand how multiple motivations can play a joint role.
That is, frequently a small number of motivations are not independent and may all be in effect concurrently during an activity.
In our study, concurrency of motivations is observed in two aspects.
First, as a kind of basic demand, it is quite common for users to mix M10 together with other motivations.
For example, participants who reported to be in outdoor environments with bright sunlight also complained that the small screen influenced their operations and that they expected eyes-free interaction to require less effort.
I have to make too much effort  to recognize the text in the small screen ."
Second, if the user is in a specific context, different motivations related to the contextual dimension often complement one another.
For example, in social activities, the need to avoid interrupting social activities often complements the need to foster social respect.
But he was late and his professor asked me about his whereabouts, I wanted to send a message to get my friend to contact his supervisor immediately.
But I had to focus on the chat with the professor  and I didn't want to be rude ."
For example, as one participant mentioned, "When I am driving, typing text may be dangerous .
But after I arrive at the destination and talk with others, typing text could be impolite ."
We adopted a user-centered approach to explore motivations for eyes-free interaction on mobile devices via focus groups.
Based on context dependency  and realm  we developed a four-category classification of motivations.
We analyzed user motivations and sorted them into the four categories.
We then discussed issues of diversity, concurrency and shifting of motivations, followed by design implications for eyes-free interactions in mobile device usage.
Our work provides a different view of eyes-free interaction from the user's perspective and helps to reveal insights and relationships among motivations.
By enhancing the understanding of the motivations behind eyes-free interactions, we hope that better eyes-free interfaces can be created in the future.
Based on the observations and analysis of user motivations, we highlight three groups of implications for the design of eyes-free interactions in mobile usage.
Make the interaction method adaptive to changing motivations: As discussed above, the user may want to use eyes-free interaction with different motivations at different times.
In this case, a single interaction method may not satisfy different motivations unless dynamic adaptation occurs.
We notice that motivations often vary together with changes in the contextual settings.
So designers could leverage context-aware technologies to facilitate such adaptive interaction methods.
So designers need to think about the social impact of interaction methods they design for eyes-free interaction.
Ideally, eyes-free interaction should be subtle and socially acceptable.
One possible solution is embedding eyes-free interaction into commonplace objects and socially acceptable behaviors such as rotating a finger ring .
Minimize cognitive/physical workload: Although eyes-free interaction reduces reliance on visual attention, it is still possible to cause a high cognitive/physical workload due to the uses of cognitive/physical resources from other modalities .
Thus, designers need to carefully design the interaction method so that users can finish the eyes-free interaction with a minimal cognitive/physical cost.
This project is funded by the National Research Foundation  and managed through the multi-agency Interactive & Digital Media Programme Office  hosted by the Media Development Authority of Singapore  under Centre of Social Media Innovations for Communities .
We thank Erik Tobin, anonymous reviewers, and all members in the NUS HCI lab for their help.
