In this research we set out to discover why and how people seek anonymity in their online interactions.
Our goal is to inform policy and the design of future Internet architecture and applications.
We interviewed 44 people from America, Asia, Europe, and Africa who had sought anonymity and asked them about their experiences.
A key finding of our research is the very large variation in interviewees' past experiences and life situations leading them to seek anonymity, and how they tried to achieve it.
Our results suggest implications for the design of online communities, challenges for policy, and ways to improve anonymity tools and educate users about the different routes and threats to anonymity on the Internet.
We lack a full understanding of the real life circumstances surrounding people's experiences of seeking anonymity and their feelings about the tradeoffs between anonymity and identifiability.
A main purpose of the research reported here was to learn more about how people think about online anonymity and why they seek it.
More specifically, we wanted to capture a broad slice of user activities and experiences from people who have actually sought anonymity, to investigate their experiences, and to understand their attitudes about anonymous and identified communication.
Another purpose of this research was to understand the strategies people use in trying to achieve anonymity online.
Most tools available to achieve online anonymity are poorly understood.
More than 85% of the interviewees in one study said that they did not know how to surf the Web anonymously ; most people do not know who has access to information about them or how they get this information .
Indeed, the average person has only a vague notion of how the Internet works  and the potential threats for users .
This knowledge may be important because anonymity is no longer assured just by using pseudonyms or relying on the obscurity of large numbers.
People shop online using credit card information often revealed to third parties.
They search and browse, and their clicks are recorded.
A user's comments in a blog post may be searched and connected to his professional website.
Even personal health records, despite attempts to keeping them confidential, are not necessarily safe .
How well do people understand this context of increasing social transparency and third party use of their information?
We wanted to discover how users try to achieve anonymity, and whether they are confident that they have achieved it.
The intended contribution of this research is to provide a richer understanding of the different situations in which people try to avoid being identified online, to inform debates about anonymity on the Internet, and to suggest improvements for the wellbeing and privacy of users.
Should people have the right to anonymity on the Internet?
Should CHI researchers join with others to make anonymity online easier to achieve?
Or should online anonymity be banned?
These questions are matters of debate among security researchers , politicians and policy analysts , community designers , architects of the new Internet  and the public.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
The definition we use in this paper is based on Gary Marx's analysis : being anonymous means a person cannot be identified according to any of seven dimensions of identity knowledge, that is, the person's legal name, location, pseudonyms that can be linked to the person's legal name or location, pseudonyms that cannot be linked to specific identity information but that provide other clues to identity, revealing patterns of behavior, membership in a social group, or information, items, or skills that indicate personal characteristics.
Internet users care a lot about their privacy, and surveys suggest they may have reasons to seek privacy by hiding their identity .
What we know about these reasons is derived mainly from studies of particular activities or groups who intentionally seek anonymity, including whistle blowers , members of stigmatized groups , people conducting sensitive searches , hackers , and lurkers .
Anonymity lifts inhibitions and can lead to unusual acts of kindness or generosity, or it can lead to misbehavior, such as harsh or rude language and acts that are illegal or harmful.
People use the protection of anonymity to reduce the social risks of discussing unpopular opinions and taboo topics, and to create different personas online than they exhibit offline .
We also can draw on the literature about the different ways people anonymize their Internet activities, including the use of proxy servers, Secure Sockets Layer technology, anonymous emailers, and cookie managers .
These options are used by comparatively few Internet users, despite their concerns about privacy and security .
People more often modify their own behavior to manage their identity presentations to other users, for instance, by falsifying their personal information or using multiple email accounts , or adjusting their profiles on social networks sites .
These studies suggest that attitudes about particular online communities or sites, technical barriers, and personal privacy preferences can help explain people's motivations to seek anonymity.
However, to inform policy and design, we need a better understanding of the real life contexts that lead people to seek anonymity across different Internet activities, and their effectiveness in doing so.
We therefore conducted interviews with people who had sought anonymity online to learn about their activities, their experiences, their knowledge, and their opinions of being anonymous online.
Skype or IM chat from an anonymous client.
All chat logs and audio recordings were coded anonymously.
Because we did not have prior theory or hypotheses to test, we used a qualitative interview approach .
The interviews used a protocol with follow-up questions to explore answers in further detail .
The interviewer asked interviewees what activities they had done online anonymously, telling them that "anonymous" meant having no connection with personal information such as their legal name or persistent email address.
For each activity, the interviewer asked interviewees why they wanted to be anonymous.
Interviewees were prompted to give concrete examples of anonymous activities and the history of those activities.
The interviewer asked them to describe the methods they used to achieve anonymity and to evaluate their level of anonymity when taking those actions .
In the second part of the interview, the interviewer asked interviewees about the activities they did using their real names or other personal information that identified them.
They were asked why they used their real names for those activities.
The interview ended by asking interviewees to evaluate the pros and cons of anonymous and identified communication online.
We interviewed 44 participants, 23 women and 21 men.
They were recruited using Amazon Mechanical Turk, Craigslist, and university forums.
We told recruits that we were interested in online anonymity and asked them to participate if they had ever used the Internet anonymously.
All of our interviewees said they used the Internet frequently, and had at least one prior experience with anonymous browsing or another type of anonymous online activity.
Their ages and occupations varied widely; there were students, employees, and retirees.
Interviewees reported a range of technical computing skills from practically none to advanced; one interviewee was an IT manager and another had a university degree in network security.
All interviews were recorded, transcribed and translated into English.
For interviews conducted in Mandarin Chinese, the original transcripts and the translated versions were coded separately and back translated.
Discrepancies were resolved in discussion.
We performed qualitative data analysis using a grounded theory approach .
The data were coded in NVivo software.
Two coders independently coded the same subset of the interviews, discussed and resolved differences, and clarified code definitions.
We then performed axial coding.
We discussed the body of coded transcripts, and performed affinity diagramming to group similar concepts and generate connections.
These were clustered into themes.
We returned to the interviews to clarify ambiguous codes and to divide themes that were too broad into separate parts.
We then examined the relationships between these thematic categories, looking for patterns in reported behaviors and motivations.
We refined themes during the writing process.
Some anonymous social activities were idiosyncratic, seemingly done for fun or amusement.
An interviewee in mainland China created a fictitious profile on a social networking site to play a trick on a friend.
I created a profile similar to my friend's profile on Renren.com.
Then I added all the contacts from his `friends' list, and posted some funny updates daily ... since he was on good terms with me, I liked to play tricks on him.
He did that to me too.
Anonymity can make it difficult for people to establish trust or get credit for one's contributions in groups, and may hinder online community building .
Our interviewees generally agreed that these were benefits of identifiability.
Nonetheless, more than half of our interviewees were anonymously involved in various online interest groups, mostly hobby groups on topics such as fiction, music, pets, games, technology, and sports.
One popular reason for anonymity was that the norm of those groups was to be anonymous.
In a few cases, the group had an implicit or explicit membership standard that encouraged anonymity in those who did not conform.
For instance, interviewee #27 joined a Japanese video sharing Number of interviewees  Instrumental Anonymous Activities  Filesharing and downloading Browsing and searching for information 18  18 
The interviewees described a myriad of unique anonymous activities on the Internet.
A retired teacher created an anonymous online community for English learners to practice their language skills with each other.
A Chinese student used anonymous social networking profiles to play good-natured tricks on his friends.
Some interviewees used anonymity as a general online practice, but most used it judiciously, for particular kinds of online interactions.
About half of the interviewees  used anonymity for illegal or malicious activities such as attacking or hacking others, or they engaged in socially undesirable activities like browsing sites depicting violence or pornography.
Other socially undesirable activities included downloading files illegally, flaming others, `peeping' others, or searching for others' personal information online.
The line between illegality and undesirability was sometimes fuzzy, and many whose behavior was acceptable in some situations, for example, within a discussion forum, were fearful it would be unacceptable in others, for example, at work.
It was also impossible to cleanly separate "bad guys" from "good guys" in our data because many of those who reported antisocial behaviors  also reported prosocial behaviors .
Table 1 summarizes the various online activities that interviewees did anonymously.
Sixty-one percent of the interviewees mentioned instrumental activities they did anonymously, including browsing websites and downloading files.
Many search engines provide personalized search results and recommendations, but some interviewees browsed anonymously to avoid tailored results and access a wider range of information or to avoid personalized advertising.
Some interviewees browsed anonymously because they felt that registering or logging in was unnecessary and only benefited a company.
Although social networking generally requires using one's real identity, half of our interviewees reported using fictitious profiles to go on social networking or dating sites, or used false personal information when chatting online.
Some interviewees used different social network profiles to separate the information they shared with different groups of people.
A teacher  was very active in a fandom group, and often posted fan fiction online.
She wanted to keep in touch with other members of that community, but she was afraid that she might be criticized if her family or her boss found out about her writing because it was not "real" fiction.
She therefore maintained two Facebook accounts, one under her real name for family and coworkers and one under a fictitious name for fandom friends.
Nearly half of the interviewees reported posting original artwork, photographs, videos, and writing online to share with others and receive feedback.
We expected interviewees to attach their real names to original works to gain status and reputation, but many interviewees chose instead to sacrifice recognition to avoid links to their offline life.
Interviewee #1 participated in various online music communities every week.
She always posted her songs anonymously so that no one at work would find them and judge her by them.
The reason I won't use my real name is to not connect my real life with the online community...
I don't want my supervisors and colleagues to know about the other side of my life, since that may make my image look bad.
One artist told us that he built a reputation in online communities by posting his works under a consistent pseudonym, although he wasn't sure that counted as being recognized for his work.
He also explained that he preferred not to log into his account at all when reviewing other people's work.
When I post critiques I tend to be rather harsh....  being targeted by someone who can't take a critique, so they might decide to try to find my alias on other art sites, and troll me in return.
Some joined online domestic abuse or parenting support groups.
Others went to forums to ask questions about finances or gaming.
In addition, some interviewees provided support or help to others anonymously.
Interviewees chose to be anonymous to preserve their public or self-image, or to manage their online relationships.
The same interviewee who liked to play tricks on his friend told us that he also visited technology forums and helped people solve technical issues.
He was happy to help, but sought to avoid unwanted commitments.
Once I helped a guy solve a problem, then he asked my real identity and kept coming back to me.
It was hard to refuse him since he knew who I was.
I don't like this kind of thing being turned into an obligation.
Nine lived in Asian countries where BBS or forums allow people to purchase goods from other users anonymously.
Four interviewees from the West also bought and sold goods online.
Of these four, two mentioned using fictitious information to buy and sell items on Craigslist to avoid being identified or tracked down by online predators.
The other two said they typically used their real information to pay a seller using a credit card, but sometimes they initially communicated with the seller under a pseudonym.
Nine interviewees joined political discussions on anonymous forums to contribute their views and debate with other users.
Some also engaged in anonymous online voting, made online donations, or participated in social protests.
Interviewees from several different countries mentioned browsing news sites and political blogs and forums anonymously to access information from blocked sites and to protect themselves from social censure or legal consequences.
Four participants anonymously posted their views about products and services.
They mentioned their concerns about not knowing who would access their reviews and having their reviews stored online forever.
They sought anonymity to avoid negative reactions from the subjects of the reviews or from people with opposing views.
One woman explained that she always signed her postal letters with her real name because they were addressed to one person or organization, but that she preferred to write anonymously when online.
I posted a very bad review .
And I guess I did that .
I live in a small town, so I certainly didn't want to put my real name, although I would have no problem speaking face-to-face with the restaurant owner ...
If you speak to somebody face-toface, you know who you spoke to.
But when it's online, you're really potentially speaking to billions of people, and the information will last.
Consistent with prior work, people preferred to be anonymous when seeking help or doing other activities that might make them seem socially undesirable or needy, such as when they were using online dating sites or asking for support in groups, but we also found that people pursued anonymous activities when being identified might expose to them to personal threat.
Many answers reflected a personal "threat model" of persons or organizations.
Frequently, the source of threat lay outside the particular activity, site, or group in which the person sought anonymity.
Personal threat fell into five categories: online predators, organizations, known others, other users on the site or in the community, and unknown others.
Online predators included criminals, hackers, scammers, stalkers, and malicious online vendors.
Fear of identity theft and spam was the main concern of those who made online sales or purchases with credit cards or account information.
Fear of stalking or harassment was a major motivation for hiding one's identity when chatting, posting on forums, and building social networks.
Organizations that posed a threat included government and business organizations.
Government was a threat because it has the power to identify and punish illegal, subversive, or undesirable online activity.
Interviewees who told us about illegal downloading or filesharing were concerned with avoiding exposure and arrest.
Companies were a threat because they could reuse or sell information to marketers and spammers.
People that the interviewees knew in real life were sometimes named as a threat, mostly as a precaution but sometimes because of a past negative experience.
Among those named were specific family members, friends, employers, teachers, co-workers, supervisors, classmates, current significant others, and previous romantic partners.
Anonymity was particularly a concern for people who wished to avoid harassment from estranged or controlling parents, former friends, or previous romantic partners.
Other users on a site or in the community could also be considered a threat.
For example, a Taiwanese blogger told us that he used to maintain a blog.
When he stopped posting for a while in order to keep some personal information private, his friends on the site kept looking for him and asking about his life.
This was a source of stress for him.
Those online friends know what your life looks like, but then suddenly if you don't talk with anyone, or just disappear, then everyone would ask what had happened to you.
This is a huge pressure to me.
Thirty-nine percent of interviewees expressed the attitude that revealing personal information online is "dangerous" without any specific threat in mind.
A college student who participated in technology and gaming forums lurked almost all the time, manually changed his IP sometimes, and used multiple email accounts, but rarely had any specific threat to hide from.
If I do something stupid online I want to be prepared...
It's just like when you prepare for a disaster, you don't know what disaster is going to strike.
In sum, interviewees' personal threat models generally involved protection and privacy from other people and groups; they were either attacker-centric or relationshipprotective, as compared with the more typical softwarecentric model  used in computer security analysis .
Participants sought to protect themselves from real-world threats such as getting arrested, physical attacks on themselves or their families, stalking, harassment, and loss of property or jobs.
They also feared online attacks, including online harassment, trolling, and flaming.
They used anonymity to prevent potential privacy leaks, expressing concerns that once their information was online, it would be stored permanently and anyone could access it.
One 4chan user almost always posted anonymously, because he felt that any information he shared online would be out of his hands.
To a large degree, you cannot control who views, accesses, or uses any data you put on the Internet ... the Internet never forgets.
The Internet is sticky - pages stay up, info stays up, etc.
The literature in social psychology and online communities has described motivations for anonymity that are less about threat per se than about the emotional effects of anonymity and ways that anonymity can help people manage their social relationships online .
In accord with this literature, a few of our interviewees said that using a pseudonym or fictional identity made them feel "cool" or "sophisticated."
Some mentioned feeling more relaxed talking to anonymous strangers than to friends.
One student told us that he sometimes added random people to his online chat list to talk about things that bothered him.
When I'm talking to someone else and neither of us knows who the other person is, there's no apprehension.
Whatever you want to say, you can just say it; you can go ahead and vent some of your frustrations.
Participants reported using both technical and behavioral strategies to achieve anonymity.
The most commonly used technical method was to change one's IP address.
Interviewees used proxy servers, VPNs, and anonymizing systems like Tor to hide their home IP address, or they changed their IP address manually.
Those with more advanced technical skills used encryption to protect their information.
For users with lower technical abilities, one commonly used method was to change browser settings or website-specific privacy settings to control which other users had access to their profiles.
Most, however, said they did not bother because, as one interviewee explained, the tools "are quite a bit of trouble to use."
Half of the interviewees obtained anonymity within online communities by not participating.
They also limited the information they shared online.
Sixteen interviewees reported sharing false information to maintain their anonymity--providing a fictitious name, using a false profile photo, and inventing biographical information when other users asked for personal information.
We asked interviewees how effectively they had achieved anonymity.
We did not quiz them on their understanding of the Internet, but many interviewees revealed an incorrect or incomplete understanding of the Internet and anonymity.
For example, when discussing the private browsing function of a web browser, interviewee #8 said she was not sure whether it erased her traces from the computer she was using or from the website she visited.
Interviewees also confused social anonymity  with technical anonymity .
Many did not understand that one can be anonymous within a particular group or application but not anonymous to the ISP.
A few possessed greater understanding of the Internet and distinguished between what members of a community knew and what might be discovered about their Internet behavior more generally.
For instance, interviewee #21 said she was unidentifiable in a particular online community because of the steps she took to protect her identity , but she also said that there is no true anonymity on the Internet because anyone with technical expertise could find out who she was.
Some people reported creating separate identities in different online communities to prevent their friends in one group from learning of their membership in another group.
For example, the fandom enthusiast  used a consistent pseudonym for all fandom-related activities that were "unconnected with my real name."
Some others, however, used the same identification information across communities or platforms, which would provide clues to their real identity.
Only a few participants were aware that subtle patterns of behavior across time and applications could identify them.
The moreaware fandom enthusiast employed different communication patterns when talking with her online friends and her friends in real life.
One participant  said that revealing his expertise could identify him.
He explained that he maintained a variety of detailed personas, one for each of his unique skill sets, in order to share his expertise without compromising his anonymity.
Our study examined users' experiences and understanding of online anonymity.
From the narratives interviewees told, we gained some insight into their decision making processes for choosing anonymity over revealing their real identity.
The prior literature cited earlier suggests three factors that may lead people to seek anonymity.
These include technical constraints and misunderstanding of the Internet, the online community context, and personal privacy preferences .
Our interviews with people about their experiences of seeking anonymity exposed two other important factors that influenced their activities and their strategies for attaining anonymity: their prior negative experiences, and their desire to manage the boundaries between their online and offline worlds.
Under Marx's definition of anonymity, we found that few achieved full anonymity even when they claimed to do so.
Most participants did not reveal their real name or location, and many participants mentioned using pseudonyms to hide their identity, which use would afford incomplete protection.
A few participants said that they used variations of their names  or something important to them  in their pseudonyms, and they were aware that some other users or website administrators could identify their real identity from their pseudonyms.
Prior negative experiences influenced interviewees' perceptions of how using their real identity might pose a threat and how anonymity would protect them from future threats.
Fifteen interviewees used anonymity because of a prior unpleasant or frightening experience.
A European woman told us she used false information in every online activity she participated in because she was once lured to another country by online criminals who pretended to offer her a job.
She escaped, but the experience was terrifying.
My life was in danger...
I was even afraid to go on the Internet at that time.
I learned a lot of things about the Internet, and the most important, you don't have to use real information about yourself.
Interviewee #6 told us about a stalker who searched for her personal information using her username on a BBS.
After the incident, this interviewee created unique usernames for each of her accounts on different sites.
Another interviewee was a graduate student  who published some damaging information about a university president candidate on a forum.
The candidate's supporters retaliated by exposing all of the student's personal information, including his real name, school, and department, and then spreading a false rumor that he was not a real student.
Friends' or other users' prior experiences also influenced people's decisions.
For example, a Chinese woman who always shopped online using fake identity said, Actually I'd used my real name before, but I heard of stories like this: a retailer received a bad review, so she posted the buyer's identity information to the web and said some very bad things about the buyer.
So I started to use fake names.
Many interviewees did not have the technical skills to avoid detection.
The woman who had been lured overseas by online criminals began to change her Internet service provider every six months, believing that this action anonymized her on the Internet.
Then these friends would argue with me under my post.
I didn't want our friendship to be affected, so I didn't want to express my views under my real name again.
We speculate that the relational benefits of anonymity might be more important for members of Eastern cultures, consistent with the literature on communal societies and collectivism in Eastern cultures .
Some interviewees wished to create boundaries between different online activities.
One interviewee had frequented a website about preparing for zombie attacks.
Because some of the members liked to post pictures of the weapons they owned, he was more cautious about disclosing personal information on that site than on the game sites he visited: In my head, there's a big difference between video game enthusiasts and firearm enthusiasts... whenever I was interacting with the firearm enthusiasts, I wanted that extra level of protection.
Not that I thought everyone was bad...
I just happen to know all the guns they own.
They sought to keep these personas separate by maintaining separate profiles and social circles.
One woman  maintained separate email, Facebook, and Twitter accounts for fandom activities and for communicating with real-life friends and colleagues.
Another interviewee  told us he kept two Flickr accounts, one for his friends and another he used only to share photos with his parents and older relatives.
Interviewees also used anonymity to manage restrictions in the online environment such as government policies that blocked content.
When the websites that participants wanted to browse violated government policy restrictions, interviewees sometimes chose to browse anonymously.
Other interviewees in this situation, however, decided not to be anonymous in order to appear "normal" .
One man told us that he liked to visit subversive websites out of curiosity but would never register or post for fear of drawing government suspicion.
I just want to be perceived as a harmless voyeur of this stuff, because to me it's like spy novel stuff, and....
I don't have the money to defend myself if some overzealous cyberauthority sees me doing more than browsing.
Interviewees' decisions to seek anonymity were often influenced by their desire to control and manage the boundaries between their different social networks, groups, and environments.
Interviewees often sought anonymity to prevent conflict with friends or family, to maintain a professional public image, or to avoid government attention.
They wanted to preserve separate identities in real life and online, in different online groups, and in different real life groups.
The fan fiction writer with multiple Facebook accounts told us that anonymity was particularly important to her because her writing sometimes contained adult content.
As her job involved working with children, she was afraid that people would censure her if they found out she had authored erotic fiction.
When you work with kids, a lot of people feel like you don't have a right to a personal life.
You have to be a role model at all times, even when you're not at work.
Potential risks to relationships included opposing views, conflicts of interest, and loss of trust.
One Chinese interviewee said that she felt less reluctant to post her political opinions on anonymous forums than on social networking sites where friends could identify her posts.
I've some friends who do not agree with my views.
Sometimes I criticized the government on Renren.com.
Nearly all of our interviewees  held both positive and negative attitudes about anonymity.
Two advocated anonymity as a right and felt that it was essential to privacy and security in the digital age.
Twelve said that anonymity could be misused and could allow irresponsible behavior without consequences for the perpetrators, but would not give up their rights to be anonymous because of their own situations.
Ten interviewees thought seeking anonymity as a general online strategy was a futile pursuit because advances in computing and use of digital data have made anonymity virtually impossible across applications.
These participants were concerned about hackers, the government, and unknown others capturing their IP address and tracking them down.
They expressed concerns about personal information being used by third parties such as proxy or torrent server owners.
One government employee felt very strongly that although anonymity is essential for privacy and security, it is exceedingly difficult to achieve: We, to a large degree, live in a post-privacy world, where if you know how, you can find out anything about anyone.
Tradeoffs included expanding the diversity of their Internet associations versus protecting their image and relationships, freely expressing their opinions versus maintaining their credibility, and getting useful, personalized recommendations versus receiving spam.
Our results show that people from all walks of life had reason, at one time or another, to seek anonymity.
A main policy tradeoff is that discouraging anonymity will discourage malicious behavior  but will also discourage people from engaging in creative, helpful, and harmless online activities that they might otherwise pursue.
Many people would be prevented from managing personal threat and their social boundaries because identifiability increases the bleeding of social information across time, place, and group.
Current Internet design allows for anonymity at the application level , but anonymity across applications  is very difficult to achieve for most users.
Further, the demographic information or content that users reveal can be linked across applications and cause them to be identified even if their legal name, email address, and IP address are hidden.
An important policy question is whether Internet users should have stronger controls on their levels of anonymity, and whether the risks of anonymity outweigh its benefits.
In this paper, we examined only the risks and benefits for individuals rather than for communities or the society as a whole.
Recent world events, such as the rapid spread of a viral incendiary video, suggest that the freedom of -8-
Forty-five percent of our interviewees expressed uncertainty about what might happen to them or their data online.
They also did not have an accurate understanding of how their personal information could be accessed by others and which information would be disclosed.
Interviewee #16 mentioned concerns about her practice of entering her telephone number in multiple accounts, and whether that behavior connected her multiple identities.
She avoided using sites that did this.
I think the threat for me is mostly that Google would accidentally associate my two accounts.
Interviewees noted the absence of user-friendly tools for achieving anonymity.
Some complained that existing proxy servers were too slow or difficult to use.
Others did not know how to use anonymity tools at all.
If we want to support anonymity as an option online, then we must improve the usability of tools for achieving anonymity.
Online communities will sometimes want to offer anonymity for some or all members.
Such communities will probably need to develop strong norms and moderation or sanctioning processes to support prosocial behavior and prevent destructive behavior .
Online pseudonyms allow users to build reputations inside single communities or websites such as eBay while keeping their real identities hidden.
However, our interviewees sometimes wanted to build reputations across different online platforms.
We suggest that new mechanisms might provide better solutions for users attempting to balance their safety concerns with their desire for widespread recognition.
IN our study, Chinese interviewees weighed relational factors especially heavily when choosing to hide their identity.
They also were more suspicious than other interviewees about information being used against them by officials, vendors, and strangers, and many did not register on websites when they avoid doing so.
Our finding echoes other work suggesting that Chinese users are particularly likely to falsify their identity on online social network sites .
This behavior could be due to political or cultural beliefs, or to biases in our sampling.
In our future work we plan to investigate this question further.
Although the diverse demographic and technical skills of our sample provided us with a snapshot of anonymous Internet use in different cultures, government policy areas, and knowledge contexts, our sample was not a representative sample of the population of Internet users.
Limited by our interview approach, we were also unable to examine how users' strategies align with their actual anonymity levels.
Further research will require a more representative sample and a more fine-grained approach to find out how Internet users in general define and seek anonymity.
Our sample and the study design did not allow us to distinguish political from cultural factors in motivations for anonymity.
Edmonson, A.C., and McManus, S. E. Methodological fit in management field research.
Oppositionists and group norms: The reciprocal influence of whistle-blowers and co-workers.
Uncover Security Design Flaws Using The STRIDE Approach.
Hofstede, G. Dimensions of national cultures in fifty countries and three regions.
In J.Deregowski, S. Dzuirawiec and R. Annis, eds., Explications in CrossCultural Psychology.
Jensen, C. and Potts, C. Privacy practices of Internet users: self-reports versus observed behavior.
The MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts 2011.
Krishnamurthy, B. and Wills, C.E.
Characterizing privacy in online social networks.
Some Reflections on the Sociology of Anonymity.
Access Control for Home Data Sharing: Attitudes, Needs and Practices.
Plan 9 From Cyberspace: The Implications of the Internet for Personality and Social Psychology.
Odom, W., Sellen, A., Harper, R., and Thereska, E. Lost in translation: understanding the possession of digital things in the cloud.
Qualitative research and evaluation methods.
Reputation management and social media: Our digital footprints.
Pfitzmann, A. and Kohntopp, M. Anonymity, Unobservability, and Pseudonymity - A Proposal for Terminology.
