Whether they are made to entertain you, or to educate you, good video games engage you.
Significant research has tried to understand engagement in games by measuring player experience .
Traditionally, PX evaluation has focused on the enjoyment of game, or the motivation of players; these factors no doubt contribute to engagement, but do decisions regarding play environment  affect the player more deeply than that?
We apply self-determination theory  to explain PX in an experiment with controller type as the manipulation.
Our study shows that there are a number of effects of controller on PX and in-game player personality.
These findings provide both a lens with which to view controller effects in games and a guide for controller choice in the design of new games.
Our research demonstrates that including selfcharacteristics assessment in the PX evaluation toolbox is valuable and useful for understanding player experience.
These efforts have taken both a prescriptive approach , and an analytic perspective .
The analytic approach to understanding player experience  has taken many forms.
Significant research has been conducted on operationalizing concepts important to PX  , and measuring these concepts by instrumenting , observing , and surveying  the player.
Although prior research on measuring PX applies various methodological approaches, what previous work has in common is that it all attempts to quantify or qualify the player's experience.
However we suggest that to fully understand PX, we must understand both how a player feels about a game and how they feel about themselves during gameplay.
For example, consider a role-playing game that rewards players who steal items from their teammates.
A player might be engaged and get satisfaction from exercising their stealth inside the boundaries of the game, but quit playing, because succeeding makes them feel sleazy.
In this case, the important information is not how the player feels about the game, but about how the game makes them feel about themselves.
Previous work has introduced the idea of considering a user's experience of themselves during play by investigating a user's in-game trait personality; however, this application of in-game personality has been only in the context of sociological exploration of virtual worlds , association with in-game avatars  or preference of game genre , and not for the purpose of PX evaluation.
To investigate the relationship between player experience of a game and a player's in-game personality , we chose to compare the effects of different game controllers.
Studying game controllers is a natural choice for this research as the controller acts as the interface between the player and the game - it is the device through which players engage with the game.
Previous work comparing input devices in gameplay has focused on measuring performance differences in terms of targeting  or steering , or player experience differences in terms of spatial presence  or immersion .
Whether they are made to entertain you, or to educate you, good video games engage you.
Good games draw the player in and keep them engaged during play, and an engaged player will give the game a better chance of success at its intended purpose, irrespective of whether that be to divulge or divert.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
We explore how the type of controller used during game play affects the player's game experience in terms of their enjoyment and their motivation.
More importantly, we show how controller choice affects a player's perception of themselves and how their perceived personality  within the game  compares to their idealized version of themselves  and their reality  .
To experimentally determine the role of controller on PX, we designed and implemented a custom game that allowed us to compare three controller types .
Our results show that the choice of controller affects our enjoyment and motivation to play.
Further, we show how playing with different types of controllers changes how we satisfy our needs within game play and how we perceive ourselves in a game.
Specifically, the choice of controller affects our perceived Agreeableness and Neuroticism.
In addition, we show that change in game-self is the biggest predictor of both enjoyment and motivation to play.
These findings provide both a lens with which to view controller effects in games and a guide for controller choice in the design of new games.
Our research demonstrates that including personality assessment in the PX evaluation toolbox is valuable for understanding player experience.
Furthermore, a majority of studies that measure game experience do not leverage the research in validated evaluation approaches and instead apply ad-hoc surveys to gather participant responses.
SDT is comprised of several mini-theories and focuses on factors that influence motivation.
One mini theory, Cognitive Evaluation Theory  , describes intrinsic motivation in terms of competence and autonomy.
To assess the factors that support intrinsic motivation in games, the concept  of Player Experience of Needs Satisfaction   was developed.
We next describe the concepts within PENS.
In terms of SDT, intrinsic motivation  is defined by a locus of control inherent in the person, and an outcome attributed to volition and achievement.
IM is distinct from external motivation, which is defined by an external locus of control, e.g., deadlines.
CET proposes that IM is a function of autonomy, and competence.
CET proposes that the experience of competence derives from challenge, and the personal effort of mastering challenges.
For example, the laddering used in many games provides a structure for players to exert effort to master successively harder challenges.
CET proposes that the experience of autonomy derives from volition and willingness to perform a task.
For example, multiple in-game options give players cause to experience autonomy through willing decision-making.
Within SDT, relatedness is defined as the feeling of belonging to a group, and is an important factor for psychological well-being.
Social games like FarmVille and massively multiplayer online role-playing games  make extensive use of this concept.
PENS defines presence as "the sense that one is within the world".
Presence is fostered by competence and autonomy, and related to the flow concept  as the highest state of presence.
PENS defines controls as intuitive, when they do not interfere with one's sense of presence, are easily mastered, and make sense in context of the game.
Early attempts at game experience evaluation appropriated methods from classic usability evaluation, but researchers quickly discovered that games have different goals  and constraints  than productivity software .
To combat these differences, researchers proposed revising methods of traditional user experience evaluation for use in games, including revised heuristics for playability evaluation  and revised questionnaires appropriate for the gaming context .
In addition, new methods were created, including new survey instruments , psychophysiological methods of evaluation , and event log analysis  .
An increasingly active field of research, the goal of game experience evaluation is to understand how the game affects the emotional and cognitive experience of the player to produce the desired outcome of `fun' .
In the context of game-based learning,  shows that experienced competence, autonomy, and relatedness increase motivation, positive mood, and the recommendation of a game.
Finally, in , the authors validate the application of SDT  to the domain of exergames, showing that SDT-guided game feature choices result in improved game enjoyment, game recommendation and game rating.
Specific to the evaluation of input,  applied PENS to show that realistic and tangible controller mappings led to higher experienced autonomy and presence.
For example, the five factors of personality have been shown to correspond with a player's preferred genre  and motivation to play .
In the area of player taxonomies, research has shown that player type can be predicted from the personality traits of the player , and that considering personality traits in combination with player taxonomies and game design elements can inform the understanding of enjoyment in game play .
Additionally, research has shown that personality traits carry into general behavior in virtual worlds .
Self-discrepancy theory is based on the assumption that people compare themselves to so called self-guides, or internalized standards , and has been applied in fields such as mental health and work-life balance .
Self-guides represent three domains of the self, namely the actual-self , the ideal-self, , and the ought-self .
A common way to assess self-guides is to use the five factor model of personality, commonly referenced as the Big Five .
Usually used to assess personality traits, the instructions are rephrased to use the following five factors to assess different states of self-characterization.
Extraversion  is a tendency to be energetic, outgoing, and assertive.
People who score high on E tend to be involved in social activities, rather than spend time alone.
Agreeableness  is a tendency to be friendly, caring, and conflict avoiding.
People who score high on A prefer cooperation to competition and are not likely to be aggressive.
Conscientiousness  is a tendency to show selfdiscipline, act dutifully, and aim for achievement.
People who score high on C plan activities rather than engaging in spontaneity, and tend to be organized and dependable.
Neuroticism  is a tendency to be nervous, sensitive, and emotionally unstable.
People who score high on N respond poorly to environmental stress, and are likely to experience stress and frustration in minor situations.
Openness to Experience  is a tendency to be intellectually curious, think abstractly, and to explore.
People who score high on O are likely to try something new, rather than sticking to old beliefs and tradition.
In contrast to the direct application of personality traits , self-discrepancy theory considers the difference between self-guides , and has been applied successfully to understand games.
For example, research on character choice in World of Warcraft has shown that players create characters closer to their ideal-selves than to their actual-selves , and that this trend was stronger for those with higher depression scores.
Additionally, research has shown that the discrepancy between actual-self and ideal-self is related to game enjoyment, especially when convergence between game-self  and ideal-self is high .
Finally, selfdiscrepancy has been used to explain game addiction .
Previous work comparing input devices in gameplay has focused on measuring performance in terms of targeting  or steering .
At the level of PX, research has shown that movement-based input enhances engagement and social interaction  in collaborative games.
Others have shown that controllers differ in terms of spatial presence  and immersion  within games.
It is important to understand the spatial presence of controllers, because research has shown that presence can predict enjoyment in game play .
Finally, as noted in the section on the use of SDT in PX evaluation, a realistic mapping between controller and task leads to a higher experience of autonomy and presence, but not competence .
We designed a simple 3D game where the premise was that the user was flying inside of a tornado in a ship and the goal was to collect spinning items .
Collection was accomplished using a `tractor beam' by hovering over the item for 0.8 seconds.
The beam changed colour to provide feedback on successful hovering, and feedback on the number of collected items were displayed in a gauge on the ship's console.
Collecting 10 items allowed the player to speed in the ship to the next wave.
The number of waves in each game depended on the success of the player and each game ended after five minutes.
Our design goal was to create a game that was playable with a variety of controller types, while keeping difficulty constant to allow inexperienced gamers - or gamers inexperienced with a particular controller - the opportunity to succeed in the task.
Although complete in terms of the formal elements of game design, our game was specifically designed to be stripped of dramatic elements - such as characters, story, and dramatic arc - to study how controller choice affects self-perception and PX without interference from dramatic effects, , or confounding effects,  .
PlayStation Move button to start the game and the x- and yposition of the controller to position the tractor beam.
Kinect: The Microsoft Kinect is a gesture-based controller developed for Xbox360.
The device uses one camera that detects x- and y-position and another infrared receiver camera that detects depth through the dispersion of dots displayed via an infrared transmitter - for a detailed specification see .
In our study the experimenter started the game; the x-position of the tractor beam was controlled by the relative position of the left and right shoulder to the Kinect; the y-position was controlled by the relative position of hip and shoulder to the Kinect.
The experiment was conducted with 78 students from the University of Saskatchewan .
Students were recruited via mailing lists and notices on bulletin boards, and represented a variety of disciplines of study.
Most participants played games : 73% played on computers, 44% on consoles, and 45% on mobile devices.
In terms of controller expertise, 51% were experienced with the GamePad, 53% with the PlayStation Move or Nintendo Wii, and 9% with Kinect1.
Participants began by completing an informed consent and a questionnaire about their actual-self, ideal-self, and their current affective state.
They then played one game  with each of the three different controller types.
After each controller condition the players completed questionnaires assessing their experience of the game and of themselves within the game .
At the end of the experiment, players completed demographic questions.
The experiment was a within-subject design, with all participants using each of the three controllers.
Order of presentation of controller was fully counterbalanced.
Our game required only that the player target objects by manipulating the x- and y-position of the tractor beam; there was no binary input necessary.
We compared three popular controller types  represented by the Microsoft XBox GamePad, the Sony PlayStation Move, and the Microsoft Kinect.
GamePad : We used an Xbox360 standard controller.
For our study we used the A-Button to start the game and the right analog stick to position the tractor beam.
Move : The PlayStation Move is a position-based controller, using a wand with a coloured light orb on top, which is tracked by the PlayStation "Eye" Camera.
The PlayStation Eye was set to capture the scene at 60 Hz with a resolution of 640 x 480, and a 76 field of view.
Note that the novelty of the Kinect among our sample is a potential confound.
As such, we replicated our analyses for a subgroup where players were unfamiliar with all devices .
Our main results are all confirmed in this subgroup, with two exceptions , where the trends of the results remain, but pMainEffect>.05.
Enjoyment of game was measured using two scales.
PANAS: Positive Affect and Negative Affect were assessed using the Positive Affect Negative Affect ScheduleExpanded  .
In the PANAS-X, participants are asked to agree with 20 emotion adjectives on a Likertscale ranging from 1  to 5 .
Half of the adjectives are positive  and half are negative .
Ratings are merged to create a composite score for negative affect and one for positive affect.
The PANAS-X has been used to evaluate the enjoyment of video games .
IMI: Intrinsic Motivation was assessed using the 18-item Intrinsic Motivation Inventory , which has been used to evaluate experience with video games .
A series of items are rated on 5-point Likert-scale, ranging from 1  to 5 .
Example items are "I enjoyed this game very much" and "I think I am pretty good at this game".
Data is merged to create four scores for each of interest-enjoyment, competence, effort-importance, and tension, and also an overall score of intrinsic motivation.
Ratings used a 5-point Likert scale from 1  to 5 .
Participants also reflected on their ideal-self, by completing items of the form "The type of person you wish, desire, or hope to be..." , with the same items as used for assessing actual-self.
After each game condition, participants were asked to assess their game-self using a short form .
Participants were asked to answer the questionnaire by completing the sentence "Reflect on the characteristics you see yourself having during the game - the type of person you were playing the game".
Items in the short version covered all 5 aspects of personality, the number of items representing the scales E, A, O, N, C per questionnaire were stable, and we fully counterbalanced the presentation.
Drawing items from a longer questionnaire is an established approach .
The Player Experience of Need Satisfaction Scale  , was designed to understand game experience from the perspective of SDT , and has been used to evaluate games .
We used PENS after each condition to assess if the game satisfied the players' needs for Competence, Autonomy, Relatedness, Immersion and Intuitive Controls.
A series of statements was agreed with using a 5-point Likert-scale from 1  to 5 .
Example items include "I feel competent at the game" or "Learning the game controls was easy".
Data are merged to create a score for each of the five underlying constructs.
Although some have argued for leaving out the subscales on Relatedness if the game is for a single player , it is possible that different controller types could differentially satisfy the need for relatedness, so we included it.
All analyses were conducted using RM-ANOVA in SPSS 20.
All parametric tests were performed after validating the data for assumptions of ANOVA use.
Degrees of freedom were corrected using the Huynh-Feldt method, if the condition of sphericity was not satisfied.
Pairwise comparisons used the Bonferonni method of adjusting the degrees of freedom for multiple comparisons, with the exception of the self-discrepancy measures, which used Tukey's LSD to avoid potential Type II errors resulting from small effect sizes.
Significance was set at =.05.
We first present the results of PX as traditionally measured by positive affect and intrinsic motivation.
We extend this traditional analysis of PX by presenting the results of need satisfaction.
We then explore how the controller conditions changed how players feel about themselves within the context of the game through presentation of the personality results.
Finally, we investigate how the use of personality as a measure of player experience compares with the use of measures of play experience through a regression analysis.
The player's trait personality was assessed using the Big Five Inventory  .
The BFI is a standard instrument to assess personality dimensions and has been used in the context of games .
Data are merged to create a score for each of the underlying dimensions and for an overall score.
Self-Discrepancy Theory assumes that the distance between self-concepts is predictive for psychological well-being.
There are many ways to measure differences between selfconcepts, including personality questionnaires, which easily assess personality constructs and get a measure for SelfDiscrepancy at the same time.
We use the overall score from the BFI to give a simple estimate for Self-Discrepancy by calculating divergence .
Participants completed the BFI five times.
When evaluating PX, the first question of interest is usually whether or not the experience was fun, often measured as the degree of positive affect , mediated by the degree of Intrinsic Motivation  - especially the motivational component of interest/enjoyment.
Pairwise comparisons show that the Kinect produced the highest Positive Affect, then the Move then GamePad .
All differences were significant at p<.006.
For the Move condition, the correlation is significant with Competence and Relatedness, and for the Kinect condition, the correlation is significant with Competence, Autonomy, and Relatedness.
These results reveal that PX is not related to players' overall personality traits, but is related to their experienced personality within the context of game play, demonstrating that the use of game-self-characteristics for PX is meaningful.
Figure 5 shows the differences in perceived personality in game for the different controllers in the context of perceived actual-self and ideal-self.
Interestingly, the ingame personalities are contained within the boundaries of actual-self.
Contrary to expectations of game play, the game did not produce more idealized versions of players, but moved their perceived personality further from their ideal than their actual-self .
This ideal-self-game-self discrepancy is significantly larger for all controller types than for ideal-self-actual-self .
We revisit this interesting result in the discussion.
The results of the personality analysis show that a choice as simple as which controller is used can affect our in-game personality, and that in-game personality correlates with need satisfaction, whereas actual-self does not; however to understand the role that in-game personality plays in game experience evaluation, we must know the relative contribution of the need satisfaction variables and the personality variables to the overall outcome of increased positive affect or motivation to play.
We conducted an analysis of regression with game-self, Competence, Autonomy, Relatedness, Immersion, and Intuitive Control on Positive Affect and overall Intrinsic Motivation .
Personality was included as a single factor, indicating overall game-self, whereas the individual contributions from PENS were included individually because they measure distinct dimensions; there is no meaning of an overall PENS score.
Figure 5 shows how in-game personality characteristics change with controller type, but also shows how game-self is fairly similar to actual-self.
To determine whether the differences in game-self are meaningful for game evaluation, we conducted two-tailed Pearson correlations for game-self and the PENS dimensions separately for each controller.
We also calculated the correlations for actualself and the PENS dimensions across the three controllers.
Correlations are displayed in Table 3.
The results show that there are no significant correlations between actual-self and any of the PENS dimensions; however, there are correlations between the PENS dimensions and game-self.
Our results show that game-self, Competence, and Autonomy predict Positive Affect, with changes in gameself yielding the biggest contribution.
In addition, gameself and Immersion predict Intrinsic Motivation, with Immersion providing the larger contribution.
These results show that changes to game-self as a result of controller predicts positive affect and intrinsic motivation during game play, and confirm that analysis of in-game personality is a valuable tool to understand PX.
Other researchers have previously applied theories of needs satisfaction to understand and explain player motivation and user experience within a game .
We do the same in our work but add to the literature with our findings on how controller choice differentially affects our satisfaction of needs.
In addition, we demonstrate that the application of self-discrepancy theory to game evaluation adds value to our understanding of PX.
Game-self changed significantly with use of a different controller, and the change in game-self as a result of controller choice is a bigger predictor of positive affect than the components of need satisfaction theory.
These findings confirm that including trait personality assessment in the PX evaluation toolbox is valuable for understanding player experience.
Our findings also have practical importance.
For instance, we use games to escape reality, whether through a fantasybased role-playing experience  or not .
We show that controller choice affects game-self, thus it is important for game designers to consider controller choice, to ensure that the escapism provided by games is not unintentionally damaged.
In these games, the character begins with vulnerabilities  that are resolved through interacting with environmental threats.
The designer's intention is that players experience the fragility of the hero and surmount the odds; the goal is to become strong and overcome the feelings of being weak.
Players accomplish this through leveling up .
Many of these types of games use traditional controllers , which is shown in our study to increase Neuroticism.
By using the GamePad for these types of interactions, the experience of anxiety and instability might be heightened; users may be more likely to experience stress from minor events.
It could be that in playing these games with a GamePad, the designer's intention of having players experience the character's fragility is effectively translated.
In another example, consider games designed as social icebreakers or to promote social connectedness .
Games that target a friendly play environment benefit when players' gameselves are Agreeable.
Our results suggest that the Kinect is preferred for enhancing Agreeableness, matching what is working in the games industry; the success of the Kinect has largely been for these types of social games.
Our findings related to in-game personality as a result of controller choice could also be applied to guide controller choice in the design of new games.
For example, consider a game designed to help players learn empathy.
Our findings show that using the GamePad heightens the experience of Neuroticism, reinforcing feelings of being uncomfortable with strangers and difficult social situations, and causing players' game selves to be more likely to lose their temper and be prone to annoyance.
Our results suggest that using the GamePad would decrease the game-self's natural inclination towards empathy, thus increasing the challenge of experiencing empathy; therefore, it could be a good choice for this application.
In another example, consider a game that encourages deception and betraying others for personal gain .
Although the Kinect is a general choice for collaborative or social games, our results show that the Kinect enhances players' Agreeableness within the context of play, reducing willingness to take advantage of others, insult others, and invite conflict.
Thus, our findings suggest that the Kinect may not be a good controller choice when designing a game where the mechanics incite low Agreeableness .
The mismatch between the personality affordances of the controller and the intended in-game personality of the player may result in poor PX.
On the other hand, as previously noted, our findings suggest that games designed as social icebreakers or to promote social connectedness would benefit from the Kinect.
Although the primary purpose of computer and video games has been to entertain, games have also been used to persuade a player to change their attitudes or opinions , to inspire behaviour change , and to teach concepts, skills and tools  .
Regardless of whether a game is intended to entertain or educate, players will enjoy the experience of play if they are motivated to make progress .
Good games draw the player in and keep them engaged during play, and an engaged player will give the game a better chance of success at its intended purpose, irrespective of whether that be to divulge or divert.
Our results demonstrate how the choice of controller in a game mediates the experience, not only for the satisfaction of needs, but also for perceived personality.
These findings related to game-self and controllers are useful both as a lens with which to understand controller effects in games and as a guide for choices on controller in new games.
Our study provides interesting findings for PX research; however, there are some limitations that raise questions for future work.
First, our game was intentionally designed to be void of dramatic elements related to story arc or character progression.
How our results extend to games where the player relates to their character is unknown.
Our results that show how game-self is subsumed by actual-self likely do not extend to situations in which a player interacts via a character with personality traits closer to the player's ideal-self .
Second, although our game was engaging, it was not designed to draw a player in like an off-the-shelf game.
Our results may differ when applied to games engineered to produce engagement and flow.
On the other hand, the underlying mechanism of pursuit tracking used in our game is a common mechanic in a variety of game genres , and thus our results related to controller choice have general application.
Third, we tested three controllers; extending our results to other game input  is needed.
Also, we created a specific control mechanism for Kinect interaction ; a different control mechanism  may produce different effects on gameself.
Finally, our analysis considers all participants as a group.
Examining results by demographic factor, such as age, sex, personality traits, or game expertise could produce interesting interactions.
Our findings produce many future opportunities for research, of which we present a few examples.
First, we investigated a single-player game; applying our approach to collaborative or competitive play could inform the choice of controller for this popular genre.
Second, we look specifically at controller choice in digital games; our analysis could be extended to artifact use in board game play.
Finally, our findings can be used as a lens to view existing game success.
Relating the predictions of positive affect based on changing game-self to market success of games would provide commerce-based validation of our research.
Traditional game evaluation focuses on the enjoyment provided by a game .
We apply satisfaction of needs theory  to explain the underlying components of game enjoyment in an experiment with controller type as the manipulation.
In addition, we explore the use of game-self as an additional level of PX evaluation to investigate the difference between how a play experience makes a player feel about the game and how the experience makes them feel about themselves.
Our study shows that there are a number of effects of controller on PX and player personality within a game.
These findings provide both a lens with which to view controller effects in games and a guide for controller choice in the design of new games.
