Inherent pen input modalities such as tip pressure, tilt and azimuth  have been extensively used as additional input channels in pen-based interactions.
We conducted a study to investigate the natural use profiles of PTA, which describes the features of PTA in the course of normal pen use such as writing and drawing.
First, the study reveals the ranges of PTA in normal pen use, which can distinguish pen events accidently occurring in normal drawing and writing from those used for mode switch.
The natural use profiles also show that azimuth is least likely to cause false pen mode switching while tip pressure is most likely to cause false pen mode switching.
Second, the study reveals correlations among various modalities, indicating that pressure plus azimuth is superior to other pairs for dualmodality control.
One big benefit of adding extra interaction modalities is that a user can select different pen modes by simply adjusting the added modality, without moving the pen tip away from the interaction focus.
For example, Ramos el al.
To effectively switch pen modes via extra modalities, the designers need to choose appropriate thresholds for triggering the mode switch process.
Otherwise, the mode switch might be falsely activated because normal pen use, such as drawing or writing, also affects the values of these modalities.
Using values that are unlikely to occur in normal pen use would help prevent false activations.
For example, research  shows that the rolling angles of a pen range from -10 to +10 in normal pen use.
Therefore, the 10 was used as the threshold for triggering a rolling menu to avoid accidental activation.
The natural use profiles of a pen, which describe the features of various modalities during the course of normal pen use, provide hints for the thresholds of other modalities.
Besides suggesting thresholds for mode switching, natural use profiles reveal the correlations among various modalities.
A loose correlation pair means that the two modalities are unlikely to interfere with each other, indicating that a user can independently control each modality.
These modalities are highly recommended for multi-degree-of-freedom control tasks, e.g., curve manipulation , or 3D objects manipulations .
Overall, an understanding of natural use profiles will provide pen-based interface design with a proven foundation.
However, prior work  mostly addressed the use of a particular dimension for enriching pen-based interaction.
The profiles about tip pressure, tilt and azimuth  still remain unknown.
In this paper, we, conduct a study to fill this gap.
Pen input has been widely adopted as a major interaction modality for slate computers, handheld devices, and large format electronic whiteboards, due to its portability, outdoor availability, short learning curve, and ease of manipulation.
Despite these advantages, pen input suffers from its low communication bandwidth: typically, only a single point, the x-y position of the pen tip, is used for interaction.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Twenty volunteers , age from 21 to 33, participated in the experiment.
All of them were righthanded.
The experiment was conducted on a Wacom Cintiq 21UX interactive LCD display  with a digital stylus.
The hardware can detect the tip pressure range , corresponding to the force range  , tilt angle range  , and azimuth angle range  .
The experimental program was developed in Java and ran on a 2.13 GHz Intel Core2 CPU PC with Windows XP.
By pressing the spacebar on the keyboard the user proceeded to the next trial.
Each character appeared twice in total.
All characters were mixed and counterbalanced in random order.
In summary, the experiment consisted of: 20 participants x 17 characters x 7 sizes x 2 repetitions = 4760 trials.
Our basic objective is to investigate the natural use profiles of PTA, which describe the features of PTA and correlations among them in normal drawing and writing.
Therefore, besides the common symbols and English letters, we also included Chinese characters in the experiment, which contain most basic strokes in daily drawing and writing such as points, lines, turns, crosses, and arcs.
In particular, the following characters are involved in the experiment: * Symbols , * Letters , * Chinese characters which were classified by structure and complexity .
At the beginning of each trial, a character appeared on the upper left corner of the display in the font size 36.
In the meantime, a translucent green square was displayed at the center of the display, the length of which was one of the seven tested sizes.
Figure 2 shows the distribution for each of them.
R-squares of Gaussian distribution regression were 0.74 , 0.98 , and 0.92 , indicating that the tilt and azimuth data well fit Gaussian distributions.
The frequency of pressure value 1023 was extraordinarily high, probably because pressures above 1023 were also recorded as 1023.
Excluding it , the R-square of Gaussian distribution regression is 0.98, also showing a strong fit of Gaussian distribution.
Figure 3 illustrates how character size affects PTA modalities.
Post hoc pair-wise comparisons showed significant differences for all pairs in pressure, and 50 vs. other sizes in tilt, and 100 vs. other sizes in azimuth.
Our pilot studies indicated that the preferred display-table angle varied for different users.
Thus, we decided to place the tablet horizontally to eliminate potential effects caused by different display-table angles.
The horizontal plane is also a common tablet usage, e.g., where a user flattens a tablet laptop and places it on the lap or on a desk.
Figure 3 also shows that pressure is susceptible while tilt and azimuth are robust to the change of character size.
Along with the increase of character size, pressure increased rapidly and remained stable at around 763 when character size reaches 800 pixels.
However, tilt and azimuth did not undergo drastic changes: the gaps between the lowest and highest values were 2.77 for tilt and 3.23 for azimuth.
We suggest using the PTA values outside these ranges to trigger pen mode switching in order to prevent false activation.
Our study also shows that the azimuth is least likely to cause accidental pen mode switching while tip pressure is most likely to cause accidental pen mode switching.
The range of azimuth in normal pen use takes only 24% of the full range .
Moreover, the azimuth value remains relatively consistent regardless of the change of character size.
In contrast, the pressure modality is the opposite: the range of tip pressure in normal pen use  takes 61% of the full range  and it is susceptible to the change of character size.
Also, as the pen pressure always starts from the level 0 when the pen tip lands on the tablet, the values outside the normal use range, which are , still occasionally occur in normal drawing and writing, especially when the pen tip just lands on the tablet.
Therefore, tip pressure is not recommended for triggering pen mode switch.
Our experiment shows that plenty of pen events exceeded the maximum tip pressure, 1023 , suggesting that the manufactures should enlarge the detectable range to accurately capture tip pressures.
The susceptibleness of pressure is probably due to the following two reasons.
First, users tend to control a pen mainly by the muscle groups of fingers and palm when drawing/writing small-sized characters, while muscle groups of the arm are involved for large-sized characters.
Using different muscle groups to control the pen probably leads to the large variation in pressure.
This finding also concurs with the literature .
Second, research literature  shows that human mechanoreceptors in a person's fingers  adapt after a few milliseconds.
In other words, users become less aware of the absolute amount of pressure they are applying with a pen.
This is one of the reasons why the user's grip gets tighter as time goes by, and also a possible explanation as to why pressure is greater while drawing larger characters, which require more drawing/writing time.
Two-tailed Pearson Correlation Analyses revealed small correlations between pressure and tilt , tilt and azimuth , and a very minor correlation between pressure and azimuth , all p < .001.
If a user needs to control two PTA modalities to manipulate multiple degrees of freedom , the best option is pressure & azimuth.
The combined distribution of PTA shows that pressure & azimuth is the most loosely correlated pair, with the correlation coefficient of -0.09, which is substantially lower than pressure & tilt , and tilt & azimuth .
The minor correlation shows that pressure and azimuth almost never interfere with each other in normal pen use, in which a user does not even consciously avoid interference between different modalities.
This suggests that pressure and azimuth are promising candidates for dual-modality control: they can be independently controlled without causing interference.
Our study focuses on natural pen use, which means the results revealed the correlations among PTA in a natural usage scenario.
Correlations among PTA in intentional control applications  are also worthy of exploration.
We will investigate these in future work.
Besides providing specific ranges for trigging pen mode switching and for dual-modality control, understanding PTA profiles can also benefit the following applications:  Adaptive mode switching based on personal PTA use profiles.
As PTA profiles vary across different users, thresholds for mode switching may be designed for different users.
Personal PTA profiles can serve to distinguish different users.
Understanding the correlations among PTA allows designers to better leverage these modalities used in tandem.
We have conducted a study systematically investigating the natural use profiles of pressure, tilt and azimuth .
Detailed analysis shows that using azimuth is least likely to cause accidental activation while tip pressure is most likely to cause false activation for pen mode switching, and that pressure plus azimuth is the best option for dual-modality control due to their loose correlation.
This study is the first one that investigates the natural profiles of pen pressure, pen tilt, and pen azimuth simultaneously and their mutual relationships as well.
It might open up a promising new field of research on multiple pen modalities.
Furthermore, comparing prior studies on pen input modalities which mainly focused on the human ability to control pen input modalities, this work focuses on natural pen use and thus reflects the spirit of human computer interaction.
The results of our study provide guidelines on how to use multiple degrees of freedom which are intrinsic to a pen in realistic pen usage situations.
