For example, GUIs are not appropriate for hands-occupied or eyes-occupied environments such as driving .
GUIs also cannot be effectively implemented on technologies such as telephones or PDAs, because of screen-size limitations .
Second, TTS systems are useful for presenting text  and voice on telecommunication devices, such as cellular phones .
Third, for some people, it is hard or even impossible to use GUI-based systems.
For example, about 11 million people have some form of visual impairment and about 1.5 million are totally blind in the U.S. alone .
TTS technologies provide a new opportunity to use the power of the computer and the Internet for the disabled.
In addition, TTS technologies also make it easier for the illiterate and pre-literate  to use computers.
Finally, TTS systems are increasingly used to develop more human-like interfaces.
The basic assumption is that by incorporating anthropomorphic indicators such as speech, users will feel more comfortable with computers and perceive them as more intelligent .
This study examines whether people would interpret and respond to paralinguistic personality cues in computergenerated speech in the same way as they do human speech.
Participants used a book-buying website and heard five book reviews in a 2  by 2  balanced, between-subjects experiment.
Participants accurately recognized personality cues in TTS and showed strong similarity-attraction effects.
Match of user voice characteristics with TTS had no effect, confirming the social nature of the interaction.
We discuss implications for HCI theory and design.
In recent years, there has been increasing interest in and use of Text-to-Speech  technologies .
This is due to several factors.
First, there has been growing demand for Speech User Interfaces .
To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
There is relatively little difference in intelligibility across systems ; indeed, word intelligibility scores for the best TTS systems are close to 97%, suggesting that the intelligibility of the best TTS systems approaches that of real human speech .
Naturalness scores for the best TTS systems are in the fairto-good range, indicating that even the best TTS systems still do not match the quality and prosody of natural human speech .
That is, although it would not be surprising for users to be influenced by the comprehensibility of speech  or the naturalness of speech , the obviously synthetic nature of TTS should make the non-verbal aspects that influence social assessment irrelevant to users' attitudes and behaviors.
For example, odd hesitations in human speech are interpreted as attempts at deception .
These inappropriate pauses are a ubiquitous aspect of all synthesized speech engines, but it is unlikely that users would respond to all TTS engines as highly deceptive.
Even the literature that most dramatically demonstrates that individuals consistently apply social rules to computers  - - t h e Computers are Social Actors  paradigm  --cannot be directly applied to assignment of human attributes for systems employing text-to-speech.
In traditional CASA experiments, the user is presented with a computer that does nothing to remind the user that it is not human or, more specifically, that it is an ersatz human~ For example, the vast majority of studies in the CASA paradigm involve plain text presenting commonplace language and omitting any behavior uniquely associated with computers .
Thus, the content produced is as consistent with computer-mediated communication as it is with human-computer interaction.
Even the use of the word 'T' is eschewed in the experiments to ensure that the user is not reminded that there is an incongruity in a machine using the term for human identity.
In contrast to the failure to mark non-humanness in the previous CASA studies, TTS is a "liminar' case  wlfich sits at the botmdary of human and machine, although it is clearly on the machine side of the divide.
A demonstration that users employ social cues even with highly-present reminders that the voice is not coming from a person would represent a critical test of the CASA framework, as well as having critical implications for HCI design.
Third, the term personality ~ comes from the Latin personare, to sound through, referring to the mouth opening in a mask worn by an actor ; thus, it is natural to focus on the "sound" characteristics of personality.
Fourth, the field of personality psychology provides a rich set of predictions concerning how individuals will respond to various personality types.
Thus, we are not limited to merely determining whether individuals can identify the personality of a TTS voice; instead, we can also determine whether these personality markers will influence users' attitudes and behaviors.
Fifth, personality is an important and easily-measured individual difference among users, so the parallels to computers, as well as the interaction between user personality and computer personality, become particularly interesting.
Finally, and most importantly, there is a significant literature that outlines the specific linkages between the characteristics of the vocal channel and the assignments of personality that result.
The present study focuses on the extroversion/introversion dimension, both because it is the dimension most strongly marked by paralinguistic cues and because it has proven to be important in the HCI literature .
Four readily-manipulable aspects of TTS engines are associated with characteristics that individuals use to distinguish introversion from extroversion in humanhuman interaction:
Among humans, paralinguistic aspects of speech convey a wide range of trait information about the speaker, such as gender and age.
In the present study, we attempt to determine whether the vocal characteristics of speech can convey "personality."
That is, given identical content, will the particular settings in a TTS engine lead individuals to identify and respond to the voice as if it had a personality?
We chose personality for a number of reasons.
First, personality is more subtle and complex than the more obvious characteristics of gender and age.
To determine whether paralinguistic cues in TTS lead users to respond to the voice as ff it manifests a "personality," we used three different approaches.
First, we determined whether users could simply identify whether the voice was "introverted" or "extroverted."
This assessment not only involved direct questions about the voice, but also whether the personality of the voice affected assessments of the content that the voice presented.
This is a much stronger test than the direct test, in that it requires users to think of the voice as the source of the content.
A yet more stringent test is to determine whether the users draw on social rules to respond to the voice.
In this study, we examined the principle of simil~irity-attraction.
According to this principle, people like others who possess a personality that is similar to their own .
Similarity-attraction has proven to be a very robust finding when a computer's personality is manifest through verbal/textual cues .
However, text-tospeech is so obviously not similar to a human voice that to be able to find second-order similarity effects would be remarkably strong evidence for the assignment of personality to TTS.
If we combine the literature on similarity-attraction and proximate source orientation, then the match between TTS personality and user personality should affect the reactions to the reviewer and the review itself, rather than merely affecting direct assessments of the voice.
This leads to the following hypotheses:
Hh: Users will evaluate a book review more positively if the review is narrated by a I T S voice that matches their own personality.
H6: Users will like a review writer more if the writer's review is narrated by a TTS voice that matches their own personality.
H7: Users will regard a review writer as more credible if the writer's review is narrated by a TTS voice that matches their own personality.
This study was executed in the context of a book-buying website site .
Each web page had an identical visual interface based on Amazon's book description, Each page included the rifles, the authors  and the pictures of five books.
Although the correlation between people's voices and their personality is not very strong , individuals nonetheless use voice characteristics to assess personality, especially when other cues are absent.
This leads to the following hypothesis:
Participants Several weeks prior to the study, a web-based personality survey was administered to students who registered for a large introductory communication course.
Both MyersBriggs  and Wiggins  personality tests were administered to maximize the likelihood of correctly assessing the personality of students.
From a total of approximately 150 undergraduate students, a total of 72 participants--36 extrovert and 36 introvert students-who had English as a first language were invited to participate in the study.
Participants were randomly assigned to condition, with gender approximately balanced across conditions.
All participants signed informed consent forms, were debriefed at the end of the experiment session, and received class credit for their participation.
Procedure The experiment was a 2  by 2  balanced, between-subjects design, with five book descriptions as a repeated factor.
Upon arrival to the lab, each participant was assigned to a computer equipped with a headphone and an Internet Explorer 4.0 browser.
Participants were instructed to use the headphones during the whole experiment and not to adjust the volume level of either the headphone or the computer.
The descriptions were edited version of the actual descriptions on the Amazon.corn site.
Below the icon for the audio file, there was an eightquestion questionnaire.
Below the questionnaire was a button that allowed the user to progress to the next book description page .
Except for the personality of the voice, the visual layout, textual information, and book description content were identical across conditions.
Participants read the instruction on the web page and heard five book descriptions.
After hearing each book review, they provided answers for questions regarding the book reviewed, main character in that book, and the review itself.
After hearing all five book descriptions, participants were presented with a web-based questionnaire.
Participants were then told that all five book descriptions had been written by the same person  and were asked questions about the reviewer.
They were also asked questions about the voice they had heard.
After participants filled out the web-based questionnaire, we made an audio-recording of them giving their name and describing their experience in the experiment; this allowed us to code each participants' voice as extroverted or imroverted .
Finally, all participants were debriefed and thanked.
Manipulation The CSLU Toolkit was used to produce and manipulate the parameters for the two synthesized voices.
The four voice parameters discussed above were simultaneously manipulated to instantiate the personality of the voice.
The extrovert voice had a speech rate of 216 words per minute, the maximum volume level possible with the Toolkit; a fundamental frequency of 140Hz; and a pitch range of 40Hz.
The introvert voice had a speech rate of 184 words per minute; the volume level set at 15% of the maximum; a fundamental frequency of 84 Hz; and a pitch range of 16 Hz.
Pre-tests ensured that the voices manifested the appropriate personality and did not differ in intelligence .
Measures All dependent measures were based on items from the web-based, textual questionnaires.
Participants used radio buttons to indicate their responses.
Each question had an independent, ten-point Likert scale.
Questions concerning book quality, the main character, and review quality were asked for each of the different book descriptions.
General questions regarding the reviewer and voice were asked once at the end of the complete hearing session.
One set of these questions asked, "How well do each of these adjectives describe the reviewer" , followed by a list of adjectives.
The response scales were anchored by "Describes Very Poorly"  and "Describes Very Well" .
Other sets of questions were based on standard scales.
A number of indices were created, based on theory and factor analysis.
All indices were highly reliable.
It was used for assessments of both the voice  and the reviewer .
Extrovertedness was an index composed of seven Wiggins  extrovert adjective items: Cheerful, Enthusiastic, Extroverted, Jovial, Outgoing, Perky, and Vivacious.
It also was used for assessments of both the voice  and the reviewer .
Voice attractiveness was an index composed of the items, "How much did you enjoy hearing the computer voice?," "How likely would you be to have the voice read you other descriptions?," and the following adjectives: enjoyable, likable, and satisfying .
Voice credibility was an index composed of three adjectives: credible, reliable, and trustworthy .
Quality of the review was an index composed of three items: "What was the quality of the review that you just heard?," "How much did you like the review?," and "How trustworthy was the review?"
Liking of the reviewer was an index composed of three adjectives: enjoyable, likable, and satisfying .
Credibility of the reviewer was measured standardized trust scale  .
For the measures that were asked for each book, we used a full-factorial repeated measure ANCOVA with book as the repeated factor and computer voice personality and subject personality as the between-subjects factors.
For the items that were only asked once, we used a full-factorial 2x2 ANCOVA.
Consistent with Hypothesis "1, users applied vocal stereotypes to computer-synthesized voices.
Consistent with Hypothesis 2, the personality of the voice influenced perceptions of the personality of the reviewer, even though the content of the review was held constant.
Specifically, the reviewer was perceived as being more extroverted when the descriptions were narrated by the extrovert computer voice  than by the introvert computer voice , F = 8.7,p < .01, r/2= .16.
Consistent with the literature on similarity-attraction and its application to human-computer interaction , there was a significant cross-over interaction between computer voice personality and subject personality for voice attractiveness, such that introverts preferred the introvert voice and extroverts preferred the extrovert voice, F = 14.6,p < .001, r/2= .18 .
Similarity-attraction extended beyond the voice.
There was a significant crossover interaction, with introverts preferring the review read by the introverted voice, and extroverts, the extroverted voice, F=3.62, p<.06, r/2 = .05 .
Introverted subjects evaluated the book descriptions more positively in general than did extrovert subjects, F = 6.31, p < .05, q2= .09.
Consistent with proximate source orientation, there was a significant crossover interaction for reviewer attractiveness: Introverts found the reviewer represented by the introverted voice to be more attractive, while extroverts preferred the reviewer when presented with an extrovert voice, F = 8.35, p < .01, r/2= .11 .
2 However, the correlation between the questionnaire personality and the coded voice personality wak a remarkably low  r = .24, p < .05.
Thus, there are clear and possibly consequential differences between user personality and user voice.
To determine which is the basis for similarity-attraction, we repeated all of the statistical analyses using user voice personality rather than questionnaire personality.
In contrast to the extremely strong results for questionnaire personality, there were n o similarity-attraction effects, as indicated by n o interactions for user voice personality by TTS voice personality on any of the dependent measures.
3 As further evidence of the fundamental aspects of actual  personality, we created a new variable which indicated the match between the personality of the participants' voice and the personality of the computer voice.
We used this variable as a covariate in all of the original ANCOVAs.
The covariate had n o effect on the results; that is, all of the original similarity-attraction effects were obtained.
This provides additional evidence that it is the personality, not the cognitive, aspects of similarity-attraction that are relevant to users.
Finally, consistent with Hypothesis 8, there was a significant computer voice personality X subject personality crossover interaction in the predicted direction, F = 5.45, p < .05, r/2 = .08 , such that introverts were more willing to buy the book when it was presented with an introverted voice, while extroverts were more willing to buy the book from an extroverted voice.
One can critique previous experimental tests of the Computers are Social Actors paradigm by arguing that they are too liberal.
In previous studies, there were no strong cues to remind individuals that they were working with a computer .
Thus, participants may have simply conceptualized the interaction, implicitly or explicitly, as chat or email, because there was no difference between how one would interact with a person v i a computer and the computer itself.
Unlike these previous studies, participants in the present study interacted with a computer via an obviously non-human voice that constantly reminded them of the non-social nature of the interaction.
Surprisingly, then, the participants nonetheless assigned a fundamental human property  to the voice and were strongly influenced by that human characteristic.
Thus, this study demonstrates that the CASA paradigm is very robust.
The result that even a TTS voice can have a personality has critical implications for the design of TTS systems.
Developers of TTS systems have been focused on those aspects of speech that increase intelligibility and naturalness.
Now, however, intelligibility is not a serious : One subject refused to record his/her voice.
3 Of course, it could be argued that the relevant similarity.
One compelling alternative explanation to the above results is that while similarity-attraction does occur, the similarity is actually between the TTS voice parameters and the u s e r ' s speech parameters.
That is, rather than a personality-based explanation for these phenomena, this alternative explanation implies a pure cognitive approach.
In addition to the theoretical implications of this explanation, there is also a practical one: Should one measure the user's personality via questionnaires and adapt to personality, or should one instead measure voice characteristics of the user and set the TTS parameters to match?
To ensure that this question is worth asking, that is, to determine whether there are differences between personality as determined by voice characteristics and actual  personality, we had two blind coders rate each participant's voice as either extroverted or introverted.
Consistent with the literature , there was extremely high agreement between the two coders .
This is a common problem in email readers, branded products, various categories of tasks, etc.. Future studies should examine the tradeoff between similarity-attraction and users' desire for consistency when the voice, the content, and the user all have personality characteristics.
In sum, the results from the present study provide very strong evidence that despite its failure to seem human, individuals nonetheless respond as if text-to-speech has a personality.
This fact is both an opportunity and a problem for interface designers.
The present study demonstrates that at present, the maximum leverage can be achieved by focusing on the social and personality aspects of speech.
Virtually all TTS systems provide socially-relevant parameters that are readily manipulable and remarkably powerful.
The user assignment of personality  to TTS voices suggests that TTS presents a ~'casting" problem.
For example, when a voice is combined with a character, the personality of the two must be consistent: Pictorial representations of extroverted characters  should be combined with an extroverted voice, for example.
The proximate source orientation results suggest that companies or individuals should be very careful in choosing their representing voice.
For example, if a company or the product of the company is oriented toward extroversion , the company should employ an extrovert voice, even though the voice would seem to have no relationship with the product.
The good news is that it is surprisingly easy to crate a perception of personality in computer voice.
With the simple manipulation of accessible vocal dimensions, a designer can easily generate a clear and strong personality.
The result that users are attracted to voices that are similar to themselves  means that customization of a computer voice according to the users' personality, will increase the attractiveness, credibility and informativeness of computer speech output.
Previous research  has argued that one should match the textual content of an interface to the personality of the user.
However, because of the limitations of naturallanguage production software, this has required designers to build two or more versions of the site, a generally impractical task.
Because TTS operates in real-time, a simple change of the speech parameters immediately changes the personality of the entire site.
The similarityattraction principle is so powerful that interface designers can increase the positive evaluation of a product and even the company that makes the product by simply matching the personality of the voice and user.
The fact that questionnaires rather than voice characteristics are the critical determinant of user personality, with respect to similarity-attraction is good news for interface designers, as the former information is often easier to obtain than the latter.
Many systems are not equipped with microphones or have microphones with insufficient resolution to determine voice parameters.
A key limitation of the current study is that we used personality-neutral content to control the influence of linguistic cues on users' psychological responses to computer voice.
Paper presented at joint meeting of ASA, EAA, and DAGA, Berlin, Germany, March, 1999.
Giles, H. & Powesland, P. F. Speech style and social evaluation.
Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, MD, 1980.
Isbister, K. & Nass, C. Consistency of personality in interactive characters: verbal cues, non-verbal cues, and user characteristics.
International Journal of Human-Computer Interaction, in press.
James, F. Representing structured information in audio interfaces: A framework for selecting audio marking techniques to represent document structures.
Kamm, C., Walker, M. and Rabiner, L. The role of speech processing in human-computer intelligent communication.
Paper presented at NSF Workshop on human-centered systems: Information, interactivity, and intelligence, February, 1997.
7.. Massaro, D. M. Perceiving talking faces: From speech perception to a behavioral principle.
When the computer is the "salesperson": Computer responses to computer "personalities" in interactive marketing situations.
Review of research on the Myers-Briggs type indicator.
Perceptual and Motor Skills, 70.
Nass, C., Moon, Y., Fogg, B. J., Reeves, B., & Dryer, D. C. Can computer personalities be human personalities?
Olive, J. P. The talking computer: Text to speech synthesis, in D. Stork 
Hal's legacy: 2001's computer as dream and reality.
The art of human-computer interface design.
Voice in social interaction: An interdisciplinary approach.
Ramsay, R. W. Personality and speech.
Cambridge University Press, New York, NY, 1996.
Sawlmey, N. and Schmandt, C. Design ofspatialized audio in nomadic environments.
Paper presented at the international conference on auditory display , November, 1997.
Designing the user Interface: Strategies for effective HCI .
Effects of speech rate on personality perceptions.
Turkle, S., The second self."
The measurement of trust and its relationship to self-disclosure.
Wiggins, J. S. A psychological taxonomy of traitdescriptive terms: The interpersonal domain.
Woodall, W. G., & Burgoon, J.K. Talking fast and changing attitudes: A critique and clarification.
Journal ofNonverbal Behavior, 8, 126-142, 1983 The research was supported in part by NSF CARE and Challenge grants awarded to the Oregon Graduate Institute  and a grant from the Center for the Study of Language and Information  at Stanford University.
The views expressed in this article do not necessarily represent the views of the National Science Foundation or CSLI.
