Fairground: Thrill Laboratory was a series of live events that augmented the experience of amusement rides.
A wearable telemetry system captured video, audio, heart-rate and acceleration data, streaming them live to spectator interfaces and a watching audience.
In this paper, we present a study of this event, which draws on video recordings and post-event interviews, and which highlights the experiences of riders, spectators and ride operators.
Our study shows how the telemetry system transformed riders into performers, spectators into an audience, and how the role of ride operator began to include aspects of orchestration, with the relationship between all three roles also transformed.
Critically, the introduction of a telemetry system seems to have had the potential to re-connect riders/performers back to operators/orchestrators and spectators/audience, re-introducing a closer relationship that used to be available with smaller rides.
Introducing telemetry to a real-world situation also creates significant complexity, which we illustrate by focussing on a moment of perceived crisis.
Computers are now routinely used to design amusement rides, control their operation , enable a rider's interaction and immersion , and increasingly to document their experience by automatically producing still images or even videos as souvenirs.
One of the most challenging problems facing modern amusement parks today is that of spectators: accompanying visitors, often the adults in a party, who are unable or unwilling to go on the rides, but who nevertheless have to spend a day at the park.
These visitors are often left `holding the bags'.
Given that they are often also the ones who hold the purse strings, it is important to consider how their experience might be improved.
Inspired in part by the increasing use of telemetry in sports such as motor racing , our approach to this problem is to use a personal wearable telemetry system to capture a rider's experience and broadcast it to spectators so that they can get a greater sense of what it might be like to ride and can more closely share in the reactions of friends and family.
Such a system also has the potential to extend the images  that are now being sold as ride souvenirs.
HCI research has also begun to focus on the spectator.
As interfaces have moved into public settings such as museums, galleries, clubs, performances and the city streets, it has become increasingly important to consider how interaction with computers operates as a public affair.
Inspired by ethnographic studies of interaction in such settings , researchers have proposed new approaches to designing interaction with spectators in mind, for example choosing to reveal or hide the manipulations of an interface and their consequent effects , or by considering how to frame interaction in the public arena .
This paper reports on a deliberate attempt to create such a spectator interface and our study is therefore relevant to this emerging discussion in HCI as we address later on.
As a first prototype we staged a sequence of live experiments which played a principal role in a series of major science museum events based around the study of amusement rides.
We therefore begin by describing this performance event and our telemetry system before turning to our study.
The speed and direction of the rotating arm can be controlled, with riders experiencing accelerations reaching up to 4G.
We have chosen this ride because the event structure and technology were at their most stable and well developed at this point.
A custom-built wearable telemetry system captured four sources of data from riders: video of their face, audio as a means of self-reporting, ECG and acceleration.
This equipment was integrated into a jacket as shown in Figure 3.
This had to meet several design challenges, including fitting the passenger restraint system of each of the rides, being comfortable to wear and remaining easily serviceable.
The design also had to address the physical strain of wearing head-mounted equipment at high G-forces.
Our study is of an event called Fairground: Thrill Laboratory, henceforth referred to as F:TL.
This was a series of six theatrical events that were staged at the Dana Centre  in three weeks of autumn 2006.
Full technical details of the design of the events and technology can be found in , as these are only briefly summarised in this paper.
The events were designed to explore the nature of thrill through a combination of science and entertainment, involving talks by experts , live telemetry streamed from a selection of theme park rides, and the opportunity to go on the ride at the end of the evening.
After a set of introductory talks, the audience was presented with a visualisation of live telemetry streamed directly from the ride.
Firstly a member of the production team rode, providing a live commentary of his experience.
Secondly, a lottery was used to select an audience member whose telemetry would be transmitted next.
During the final stage of F:TL, all other audience members were free to ride, with volunteers using the telemetry equipment as often as the technical and organisational infrastructure could support.
The audience experience of the telemetry data was supported by the `expert' visualisation, shown in Figure 4, projected in the main auditorium.
Other, less detailed visualisations were projected into the bar and onto the side of an opposing building as ambient display for the benefit of any participants who were in a position to observe these locations.
Each week featured a different amusement ride that was set up outside so that it was visible from the various spaces used within the venue.
Here we draw on the experience surrounding the last and most extreme of the three, the Booster, a pure white-knuckle ride that relies mainly upon fear and on extreme accelerations to elicit a sense of thrill in the rider.
It features a central tower supporting a 40m-long rotating arm, similar to a windmill.
The following three vignettes, taken from the final event, highlight the experiences of different kinds of participant in the event.
The first follows a `professional rider', a member of the production team who gave an initial public demonstration at the start of the event.
The second follows the relatively routine experience of Sam, a member of the public audience who became a rider by virtue of winning the ticket-lottery.
In contrast, the third focuses on the activities of the technical operators as they decide how to deal with a moment of crisis in which a public rider appears to be in difficulty.
To explore the impact of introducing wearable telemetry technology on riders, spectators and ride operators, we concentrate on three vignettes drawn from a larger corpus of data.
This data consists of: eighteen sets of telemetry data including video recordings captured by helmet mounted cameras worn by the riders, along with corresponding log files of accelerometer and heart rate data captured for each; approximately fifteen hours of video recordings by a handheld camera following participants and team members; and supporting design documents and notes.
These vignettes have emerged from an analysis process which involved the transcription and discussion of multiple fragments in a series of `data sessions', during which our key themes emerged.
These themes were also followed-up through five semi-structured phone interviews with riders.
Two further semi-structured interviews with ride operators at the events were also conducted.
Ultimately, we selected these three vignettes as being representative of the most compelling issues that we uncovered.
Some appreciation of the spatial and organisational set-up of spectators, operators and riders and their lines of communication is critical for understanding the vignettes.
The following therefore provides a brief overview.
Overall the event was staged across multiple spaces inside and outside the venue, while we concentrate here on those spaces that are directly necessary for our discussion.
Here, data transmitted from a single rider sitting on the ride outside was visualised and discussed.
This process was guided by a number of event hosts, who ensured that each group of roughly 90 spectators had good access to this information.
In addition, the main telemetry control room was set up on one side in the same space, physically overlooking the ride outside.
From here, technical operators ensured the availability of the live data streams at the right times during the event.
On the ride, set up outside approximately 40m away from the auditorium, riders went through the roughly two minute long ride program.
As part of the telemetry equipment, the rider had a one-way audio link to the control room, which was sometimes  broadcast to the audience in the auditorium.
This audio stream was controlled by event staff, who responded to requests from event hosts.
Outside in front of the ride .
From here, the ride operator controlled the speed, direction and duration of the ride, as instructed by a telemetry operator, who was in two-way radio contact with the control room upstairs.
Our opening sequence begins with Alan1, our professional rider, waiting on the ride outside having already been presented to the audience downstairs.
The audience is getting seated in the main auditorium.
Two of the operators are outside on the main platform of the Booster ride.
Two more operators are in the control area in the auditorium and are in radio contact with one of the operators on the ground.
As the audience settles, a host at the front of the room provides a very brief introduction for the audience, introducing Trevor, an expert in the sensing technology whose role it is to explain its operation and the nature of the visualisations.
We see Alan is still...  sitting there and waiting so his heart rate is not big  70 or  we see it changes all the time  it's very variable.
Trevor's conduct at the projection highlights how variable the visualisation is and thus how to make sense of and `read' what is a `reasonable' or `expected' level of variability in heart rate, ECG and so on.
As his description comes to a close, Brian, another host, who is at the back of the room begins speaking.
And it's pretty cold out here .
And  get spun around and it's actually quite a pleasant sensation.
The view up here is phenomenal.
And the ground comes rushing towards you pretty quickly here I'm not really going fast yet so...
It is notable that Alan mentions the ride's slowness.
The ride was, in fact, intentionally run slowly at the beginning as experience had shown that this increased the reliability of wireless communications, providing stability during the moments when Brian `hands over' to Alan.
As a professional rider, Alan has already been on the ride many times, but each time he must describe his experience anew.
Although he can talk to his audience he cannot see or hear them in return and so must broadcast himself to unseen-butassumed audience.
Alan now continues his reportage.
However, as the ride speeds up so his talk begins to feature more exclamation than description.
As we saw earlier, Alan's more sober description became more interspersed with laughter and exclamation.
Here Alan states as he is faded out that he is finding it difficult to talk.
Even though Alan is a `professional rider,' there are times when he may `lose control' to some extent due to the extreme physical nature of the experience.
Finally, Trevor returns to briefly describe Alan's heart rate, explaining that he can "start to relax now", highlighting the decrease with his hand once again.
Brian then closes the performance.
Although it is in the planned schedule of events that the ride will indeed speed up after a short period, Brian theatrically highlights this moment to the audience.
Brian's statement transforms what might normally be a private coordination between the crew into a public one.
At this point there is sudden silence as the video freezes and audio drops out.
The audience laughs and starts talking amongst itself, with some audience members at the back looking out the small windows to the ride itself.
In our second vignette, a member of the public, Sam, has won an opportunity to ride the Booster in the public lottery.
Her friend Anne joins her for the ride.
Sam has been guided downstairs and towards the lawn in front of the ride in order to put on the necessary equipment .
Also present are operators H, J , and operator F, who in this case is female so as to avoid potential embarrassment when fitting sensors to Sam's torso.
Standing near the ride, and after a short moment of discussion about the cold and "nerves", Sam begins to don the equipment, the first element of which is the heart monitor.
Brian and the host comment on what is observable to the audience, such as "losing" Alan , getting him "back"  and finally "losing" him yet again.
As the first part of the donning procedure comes to a close, operator H physically steps back to appraise the situation.
The equipment must be `just right' in preparedness for the ready signal, as well as being relatively comfortable for the rider.
This takes a significant amount of time and operator H has at this point already spent several minutes getting to point at which it is possible perform the next task.
This second phase of readying involves testing the various functions of the equipment.
This takes a further few minutes.
The build-up to the ride here is greater and longer than usual, and is clearly seen by Sam as heightening her anticipation.
We also note how the audio testing reinforces the idea that she is meant to commentate on her experience.
Finally the signal is given that the presentations upstairs have come to a close and that the audience is ready.
Sam begins talking as the ride's steps retract, with the ground staff present on the lawn watching.
If I die, I love you all.
The ride's about to start!
Ok we're currently going up oh this is so cool!
I'm absolutely fine at the moment.
Okay yeah they're speeding up a bit now, this is absolutely brilliant.
Waa  Sam:  Oh my gosh!
This is the most amazing  ever.
Oh wow this is fantastic mate.
Ah you gotta come on this absolutely brilliant.
Oh this is so good!
I was afraid of heights not any more!
Like that one, yeah, you should give it a go.
This sequence shows the considerable time and work required to get the rider and equipment to a state of readiness.
The rider must stand at particular orientations so as to align aerials  for lengthy periods conducting tests in concert with operator H. After further waiting, the signal is given to operator H who then suggests they "go on" the ride.
The group climbs the steps onto the base of the Booster, with Sam and Anne coming to be seated on the ride itself.
As Sam is seated, operator H has to carefully remove the helmet, pass it through the bulky seat harness and reattach it once again.
Trailing wires, battery levels and so on then have to be checked again.
Sam and Anne wait for the ride to begin, chatting.
After the ride comes to a stop, Sam and Anne are helped off by operator H. Like Alan in the previous vignette, Sam is broadcasting to the unseen-but-assumed audience.
Similarly to Alan she also begins by providing a running-commentary of her experience until she breaks into less controlled screaming and exclaiming as the ride speeds up.
After this, when the ride has slowed down somewhat, she encourages the audience to have a go on the ride.
In our final vignette, we turn our focus to the control area in the main auditorium, during a time after both Alan and Sam have been on the Booster.
The audience are now on the lawn in front of the ride, either queuing, on the ride itself, or spectating.
Also on the lawn is operator H, helping a  rider who has volunteered herself from the queue to don the equipment.
Operators A, S, T and J are in the control area.
Operator A: Having having said that video has just closed but I think once you oh it's back again...
Operator A : Apparently apparently the  on the top says she's really scared can we take her down Operator H: Sorry?
Operator A : Apparently the girl on the top is really scared can we take her down Rider: There's nothing to be scared... hey Operator A: How how how scared do you think she is... she's not looking too...
Operator H: She really is saying that she wants down?
Rider: Hello control can you please hear me?
This sequence exhibits the counterpart perspective to operator H's work in the previous vignette.
Here we see the extensive work of the crew upstairs in getting the ECG, accelerometer and audiovisual streams functioning to such a degree that they are in a `rideable' state.
This includes reasoning about the causes of wireless drop outs.
Now that the system is in a readied state and the last ride has come to a stop, the rider and her co-rider are taken by Operator H to the front of the queue, where they walk onto the Booster platform together.
Like Sam, operator H helps the rider into the seat and checks the equipment for trailing wires and so on.
With the bottom carriage loaded, the ride operator spins the ride halfway round so that our rider and her colleague are waiting at the top while the next carriage is loaded.
It is at this point that the rider attempts to contact the ground.
In fact, her audio is not generally audible but is channelled into some headphones which operator S has in his hands.
However, she probably does not know this.
Operator S She's saying can we hear her Operator A : She's saying can we hear her... wave to her or something Rider: Scuse me {19} Operator H: Yeah I don't  forward.
She sounded quite scared Rider: Are you sure Ned?
Operator S: She thinks we can hear us Rider: Control please {20}Operator A: Her heart rate's gone down a bit now Rider: Okay... control room can we please turn it off for Ned?
Operator A: I can't quite see her eyes... but Rider: He's really scared Operator S: She said she's really scared Rider: Please can you get the ride off?
At this point, operator H can be seen moving towards the booth in order to instruct the ride operator to slow or stop the ride.
The main job of work for the crew in this episode, both on-the-ground and in the control area, is in determining the `seriousness' of the situation, and then acting appropriately.
Experiencing fear is a presumed possibility  with a ride like the Booster, and the technical crew must be sensitive to `normal' or `expected' levels of fear versus `serious' fear.
At this point we must stress a couple of points.
Firstly, the rider's companion reported being scared rather than the rider herself, and neither person was in any physical danger given that such rides are subject to strict safety checks and agreed operation procedures.
Initially the rider's communication attempts are woven into a joke , and the crew "pretend  haven't heard", relying on plausible deniability.
This plausible deniability can only be sustained for so long, however, due to the determined level of seriousness, and as such the crew must begin to consider stopping the ride.
This strategy, however, carries with it a number of significant overheads.
Stopping the ride or slowing it down just for one person obviously disrupts the experience for co-riders and requires intervention by the operators.
In the end, the ride is slowed down, but not stopped, which appears to resolve the crisis.
Ned are you okay you okay you okay?
Look look it's  no... it's okay Operator S: She she says it's okay she says it's okay Operator A: Oh sorry Operator H she says it's okay now she says it's okay Operator H: It's okay now?
Drawing on this existing body of work, we now consider how our F:TL performance can be described in terms of the relationships between the three roles of performer, spectator  and orchestrator .
In F:TL, the performers are the riders who wear the telemetry system, whereas the spectators are those who observe them.
These spectators can indeed be divided into an audience who have purchased tickets for the event and who gather in the main auditorium to view the telemetry output, versus bystanders who may observe the ride outside but without seeing the telemetry.
Finally, there is an extensive crew of orchestrators including the ride operator, the various technicians who manage the telemetry system, and the host and other `front of house' staff.
We now discuss how our telemetry system changes the nature of each role and perturbs the relationships between them.
As intended, our telemetry system transforms the experience of watching the ride, creating an audience who were observed to engage with the host and respond to events shown by the telemetry, for example by clapping and laughing .
In post-event interviews, audience members reported enjoying riders' audio and video commentaries as this conveyed "how they behave and how they react" but also the telemetry data as this gave a glimpse into "what's happening within them".
They noted that the telemetry system offered a level of detail that was not available when directly observing the ride due to its scale and speed:
In order to ground this discussion and to enable us to draw out more general lessons for HCI, we relate our observations to previous accounts of interactive performances from the literature.
There is a longstanding interest in HCI in interaction in public settings such as museums, galleries, artistic performances and even the city streets.
Ethnographic studies of interactives in museums and galleries have revealed the public nature of interactions and highlighted the roles of co-visitors and spectators .
Other studies of interactive performances have highlighted the importance of orchestration practices in shaping a live experience, including the ways in which technical crew monitor and intervene in an experience from behind the scenes .
Studies such as these have inspired more general design frameworks for performance interfaces.
In particular,  has discussed the relationship between the primary users of an interface, called performers, and nearby spectators, showing how different approaches to revealing or hiding performers' manipulations of an interface and their consequent effects might lead to experiences that can be considered to be `expressive', `secretive', `magical' or `suspenseful'.
In short the telemetry system can enhance, but not replace, the experience of observing the ride.
The introduction of the telemetry system radically transformed the experience of riding.
There was a clear, almost universal, tendency for riders to consciously perform, commentating on their experience for the benefit of the watching audience {4,5,16}.
It is interesting that they felt this way even though the communication was asymmetric, i.e., there was no reassuring direct feedback from the audience.
However, the most striking aspect of these performances was their bi-modal nature.
Of course, current rides already involve a degree of coordination between these two roles as family and friends may try to spot `their riders' from a viewing gallery.
However, the introduction of our telemetry system raises the stakes if the point is for spectators to be able to observe particular riders.
F:TL also significantly extended the ride operator role to include a variety of additional tasks concerned with the deployment of the telemetry system such as fitting, testing and monitoring as well as the coordination of ride start, speed and acceleration with the rest of the event.
Our data has also demonstrated that in an actual fairground setting, ride operation might additionally involve provision of the `professional rider' and the interpretation of the telemetry data {2}.
In F:TL these various orchestration functions of ride operation were spread across multiple people and spaces, requiring new communication and coordination practices and technologies {17} and resulting in a complex control scenario.
Overall, our telemetry system not only transforms each role, but also serves to connect them in new ways.
Perhaps the most interesting perturbation introduced by our system was to more directly connect riders to the orchestration team, as shown in our third vignette in which a rider uses the telemetry system to try to persuade the team to stop the ride on behalf of another rider.
This vignette also shows how the team use the telemetry system as a resource to help them decide how to proceed, drawing on audio, video and even the heart rate data in assessing the state of play {19,20,23}.
It is interesting to reflect on this in light of the history of amusement rides.
Traditional fairground rides were  on a much smaller physical scale than today's extreme rides and so naturally afforded a close connection between riders, spectators and operators.
For example, socalled `gaff lads'  would ride the Waltzers, collecting money from `punters' in the cars, showing off to the girls and giving some cars an extra spin depending on who was in them .
Modern theme park rides however have fractured this relationship due to their massive scale and also computer control.
Perhaps telemetry systems such as ours can reconnect these fragmented roles and spaces, restoring an element of traditional showmanship?
Indeed, one of our interviewees, an experienced showman, expressed an appreciation for the technology as being "back to the old school" in this regard.
This reflects previous accounts of how `pleasurable' experiences can lead to a `flow state' in which people experience an altered awareness of their surroundings .
An interesting design implication of this bi-modal structure is a potential requirement to create ride-programs  that provide opportunities for both modes.
While most rides tend to begin slowly and then speed up, it may be beneficial to exaggerate this or even build slower moments into the middle of rides to offer opportunities for more lucid commentary.
Interestingly, our wireless communications also seem to have been more reliable at slower speeds, with most drop outs occurring during fast movements {6}, and so the technology may also benefit from carefully designed programs, for example, if we wish to avoid long drop outs in the telemetry.
The process of donning the technology also affected the rider's experience.
We saw in sequences {9,10,11} that it took many minutes to don the system dealing with mundane but important details such as glasses, ponytails, the fit of the helmet and trailing wires.
Such delays could heighten anticipation and anxiety as seen in {15}.
Fitting the body worn sensors can also be invasive {9}, involving consideration of privacy and the gender of helpers.
A further delay arose from the need to coordinate performers and audience, especially delaying the ride until the audience was in place, primed and warmed up for them {3,14}.
Managing the coordination of performers and audience will be a significant challenge if telemetry systems are to be employed on a mass scale in high throughput situations such as theme parks.
This said, providing a universal open channel between performers, spectators and orchestrators may be going too far.
Returning to the bi-modal nature of performance on an extreme ride such as the Booster, on watching their videos afterwards several interviewees were surprised by their loss of control during intense moments and noted some potential for embarrassment, for example:
A similar issue can be seen in our third vignette in which a rider pleads for the ride to be stopped over what is potentially a public channel.
People are often scared on amusement rides  and may want the ride to stop.
While operators do of course monitor for critical incidents and could stop the ride if necessary, the lack of a clear backchannel from riders gives them the latitude to choose not to so do if they judge based on their experience that the situation is normal, for example that a rider is `routinely' scared and will probably soon improve, or that stopping or slowing the ride would make matters worse , would destroy the experience for others, or might ultimately embarrass the individual more through the public humiliation of being removed from the ride.
In other words, there is a degree of ambiguity in the traditional set-up that allows operators to choose `not to see' scared riders if they feel this would be beneficial.
This is reminiscent of Aoki and Woodruff's discussion of the potentially useful role of ambiguity in `saving face' in personal communications when using mobile phones .
Our telemetry system however, closes down this ambiguity, as riders are now aware that operators should be hearing them and may be more inclined to feel that they are being ignored.
The situation is further complicated by the presence of spectators who may also be party to the rider's requests over a public channel .
This has the potential to further embarrass riders, to make it even more difficult for operators to exercise their judgement, potentially facing a severe ethical dilemma, for example in the case of a real medical emergency on the ride.
Finally, broadcasting this type of information might potentially reduce spectators' motivation to try the ride for themselves.
In short, our technology is perturbing what is a subtle balance of awareness and communication among the three roles of performer, spectator and orchestrator, potentially closing down some useful ambiguity in what is after all an edgy experience in which many people will feel scared for a while, but may ultimately feel relieved or even proud for having seen it through.
This implies a degree of selection and editorial control over the use of the telemetry data.
The big question here is how should this be done?
Should both riders and orchestrators have the ability to switch off the public broadcast?
Should users be able to vet and approve their videos after the event, but losing the element of liveness?
Or should we further differentiate between spectators, for example transmitting the live telemetry only to the mobile phones of selected friends and family?
These questions remain open for further exploration.
More generally, our study speaks to recent design frameworks for spectator interfaces.
Building on , we argue that interactive performance involves a balance between three broad roles: performers, spectators and orchestrators, each of which may be further specialised and subdivided.
Our study is novel because it introduces a new performance technology into an established situation, highlighting the way in which an existing balance of relationships between these roles is perturbed.
Our study also suggests that while it may be useful to reason about how spectators experience performers' interactions in terms of revealing or hiding manipulations and effects as proposed in , that this is not a complete view.
Instead, we also need to consider how orchestrators experience performers' interactions and beyond this, consider more selective revealing or hiding or interactions at different times or to different classes of spectator.
Finally, we observe that a degree of ambiguity about who can observe what may support the subtleties of orchestration and for saving face in difficult circumstances.
In conclusion, we suggest that personal telemetry systems attached to spectator interfaces have the potential to significantly enhance amusement rides.
We have seen that our prototype can provide an engaging experience for spectators, especially when compared to their traditional role of `holding the bags'.
Beyond this, our study suggests that telemetry systems can also enhance the experience of riding and even operating a ride, providing that they are sensitively designed and deployed to avoid embarrassment and leave sufficient latitude for operational control.
Key to this is recognising and supporting the bi-modal nature of riders' performances, moving between moments of lucid commentary and less restrained flow, and also respecting some of the subtleties inherent in deciding when riders are `normally' scared compared to when there is an unusual situation that requires action.
If these challenges can be met then we believe that telemetry systems may help restore some of the traditional `old school' ride showmanship that may have been lost in the scaling up to today's massive high-intensity rides.
From an HCI point of view, our study adds to the growing corpus of literature on spectator and public interfaces, showing how designers need to consider the balance of relationships between performers, spectators and orchestrators, and how introducing a new interactive technology can perturb these in subtle ways.
Key here is the requirement to selectively reveal aspects of a performer's experience to different kinds of spectator.
We conclude by noting some directions for future work.
A major challenge lies in scaling up the approach to work within high-throughput environments such as theme parks which raises several questions.
Should the technology  be embedded into the ride in order to avoid delays in donning and removing equipment and improve reliability?
Here we speculate that the medium term approach will be to embed them in rides, but that in the long term there may be advantages in integrating them with future wearable health monitoring, sports and leisure equipment.
A second issue for scale concerns the spectator interface; should these be large public displays or might it be better to flexibly route different riders' data streams to smaller groups of mobile devices?
Beyond this, there may be greater potential to use biosensing data to drive different aspects of the experience, for example providing useful cues for identifying key moments of an experience as part of automatically editing souvenir videos, or perhaps even enabling new rides that directly adapt themselves to a rider's level of excitement.
In spite of several early explorations of using biosensing to either evaluate or control entertainment and other applications within HCI , developing such applications requires a far deeper understanding of the nature of biosensing in relation to experience that we have at present - especially where humans are in a feedback loop involving extreme movements - providing a challenging but certainly intriguing direction for long-term research.
The authors would like to acknowledge funding for this work which was provided by the UK Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council through the Equator Interdisciplinary Research Consortium .
Additional thanks to Angus Clark, Mauricio Capra, Josh Greifer, Andrew French, Jan Humble, Tuvi Orbach, Kher Hui Ng and Anthony Steed.
Aoki, P. and Woodruff, A., Ambiguity in the Design of Personal Communication Systems, in Proc.
Benford, S., Crabtree, A., Reeves, S., Flintham, M., Drozd, A., Sheridan, J. and Dix, A., The Frame of the Game: Blurring the Boundary between Fiction and Reality in Mobile Experiences, in Proc.
Brogni, A., Vinayagamoorthy, V., Steed, A., and Slater, M. Variations in physiological responses of participants during different stages of an immersive virtual environment experiment.
Coverage of the 2006 formula one motor racing season, broadcast in the UK by the Independent Television Network  , www.itv-f1.com/ .
