Exploring large visualizations that do not fit in the screen raises orientation and navigation challenges.
Structuring the space with additional visual references such as grids or contour lines provide spatial landmarks that may help viewers form a mental model of the space.
However, previous studies report mixed results regarding their utility.
While some evidence showed that grid and other visual embellishments improve memorability, experiments with contour lines suggest otherwise.
In this work, we describe an evaluation framework to capture the impact of introducing visual references in node-link diagrams.
We present the results of three controlled experiments that deepen our understanding on enriching large visualization spaces with visual structures.
In particular, we provide the first tangible evidence that contour lines have significant benefits when navigating large node-link diagrams.
While visualization practitioners strive to eliminate "chart junk" , prior work in psychology  and empirical evidence presented by Bateman et al.
This paper aims to deepen our understanding on the utility of such visual enrichments within the context of visual representations of networks.
Specifically, we study the effects of augmenting node-link diagrams with grid and contour lines.
Both grids  and contour lines  are commonly employed to enrich visualizations, however their relationship to the data differs significantly.
Grids are uniform structures independent of the data: two different datasets can be displayed on the exact same grid.
In contrast, contour lines reflect an underlying property of the data such as a density measure, thus they present a unique pattern per dataset.
Contour lines not only provide spatial landmarks enabling the use of spatial memory, but also reinforce data encoding by indexing elements topologically.
While a grid visualization has shown to be useful for navigation and revisitation of nodes in a node-link diagram , there is no conclusive evidence on the utility of contour lines.
On the contrary, a controlled experiment by Tory et al.
Discrepancies in these results warrant further research.
In this work, we describe an evaluation framework attempting to capture the impact of introducing additional visuals on the readability of node-link diagrams.
In particular, we compare a uniform grid to contours generated from the data properties and investigate their potential role in helping the viewer build a mental model of the visualization space.
Results of our controlled experiments shed a different light on previous results.
We discuss the implications of our findings and reflect on key directions for further experimentations on the topic.
Exploring large visualization spaces that do not fit in the viewer's screen, such as a node-link diagram of several hundreds of nodes, raises orientation and navigation challenges .
Over the last decade, the human-computer interaction community has offered a plethora of interactive techniques to ease these tasks in large visualizations .
Enriching the space with additional visual elements such as grids  or contour lines  is an alternative approach.
Such visual elements provide spatial landmarks which may help the viewer better grasp the dimensions of the space and provide memorable cues for better recognition and navigation  in large spaces.
Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Grids are ubiquitous in a variety of charts that people use commonly such as scatterplots and bar charts.
Their advocates argue that well-designed grids  do not obstruct the primary visualization and serve as spatial references to compare relative positions of elements.
For example, a grid in a scatterplot may help estimate the gap between two data points.
However, we could not find any experimental results quantifying their benefits in visualizations.
Their study compared several designs for augmenting nodelink diagrams, such as colored or textured grids and randomly distributed icons, while performing a revisitation task in a larger than screen node-link diagram.
Their results show that solid colored grid cells increase performance when revisiting nodes.
These findings suggest that grids play a role in the formation of a mental model of the space.
However, the specific design used in this study contradicts suggested design guidelines .
The choice of employing grid cells with saturated solid colors may have improved revisitation performance at the cost of threatening the readability of the visualization.
Contour lines or topographic maps  are also commonly employed to enrich abstract data visualizations and node-link diagrams in particular .
Alluding to a geographic landscape featuring peaks and valleys, these representations enhance spatial metaphors.
However, they do not provide concrete evidence of spatial metaphors helping the viewer build a better mental model of the visualization space.
Their first study dealt with the estimation of number of dots within a contour region .
They found that simple color coding was more effective than both conditions.
A second study on memorability of dot representations , where subjects had to recognize previously seen dot distributions, also failed to show any benefit of 2D or 3D maps on memorability.
At the extreme end of the spectrum, Bateman et al.
These embellishments refer to illustrations or deformations that do not convey any information about the data, hence could be considered visual noise.
The surprising results of their study suggest that such embellishments may provide richer spatial features that increase the memorability of charts.
A recent study by Borkin et al.
Other findings  on the topic suggest that there is a fine line between providing additional data ink  to increase memorability and engagement versus obstructing the data.
These research pieces argue for conducting further studies in this area, carefully considering the design of visual embellishments and their impact on memorability and mental model.
In graph visualization domain, mental map preservation has been investigated in the context of dynamic graphs.
However, work in this area focuses on the utility of layout preservation and animation rather than augmenting the representation with visual references .
Comparing and contrasting results across different experimental protocols, visual representations, tasks, datasets, and design of added visual enrichments proved extremely difficult.
Conflicting outcomes of previous studies resorted in no clear answer whether or not augmenting a node-link diagram with additional visuals would help a viewer build a better mental model of the space.
We refined a set of questions and propose a unified framework for evaluating the benefits and drawbacks of introducing enrichments to node-link diagrams.
In this section we describe our rationale for assessing the role that visual structures such as grids and contours may play in the formation of a mental model.
We seek answers to our high-level questions through low-level tasks performed in controlled settings.
Complementing visualizations with reference structures adds clutter that may hinder the readability of the primary visualization, and also contradicts guidelines of practitioners such as Tufte, advocating for minimal ink.
Hence, assessing the potential negative impact of added visuals on readability of a visualization is crucial.
To address this question, we selected a low-level readability task on graph topology -- find common connections between two nodes.
We hypothesized that visual structures such as a grid and contours would interfere most with the links in nodelink diagrams since their visual encodings are similar.
Therefore, we selected an identify-common-neighbors task as outlined in , which requires participants to follow multiple links in the diagram.
A key reason for introducing visual references in a visualization is the idea that they can help the viewer form a better mental model of the space.
Mental model is an overloaded term referring to concepts as diverse as the formation of an internal representation of a document collection and the formation of an internal 3D model of an object based on its 2D representation.
In this paper, our definition of mental model is an internal representation that one constructs about the spatial organization of objects.
We believe that forming a mental model of the space involves at least two aspects of the spatial organization of visual elements:  spatial structure: gaining a sense of the relative positions of the elements in the visualization ;  spatial landmarks: memorizing unique recognizable motifs in the representation that the viewer can refer to in order to navigate and orient himself in the space.
To measure the role of grids or contour lines in helping the viewer gain a sense of spatial structure and relative positioning of elements, we selected a comparison task -- determine if and how two graphs differ.
Gaining an understanding of recognizable and memorizable motifs in node-link diagrams is a research question in itself .
While a recall task such as drawing the diagram from memory may provide useful insights , it is not applicable for graphs with more than ten nodes.
To measure the role of grids and contour lines in providing memorable spatial features, we devised a revisitation task -- revisit previously highlighted nodes.
We selected this task to build upon the previous work of Ghani et al.
We also hypothesized that the construction of a mental model differs significantly depending on whether the whole visualization space can be seen in one view or not.
While in the former case visual memory plays a more dominant role, spatial memory might have a stronger effect in the latter.
For this reason, we suggest to perform the revisitation task under two different interaction conditions.
We propose a first condition in which the viewer can only pan in the visualization space, thus never seeing the whole visualization space at once; and a second condition in which the viewer can acquire a view of the whole space with a zoom-out operation.
Thus, we opted for a grid representation consisting of empty frames rather than solid color regions.
We assigned a distinct color to each grid cell as in , but used transparency as advised in .
This condition augments the node-link diagram used in the control condition with contour lines.
In the context of nodelink diagrams, contour lines can be derived from several data properties such as node degree or node centrality.
Similar to  we generate our contours starting with Delaunay triangulation of nodes in a given layout.
Corners of each triangle are assigned a height value corresponding to the selected node property.
We interpolate this height value within each triangle using barycentric coordinates.
Given a set of isoproperty values indicating where the contours should pass, our implementation of the marching squares  algorithm computes the set of points marking the boundary of the isovalue.
We sample these boundary points and use piecewise Bezier curves to connect them.
Visual references such as grids and contours are designed to reside in a visual middle ground between the foreground of the primary data encodings and the background, such that they can be brought to the foreground when attended to, and pushed to the background otherwise .
Following the design guidelines suggested in , we chose visual parameters to render the contours sufficiently discernible, yet minimize their interference with the primary visualization.
Instead of a gray-scale representation, we opted for color coding to help distinguish nested contour lines.
However, we selected a very narrow color palette, with minimal saturation and high luminance, allowing it to blend more with the white background of the node-link diagram.
In addition, we utilized shadow-like offsets to emphasize unique contour shapes further, while making them more distinguishable from the simple stroke used for the links of the node-link diagram.
Another motivation was to allude to a 3D landscape, featuring recognizable geographic formations such as peaks and valleys.
This condition augments the node-link diagram used in the previous condition with an underlying grid.
We employ a modified version of the grid design proposed by Ghani et al.
This experiment investigates whether the presence of grid or contour lines compromises the readability of a node-link diagram by employing a common neighbors task.
We performed a within-subject design with 3 Techniques x 2 Data Sizes x 4 Repeats.
We recruited 9 participants, 3 females and 6 males, with a mean age of 33.8 years.
For this study, we generated graphs using Eppstein and Wang's power law model .
The model is designed to ensure that the synthetic data generated follows a well-known property of the degree of node observed in many real networks .
We generated 6 graphs per size for each repeat and training trials.
Across techniques, we used the same graphs.
In order to minimize learning effects, we flipped the layout horizontally and/or vertically for each technique.
All graphs, regardless of their size, were scaled to fit in an area of 600 by 600 pixels, fitting on a standard computer screen and removing the need for interactive navigation that could impact the completion time.
We opted for a legible but small visualization size to capture the potential effect of background interference with a high density of visual elements.
From a series of pilots, we found that a grid of 3 by 3 provided a good compromise.
For the contour lines, we experimented with several metrics and opted for using the node degree.
We observed that this metric produced contours distinctive enough from each other, while not introducing too much clutter.
We used the same color palette for coloring the contours and the grid lines.
Figure 2 shows examples from visual stimuli used in our experiment.
Since accuracy results did not follow a normal distribution, we analyzed them using Friedman's non-parametric test.
Friedman's test did not reveal any significant difference in accuracy between Node-Link-Only, Grid, or Contours.
All techniques had a mean of about 90% accuracy .
Pairwise comparisons of Wilcoxon's test Z values reveal weak effect sizes .
We analyzed the completion time for correct trials only, using a Mixed Linear Model  that can handle missing values.
We excluded the about 10% of incorrect trials.
MLM did not reveal any significant difference in completion time, contradicting our hypothesis .
All techniques had a mean of about 15 seconds .
We asked the participants to rate whether they found the Grid or Contours distracting for this task, using a 5-point Likert scale from 1  to 5 .
In line with , the majority of participants  preferred the Node-Link-Only condition for this task.
Given two highlighted nodes, participants had to select nodes that are connected to both of the highlighted nodes in a total of 24 trials.
The order of techniques were counterbalanced across participants.
For each trial we selected two random high-degree nodes which were not connected directly but had a minimum of two common neighbors.
Due to the high connectivity requirements, the highlighted nodes were likely to appear at a busy region of the node-link diagram, where the visualization is more susceptible to interference with the background.
Thus, the chance of capturing a potential effect of the background on the readability of the node-link diagram would be higher.
The order of techniques were counterbalanced across participants.
The participants selected the common neighbors by clicking on the nodes.
After selecting all common neighbors, the participants were asked to confirm their answer by pressing a button.
Participants were instructed to take breaks as needed after every trial while the visualization screen was blank.
In this experiment participants were asked to identify presence and nature of differences between two seemingly similar graphs that are displayed side by side.
We performed a within-subject experiment of 3 Techniques x 2 Data Sizes x 4 Repeats.
This experiment was performed right after the Experiment 1 session by the same participants using the same data sets and visual stimuli.
We created new contour lines for the altered graph since their node degree had changed.
Half of the trials presented the exact same graph on both sides.
Participants had to answer whether the graph on the right had a smaller, higher, or equal number of nodes and edges as the graph on the left by pressing one of the three buttons.
We hypothesized that  participants would be more effective to conclude if the two graphs are identical with Contours, where they can rely on these visuals for gauging the differences instead of carefully inspecting the node-link diagram.
For quantifying the differences , we expected that  Grid would yield better results than Node-Link-Only, as grid cells would enable participants to structure the space and inspect regions systematically.
We also believed that  Contours would yield to better results than the two other techniques because the landscape built from data properties would guide participants' attention towards the region that is different.
Since accuracy results did not follow a normal distribution, we analyzed them using Friedman's non-parametric test.
The test revealed a significant difference between techniques for identifying if graphs are identical or not .
Pairwise comparisons using Wilcoxon's tests indicate that the Contours technique outperforms Node-Link-Only  and Grid  confirming .
An estimate of effect size based on Z value reveals a medium effect size  for both of these pairwise comparisons.
Mean accuracy indicates that Contours are 10% more accurate than Node-Link-Only and 18% more accurate than Grid.
Graph size did not yield to any significant difference between techniques.
We analyzed the results on completion time for correct trials only using a Mixed Linear Model  that can handle missing values.
As expected, pairwise comparison revealed that participants performed 20% faster to identify changes in Small size networks, with a statistically significant difference .
Pairwise comparisons revealed that Contours led to significantly faster task completion times  than the other two techniques.
Mean completion time indicates that users performed the tasks 12% faster on average with Contours than with the two other techniques, confirming .
Contrary to , Grid however did not produce more accurate or faster identification of differences between graphs compared to Node-Link-Only.
We asked participants to rate the usefulness of the Grid and Contours visualizations for this comparison task, using a 5point Likert scale from 1  to 5 .
6 out of 9 participants preferred the Contours visualization, while the remaining 3 preferred the Grid visualization for this task.
In this experiment, we investigated whether the Grid and the Contours visual reference structures aided users in forming a mental model of a visualization space.
To assess the formulation of a mental model, we devised a task of revisiting previously highlighted nodes in a visualization space that is larger than the viewing window.
We performed a 3 Techniques x 2 Data Sizes x 2 Interaction Methods x 3 Repeats within-subject design.
We recruited 12 participants, 8 males and 4 females, with a mean age of 28.3 years.
We decided against using a graph generator for this task because we did not have access to one that could produce graphs with distinguishable topological features  as real graph often do .
We conjectured that this factor could bias our results as grid or contour lines are likely to play a more significant role when used to augment "featureless" visual spaces.
Therefore, we generated our graphs from real social network data.
Starting from a data set representing co-autorship relationships in a real social network, we randomly added and removed nodes and edges until the desired number of elements and sufficient distinctive topological features were achieved.
We generated five graphs per size for each repeat and training trials.
Examples are shown in Figure 3.
Across techniques, we used the same graphs.
In order to minimize learning effects, we flipped the layout horizontally and/or vertically for each visualization technique.
Examples from the Grid and Contour visualization stimuli images used in Experiment 3 .
The images on the left show the whole visualization space with a highlight of what can fit in the view in the pan and zoom-in conditions.
The images on the right show the contents of the viewing window in detail.
We picked a grid cell size of 750x750 pixels ensuring that an entire cell and some portion of its neighboring cells would fit in the view, while avoiding a fine grid spacing.
Thus, we used a 4x4 grid for the small data, and a 6x6 grid on the large one.
We opted for using color on the grid lines as a secondary cue to encode relative positions of the grid cells .
To generate contour lines, we used the betweenness centrality of each node.
See Figure 4, bottom for an example visual stimulus.
The participants used either pan or zoom to navigate within the visualization space.
Dissociating navigation techniques is common practice  as it ensures similar navigation strategies between participants.
Here, it also enabled us to observe different strategies while forming a mental model of the space.
In the pan interaction mode, participants could not view the whole visualization but they could pan by dragging their mouse.
In the zoom interaction mode, we designed a simple two-level zoom wherein participants could toggle between a zoomed-in and a zoomed-out state on right mouse button click as implemented in .
We designed a revisitation task consisting of a learning and an execution phase, similar to .
In the learning phase, three random nodes were highlighted in sequence.
The starting view was at the center of the visualization space in the pan mode, and at the zoomed-in state for the zoom mode.
Participants had to navigate to find the highlighted node, collect information about its locality and click on it to view the next highlighted node.
Once they clicked all three nodes, they viewed a blank screen for four seconds.
After, the execution phase began with the starting view, where participants had to revisit the nodes  in the same order.
They provided their answer by clicking on the node.
Time to revisit a node was limited to 25 seconds, with a countdown appearing in the last 10 seconds.
If the time expired, a pop up dialogue instructed them to proceed to the next node.
We forced a ten second break after every trial, displaying a photograph to reset visual memory.
We instructed them to take longer breaks if needed.
Participants completed 18 trials using pan, and another 18 using zoom interaction.
We used the same visuals but high-
We counterbalanced the order of visualizations, but we kept the order of interaction methods fixed across participants, opting for presenting the most difficult condition  first.
We trained participants before each task and interaction mode, informing them about strategies they could utilize.
We instructed them to collect sufficient information about the locality of a highlighted node before clicking on it in the learning phase while being as time efficient as possible.
On average participants took about 70 minutes to complete the study.
All participants were rewarded with a 25 dollar gift card, while the best performing participant was promised an additional 25 dollars.
We expected that  participants would be least accurate with the Node-Link-Only condition, because the presence of Grid or Contours would provide additional visual references encoding the locality of a visited node.
In addition, we expected  Contours to outperform Grid because, in contrast to the uniform visual characteristics of grids, contours provide unique visual structures in different parts of the visualization which would ease recall.
We hypothesized that  in the zoom condition, differences between the Contours and Grid techniques may not be significant since participants could effectively memorize the exact row and column of the cell containing the node in the Grid visualization.
However, we expected that  in the pan condition, Contours would have clearer benefits over the other two techniques as they provide unique landmarks across space.
Finally, we did not expect  to see any significant time difference across visualization techniques because we hypothesized that any possible gains provided by the visuals on recalling the location would be eclipsed by the interaction time required to navigate there.
Since accuracy did not follow a normal distribution, we analyzed them using Friedman's non-parametric test, which revealed a significant difference among techniques .
Pairwise comparisons using Wilcoxon's tests showed that Contours outperformed Node-Link-Only  and Grid , confirming .
An estimate of effect size based on Wilcoxon's test Z value revealed medium effect size  between Contours and the other two techniques, while the effect size between Node-Link-Only and Grid was small .
Mean accuracy indicates that Contours produced 7% more accurate results than Node-Link-Only and 16% more accurate results than Grid for revisiting previous nodes.
Contrary to our hypothesis , we did not find any significant difference between Grid and Node-Link-Only.
When splitting results by interaction condition, Friedman's tests revealed significant differences in accuracy among techniques in both the zoom  and pan  conditions.
Contours significantly outperformed Node-Link-Only  and Grid  using zoom, contradicting .
In addition, Contours outperformed Grid  but not Node-Link-Only in the pan condition, partially validating .
Table 1 and Figure 5 summary the results.
After the controlled experiment, participants rated their confidence in their results using a 5-point Likert scale from 1  to 5 .
Mean confidence levels are provided in Table 2 and Figure 6.
Since these ratings do not follow a normal distribution, we analyzed them using non-parametric tests.
Friedman's test shows a significant difference in participant confidence between techniques for both pan  and zoom .
Pairwise comparisons using Wilcoxon's test reveal that participants felt significantly more confident using the Contour compared to Node-LinkOnly for both pan  and zoom .
In the zoom condition, participants felt also significantly more confident using Contour than using Grid .
We also asked the participants to give an overall preference ranking for the three visualization techniques.
Friedman's test indicated a significant difference in preference among techniques .
Pairwise comparisons using Wilcoxon's test reveal that Contours were ranked significantly higher than both Node-Link-Only  and Grid .
Indeed, 8 out of 12 participants ranked Contour as their favorite technique.
Finally, we also report on most recurrent participants' comments collected using a printed questionnaire.
For NodeLink-Only, 5 out of 12 participants indicated that they felt their performance was dependent on the node to revisit and particularly easy for nodes on the periphery of the diagram.
For the Grid, 5 out of 12 participants indicated that they were able to relocate the grid cell but that they forgot the exact position of the node within this cell.
We explain these discrepancies by two major differences in the experimental setups.
First, in contrast to the previous study, we selected a more "whispering" color palette.
This choice may have downplayed the role of grids in helping user form a mental model of the space but ensured its readability as advised in  and confirmed in our readability study.
Second, we selected graph data featuring distinguishable topological structures, as we conjectured it was more common in real datasets.
However, such features may have helped task performance more than the information provided by the grid.
Experiments with representations that naturally contain less salient motifs  may capture a stronger effect of a grid.
Unexpectedly, despite the lack of a significant increase in performance, the grid was consistently preferred over the control condition.
Participants also reported a higher sense of confidence in their answers with the grid.
These subjective impressions could point to benefits that we failed to capture with our current experimental settings.
However, from our current findings, we also want to call for a careful consideration of their use in visualizations, as they might lead to a false sense of confidence.
For the Contour, 7 out of 12 participants indicated that they used contour shapes as spatial landmarks.
For example, a participant commented that he "could see islands, coves and mountains to easily associate with geographic locations" and another explained that he "could find unique representative shapes... that represent objects in real life, for example, crown on a prince's head".
While many researchers experimented with augmenting visualizations with contour lines or topographic maps , there has been no tangible evidence of their utility.
On the contrary, advocates for minimal ink may caution against the use of these structures as they may obstruct readability.
Our quantitative findings are the first to indicate that contour lines do not hinder readability , play a significant role in helping viewers structure the space , and form a mental model when navigating a large visualization .
Our quantitative results from the controlled experiments as well as qualitative comments from the participants suggest that contour lines can provide a general outlook of the node-link diagram, helping viewers identify unique spatial landmarks to return to previously visited nodes.
Our subjective ratings also concur with the increased performance as contour lines are consistently preferred.
Based on these insights, we project that contour lines could ease navigation and orientation in an infinite zoomable and pannable canvas.
In our studies we manually selected the metric to generate the contours to ensure the presence of identifiable geometric features while minimizing interference with the primary visualization.
While node centrality provided sufficient discernible characteristics for a social network type of data , we opted to use the degree metric for synthetic data generated using a power law distribution .
Non-graph data properties associated with the nodes can also be used.
Thus, the metric to be used for contour generation is highly specific to the data.
We followed the guidelines prescribed in  for the visual design of our grids and contour lines.
Our readability study did not reveal any significant difference when additional visual structures were present.
As the common neighbor task required participants to follow many links in the diagram that were overlapping these visuals, we feel confident that readability of the diagram was not hindered when suggested design guidelines were followed.
In this paper, we proposed an evaluation framework to extend our knowledge on the impact of introducing visual references to node-link diagrams.
Through three controlled studies, we collected evidence quantifying the benefits and drawbacks of two types of visual structures : grids and contour lines.
We discussed how our findings shed a new light on previous results in the literature.
In particular, our results seem to indicate that when node-link diagrams present recognizable motifs, such as clusters, the benefits of grids for revisitation tasks  may not be discernible.
Our studies are also the first ones to reveal tangible benefits of the use of contour lines to enrich node-link diagrams.
Our experimental design attempts to capture how these visuals could help the viewer form a mental model of the visualization .
Results indicate that contour lines play a significant role in these activities.
We believe that our results on the benefits of enriching visualizations with additional visual structures will inspire further research in this space, and the evaluation framework we propose will serve as a building block for further studies.
What a mental model exactly is and how to assess it is an open and challenging research question.
Our evaluation framework is an attempt at characterizing several of the aspects that may be at play when viewers form a mental model of a visualization.
However, other aspects could be taken into account.
In particular, we did not include any recall  or recognition tasks  as we could not decide on a systematic way to operationalize them or interpret their results.
Our study is of a limited sample size.
For the first two studies, where we recruited only nine subjects, arriving at definite conclusions is not possible.
However, we can observe certain trends.
For instance, due to very small effect size, only a much larger population could reveal a significant effect of visual enrichments on readability.
Our study on identifying differences across similar graphs unexpectedly showed that grid visualizations might not be helpful for side-by-side comparison tasks.
This trend calls for further investigations on the role of a grid as a reference cue.
As mentioned earlier, we manually adjusted granularity settings such as the number of contour lines and grid cells after a series of pilot sessions, ensuring that a certain amount of contour or grid lines were always present, regardless of the scale.
We still collected conflicting feedback from our participants: 3 commented that smaller cells would allow them to better structure the space; 2 argued for larger cells as they had difficulties remembering the cell positions.
Participants also commented that while some contour lines did not appear to provide enough recognizable patterns in the pan and zoom-in modes, they became discernible as spatial landmarks in the zoom-out mode.
While we had to fix granularity of both contours and grids for a manageable study size, future studies that focus on granularity as an independent variable are needed.
In this study we did not address the particular role of the data semantics.
However, we would like to acknowledge that semantics may play a major role in mental model formation, possibly eclipsing the gain provided by additional visual structures.
However, this role would be highly dependent on the dataset itself and the participants' previous knowledge, interests and analysis skills, thus making this factor extremely difficult to control.
Irani, P., Gutwin, C., and Yang, X. D. Improving selection of off-screen targets with hopping.
In Proceedings of the 2006 AVI workshop on BEyond time and errors: novel evaluation methods for information visualization, ACM , 1-5.
Lorensen, W. E., and Cline, H. E. Marching cubes: A high resolution 3d surface construction algorithm.
In ACM Siggraph Computer Graphics, vol.
Marriott, K., Purchase, H., Wybrow, M., and Goncu, C. Memorability of visual features in network diagrams.
Moscovich, T., Chevalier, F., Henry, N., Pietriga, E., and Fekete, J.-D. Topology-aware navigation in large networks.
Purchase, H., Hoggan, E., and G org, C. How important is the "mental map"?-an empirical investigation of a dynamic graph layout algorithm.
Shoemaker, G., and Gutwin, C. Supporting multi-point interaction in visual workspaces.
In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems, ACM , 999-1008.
Skopik, A., and Gutwin, C. Improving revisitation in fisheye views with visit wear.
In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems, ACM , 771-780.
Skupin, A., and Fabrikant, S. I. Spatialization methods: a cartographic research agenda for non-geographic information visualization.
Tory, M., Sprague, D. W., Wu, F., So, W. Y., and Munzner, T. Spatialization design: Comparing points and landscapes.
Tory, M., Swindells, C., and Dreezer, R. Comparing dot and landscape spatializations for visual memory differences.
Tufte, E. R., and Graves-Morris, P. The visual display of quantitative information, vol.
Ware, C. Information visualization: perception for design.
