Voicemail is a pervasive, but under-researched tool for workplace communication.
Despite potential advantages of voicemail over email, current phone-based voicemail UIs are highly problematic for users.
We present a novel, Webbased, voicemail interface, Jotmail.
The design was based on data from several studies of voicemail tasks and user strategies.
The GUI has two main elements:  personal annotations that serve as a visual analogue to underlying speech;  automatically derived message header information.
We evaluated Jotmail in an 8-week field trial, where people used it as their only means for accessing voicemail.
Jotmail was successful in supporting most key voicemail tasks, although users' electronic annotation and archiving behaviors were different from our initial predictions.
Our results argue for the utility of a combination of annotation based indexing and automatically derived information, as a general technique for accessing speech archives.
Visual representation of speech structure allows random access to an inherently serial medium.
The aim of this paper is to explore how these new visual indexing techniques can be applied to voicemail access, in particular to address documented problems with current touchtone UIs .
We also wanted to evaluate our system with real users: much prior research on speech access has focused on new techniques and not on their evaluation.
The structure of the paper is the following.
We present an extended analysis of a previous study of voicemail usage , identifying four key user problems: message scanning, information extraction, status tracking and archiving.
A central user strategy for voicemail processing relies on message indexing by note-taking.
We implement a novel Web-based voicemail GUI that supports annotation for indexing.
The UI allows users to take temporally indexed notes associated with individual messages.
These notes serve as a visual analogue to the underlying speech in the message, allowing straightforward access to message contents, message scanning and status tracking.
We also provide people with automatically derived header information for each message.
We evaluated Jotmail in an 8-week field trial, where people used it as their only means for accessing voicemail.
Jotmail was highly successful in supporting most key voicemail tasks, although users' electronic annotation and archiving behaviors differed from our predictions.
Our results argue for the utility of a combination of annotation based indexing and automatically derived header information, as a general method for accessing speech archives.
Voicemail is a pervasive but under-researched workplace communication technology, with an estimated 68 million users worldwide.
Many organizations rely heavily on voicemail for conducting everyday work, and voicemail is often preferred to email .
The advantages of voicemail over email are: speech is expressive, easy to produce and critical in many workplace tasks .
Voicemail is also ubiquitous - any phone acts as an access device.
It is also a common feature of most new cellular phones.
In the past, the phone was the only universal access device.
As a result, voicemail interfaces were either touchtone or speech-based.
However, the Web and PDAs will soon make graphical UI methods more widely available for accessing voicemail.
We collected qualitative and quantitative data to identify users' key tasks and strategies for processing voicemail, for a typical voicemail system, AudixTM, including:  server logs from 782 active users;  surveys from 133 high volume users ;  interviews with 15 high volume users.
The server data showed intensive voicemail use: people accessed the system a mean of 7.1 times each working day, receiving 8.7 messages, and storing 4.8 mins.
Voicemail messages also contained significant amounts of information: about half those surveyed reported average message lengths of between 30-60 secs.
Furthermore, voicemail often substitutes for a series of face-to-face meetings: "entire transactions or entire tasks are accomplished by exchanging  messages.
That is, you will never talk to the person in real time."
Finally people stressed that a key value of voicemail is ubiquity: "the most important feature for voicemail as opposed to email is that it is easily accessible from any telephone.
People tend to respond quicker to voicemail than they do email, because you can access voicemail from anywhere."
Users report four main tasks when processing voicemail: scanning the mailbox to identify important messages; extracting information from individual messages; tracking the status of current messages; and managing their archive of stored messages.
Multiple listens are also necessary with vague or highly detailed messages.
Of those surveyed 46% report that they relisten to messages "about half the time".
To reduce repetitive processing, 72% of our survey users report "almost always" taking written notes.
Users employ two different note-taking strategies.
The first strategy is full transcription: here users attempt to produce a written transcript of the target message, so as to reduce the need for future access.
According to our users, voicemail messages have a predictable structure, and the object of this strategy is to abstract the key points of the message .
In most cases, users keep the original voice message as a backup for these incomplete and sometimes sketchy notes.
These notes are either kept on scraps of paper  or in a dedicated note-pad , and people refer to them when searching their voicemail archive to locate particular messages.
Scanning is used for prioritizing incoming new messages, and for locating valuable saved messages.
These users have to rapidly determine which new messages require their immediate attention.
Message location occurs when users search for saved messages containing valuable information.
Users' current scanning strategy is to sample all messages in sequence to determine location and status.
For prioritization, only 24% of people we surveyed use voicemail message headers to identify urgent messages, reporting they are too slow.
Instead they listen to the first few seconds of each message, to the speaker's intonation, to determine whether a message requires immediate action.
I only sort of skim them, but listening to the first couple of seconds, as to who it is and what the issue is, to see whether it has to be dealt with immediately.
If not, I will just save the message and go on, so I can pick up any priority ones."
In locating stored messages, most users do not retain a detailed model of their archive and 76% of those surveyed report that "listening to each message in sequence" is their standard procedure for finding archived messages.
However, the linear nature of mailbox search makes location onerous when more than a few messages are stored: "if I've got 20 messages stored ... and I want that last message, it's a real pain to get to that last message.
And ... most of the time I don't even know what message I want to get to".
Workplace tasks are often delegated through voicemail, and a common user problem is tracking message status.
Status tracking is a prevalent problem for users accessing voicemail under time pressure.
They often defer processing a significant number of incoming messages.
When accessing voicemail later, they are often unclear about which messages they have dealt with.
That makes people very cross".
There are two main techniques for status tracking.
In the first, people use notes taken during information extraction as reminders.
These notes, taken on scraps of paper, are left around the user's work area to remind them about what needs to be done.
One problem with this note-taking strategy is that people sometimes lose these notes, especially when voicemail was originally accessed in a remote location such as a meeting room.
Losing notes is less of a problem when people use a dedicated logbook for recording message details.
With the second status tracking strategy, users take no notes but leave undischarged messages in their voicemail mailbox.
Reminding takes place when users next scan their archive.
On the left of the interface is more general header information about each message that has been derived automatically.
The upper left of the screen shows archive management tools for creating and managing voicemail folder structures.
The design was finalized after several iterations with trial users.
A key strategy for addressing information extraction was the use of personal notes.
A central, novel, feature of the UI is therefore support for user annotations.
One use of annotations is for message summaries.
In all our studies users reported the need for repeated replayings of the message to extract critical information.
We therefore wanted to provide ways to rapidly identify and replay only the most relevant parts of the message, without having to listen to the entire message.
The motivation for this came from the observation that handwritten notes serve as an index into the underlying structure of the original voicemail message: "my notes trigger things - they are ... meant to just give me place holders while I am browsing.
Then I have to go back and listen to stuff".
If users later click on a given word in their notes, they automatically access the speech that was being played when the note was taken.
In this way, notes provide reasonably precise access into the underlying speech, allowing users to focus on areas of specific relevance1.
To further help information extraction, we provide general play controls for navigating within the message without recourse to notes.
These allow people to play and stop a given message as well as skip forward and skip back 2 secs.
People also have to manage their archives.
Given their access strategies, most users' archives consist of a backlog of undischarged messages as well as a store of saved valuable messages.
They therefore engage in periodic "clean-ups": accessing each message in sequence to determine whether it should be preserved.
By removing superfluous messages, users also make it easier both to scan for existing valuable messages, and monitor reminder messages.
Those who do not engage in "cleanups" report being surprised by the extent to which they are accumulating irrelevant messages.
We devised a novel Web-based GUI, Jotmail, with the goal of supporting scanning, information extraction, status tracking and archive management tasks, in response to these findings, along with those obtained from controlled laboratory studies of voicemail access .
The design was based around the strategies we had observed being used for processing voicemail, paying particular attention to the critical role of note-taking.
A key benefit of voicemail reported by our users is ubiquity.
By developing a Webbased UI, we provided access to voicemail in any location where there is a computer with an Internet browser.
The UI is shown in Figure 1.
Our user studies also revealed the requirement for scanning to prioritize and locate important messages.
In addition to user generated annotations, an important set of cues to aid scanning is message header information .
There is a delay between the time at which users hear the relevant information and when they enter their related note.
In later versions of the UI, we therefore introduced an indexing off-set, so that notes are indexed to material being played two seconds previously.
This off-set was determined after iterations with several early users.
In later versions we plan to make this interval user configurable.
Figure 2 does not show the off-set for ease of exposition.
The message length was 698K, but because the message was from outside the local PBX the system was unable to infer the caller name.
By depicting this general information we enable users to visually scan and randomly access messages.
They no longer have to access messages in sequence to identify specific messages.
As can be seen from the example of the first message, users manually supplement automatically generated overview information with their own notes.
For the first message, the user has added the caller name , because the system was unable to infer this, and the caller-ID number was unfamiliar.
In this way, annotations were used to support scanning as well as information extraction.
Labeled buttons allowed them to create new folders, as well as move, delete and copy information to those folders.
More implicit support for archive management is provided by the visibility of messages, enabling the archive to be quickly scanned to identify important messages and filter out superfluous ones.
Jotmail is built on top of Webmail, a research system that supports email and voicemail access.
Webmail is implemented as a CGI script that connects to a standard mail server.
When the script is run, it produces HTML pages with interfaces for viewing, browsing, and archiving messages.
Voicemail messages are retrieved from the voicemail system and stored as email messages with special headers and data.
The requirement for broad access influenced our choice of platform.
The annotation system in Jotmail was implemented as a web browser plug-in.
Our HTML plugin will work on most browsers, but at the same time using a plugin restricts the complexity of possible UI implementations when compared with what could be implemented in other languages such as Java.
Webmail was modified to store annotation files alongside voicemail messages, and to display small annotation plug-in windows next to each message.
The plug-in application downloads the annotation file and the audio file for each message and allows the user to play the message and type text in the annotation text box.
If the message is playing when the user is typing, then the current time index in the message is stored with each word.
By holding "Control" and clicking on a word, the user can play the message from that time index.
When the plug-in closes, modified annotations are sent back to Webmail so they will be displayed the next time the page is loaded.
This gives Jotmail users persistent annotations for information extraction and status tracking.
Users also reported problems in trying to remember what outstanding actions were required for a given message.
The user interface was designed to support status tracking in two ways - again by analogy with people's paper based strategies of leaving themselves visual reminders.
Annotations could be used to explicitly record the actions necessary for each message.
So for example "Richard phone call plugin run the test" states the action that was requested in the message, namely to run the relevant test.
More implicitly, we hoped that the mere fact of having a visual representation of each message visible in the mailbox would serve to remind people of the necessary action whenever they access Jotmail.
For example seeing a message from Marilyn Walker  might remind me of the action that message requires.
A final cue to message status is that unaccessed messages are depicted in bold .
Once accessed, their status changes.
A major goal of our evaluation was to investigate the experimental system being used by people for their everyday work.
We designed the trial to collect the following data to investigate how effectively the system supported the tasks we had identified.
We were also concerned with how well the system supported annotation behaviors, given the centrality of this strategy.
Preinstallation survey: Before installing the new system we administered a user questionnaire addressing use of the standard touchtone  voicemail system.
We asked people about the number of voicemail messages they currently received and sent, and how they processed these.
We also gathered data about scanning, information extraction, status tracking and archiving tasks, as well as note-taking strategies.
We surveyed people about the success of TT features  in supporting these core tasks.
Table 1: Comparison of Jotmail and touchtone user interfaces Jotmail logs: We logged usage data for 8 weeks.
We collected data about: number and duration of Jotmail sessions, messages stored and accessed, operations on messages  as well as information about what notes people took and when they used these to replay messages.
This data was used to identify the main types and functions of user annotations.
Post-installation survey: After 8 weeks, we took the system away and administered an extended version of the original questionnaire containing additional questions about the basic features of Jotmail, note-taking, and the use of notes for playback.
Interviews: We also carried out two semi-structured interviews with users, one while the system was installed and one after it was taken away.
These probed the same issues as the surveys, but we tried to elicit fuller descriptions of the way that the system was being used as well as its main benefits and drawbacks.
We also tried to find examples of novel or unexpected uses of the system.
We supplemented these interviews with some observations of people using the system.
O1: We predicted that people should rate it easier overall to process their messages with Jotmail, given the support it provides for scanning, information extraction, status tracking and archiving.
O2: For the same reasons, people should rate Jotmail processing as closer to email than TT access.
Both these hypotheses were confirmed .
User comments also bear out the overall superiority of Jotmail.
In the past  when I came into the office I used to put off dealing with voicemail and always look at my email first, but now I often look at my voicemail first."
Contrast this with comments about TT voicemail access: "I hate managing voicemail with so little information.
What I dislike most is that you cannot "see" messages, whether there are new messages, if so how many, or saved messages.
Users were all highly displeased when we took the system away after 8 weeks.
One repeated observation was about the greater efficiency of Jotmail.
People complained that TT required them to execute too many operations to access their voicemail.
Another user commented about TT: "it took me 27 seconds and 16 key presses to access a 5 second message".
We installed the system and collected logs for 9 users for a total of 184 sessions over 935 hours.
Our users were researchers and secretarial support staff at AT&T.
Of these, 7 completed all questionnaires and interviews.
Our logs show frequent system use.
People used the system for an average of 20.4 sessions, of mean length 5.1 hours.
Jotmail users tended to keep the application constantly running, unlike TT where short sessions were the rule.
In each session they would typically access 4.1 messages, and the mean distribution of play operations per session was 2.1 plays, 1.8 skips and 0.3 annotation-based plays.
Overall users replayed 36% of messages.
S2: Users should find it easier to locate specific messages with Jotmail than TT access, because of the increased ability to scan.
S3: Users should switch from scanning by sequentially sampling the first few seconds of each message, to using Jotmail to look through headers and notes.
All 3 hypotheses were confirmed.
The user logs also showed evidence of using the visual representation for random access: users accessed 36% of messages in an order different from that in which they were received and stored.
By providing the ability to scan messages, Jotmail allows users to prioritize their access.
One user said of TT: "With the old system I never knew which messages were there  in what order so I couldn't selectively pick the ones I wanted to deal with.
I used to put off listening to voicemail until I had the time to go through it all".
Scanning also allowed rapid access to old messages: "I can see what's in my mailbox at a glance... the fact that messages are visible means that I can find old ones easily".
ST1: Users should find it easier to track messages with Jotmail, because of the ability to scan outstanding messages at a glance.
ST2: People should be less likely to lose notes with Jotmail than TT voicemail because Jotmail notes are stored at a single on-line location.
Both hypotheses were confirmed, and multiple user comments indicated that status tracking was a critical perceived benefit of Jotmail, especially in the face of constant interruptions: "I am always being side-tracked and interrupted in my job.
Jotmail is like a tickler file.
It provides a constant reminder of the things that I have to do".
Some users exploited the note-taking features of Jotmail to explicitly add multiple successive comments to the original message "Fax sent", to track progress after each action taken in responding to the call.
They also commented on the benefits of having their notes on-line in close association with the original message.
I1: Users should rate information extraction as easier with Jotmail than TT access, because of the presence of annotations, and the ability to do time-based playback.
I2: Users should replay messages less often with Jotmail both because they have more information automatically available about each message, and their own notes provide reminders about message contents.
I3: People should take more notes with Jotmail because of the utility of notes as indices.
Table 1 shows that the I1 was confirmed.
However there was no difference in the number of replays with the two systems .
It may be that greater control over access provided by Jotmail means that users are happy to replay messages.
Contrary to our predictions, people took fewer notes with Jotmail.
The decreased amount of note-taking with Jotmail  may occur because it automatically logs relevant information, obviating the need for some manual notes: "You can take fewer notes with Jotmail because the name of the caller time and date for inside callers is shown on the screen."
Notes were still useful in Jotmail, however.
Their utility was demonstrated by the fact that every user reports taking notes on the system.
There was also no reported difference in the types of notes taken with the two systems - a few key words such as name, phone number and action.
Nor is there a difference in the reason for taking notes: the majority  of users in both cases said that they take notes as a reminder either about message contents, or about the action a message requires.
A1: Given the increased ease in managing the archive, we expected that users would archive more messages with Jotmail versus TT.
This hypothesis was not confirmed.
On the one hand, it was clear that Jotmail made it easier to store and access valued messages.
On the other hand, it seemed that the visibility of the archive meant that users were better able to clean up and hence prevent the inadvertent build up of superfluous forgotten messages: "When I access voicemail over the phone I don't usually access old messages whereas Jotmail provides reminders that I have old messages".
We also examined voicemail filing techniques.
Somewhat to our surprise, although some users saved many messages, no-one categorized messages.
They kept all their messages in the inbox, rather than creating task-specific folders.
One user explained this as follows: "I use the system to track things I have to do.
If I haven't done them, I want to keep them in the inbox to remind me that they need attention.
If they're done then I delete them.
It's just making extra work to file them and have to remember where they are."
The emphasis therefore seems to be on status tracking rather than the construction of a complex archive.
Better information extraction in Jotmail may also reduce archiving.
One user pointed out the difficulty of information extraction with TT.
We also investigated a number of questions concerning annotations, given the centrality of users note-taking strategies in our initial studies: Types of Jotmail annotations: These tended to be relatively brief , falling into 6 main categories: caller name, message topic, caller number, time, date and location, with frequencies per message being respectively: caller name , message topic , caller number , time , date  and location .
The average message has two of these annotation types and the most frequent combinations of annotation types are: name and topic, name and caller, number and topic.
Finally adding further annotations to a previously annotated message occurred relatively frequently, with 44% of annotations being additions to a previously annotated message.
According to users, many of these re-annotations were being used to track the status of previously annotated messages.
Functions of Jotmail annotations: Overall, 29% of messages were annotated, with each user annotating 21.8 messages.
Annotations were usually associated with messages that were important to the user; annotated messages were played more often than unannotated ones =5.08, p<0.0001.
Annotations were not widely used to control playback: analysis of play operations indicated that time-indexed playback accounted for only 7% of play operations compared with 51% "play from start of message" operations and 43% skip based plays.
67% of users exploited the time-based indexing feature, but the remainder never did.
Non-users argued that they received mainly short messages, reducing the need for controlled access to message contents.
With short messages there is little cost to replaying an entire message to extract a single piece of information.
However, it turned out that messages accessed by time-based playback were no longer than messages accessed using "play from start" only =0.28,ns Reasons for annotating specific messages People were more likely to annotate messages from unfamiliar callers , =6.04, p<0.025.
They also made annotations more frequently with messages that had less automatically generated information =5.61, p<0.025.
With Jotmail he was more likely to screen calls by letting them go through to voicemail.
With  I don't do that because its so time-consuming to go and get them back".
Another unanticipated use of Jotmail was for playback to a live audience.
Two users reported replaying Jotmail messages to others .
Again this was facilitated by the greater ease of message access: "The only confirmation I had of S's promotion was a voicemail message from R., so I replayed that to him.
I can't imagine being able to find that message using ".
We built a novel Web-based UI, to voicemail centered on the notion of note-taking, that also provided automatically generated message information and archiving tools.
The design was based on requirements data from interviews, experiments, surveys and user logs identifying key user tasks and strategies for voicemail processing.
Data from an 8-week field trial showed that Jotmail was much preferred to a TT UI.
As predicted, Jotmail improved scanning, information extraction and status tracking tasks.
User archiving and note-taking behaviors were not as expected however.
Archive size did not increase with Jotmail, although this may follow from the superior scanning capabilities of Jotmail, preventing the unintentional accumulation of irrelevant messages that often occurred with TT.
Removal of superfluous messages may therefore have counterbalanced increases in intentionally archived messages.
Archiving behavior may also be influenced by users' prior experience with a previous TT system, which deleted messages after 14 days .
This may have led users to view voicemail data as inherently ephemeral, despite user assertions that some messages had long-term value.
A longer field trial might produce more instances of archiving activity once users habituate to the idea of message permanence.
Users also failed to exploit the archiving tools provided, preferring to leave all messages in the inbox.
Their comments suggested that systematic filing is onerous.
Filing may also compromise the ability to track message status : once filed, messages are no longer visible in the inbox, leading them to be forgotten.
Given that voicemail volumes are lower than email, it may be possible to keep all current important messages visible in the inbox.
Lower message volume in voicemail may reduce the pressure to file that has been reported in email studies .
Annotation behavior was also not completely as predicted.
Users were very positive about their ability to annotate messages and use time-indexed playback.
Annotations were used for reminding, status updates and their on-line location meant that they were not mislaid like paper notes.
Screen-based notes were similar to paper ones.
As predicted, they were also associated with longer messages that were accessed more often.
Despite this, users reported taking fewer notes with Jotmail.
Reduced note-taking may have occurred because we automatically generated message header information, and indeed fewer notes were taken for messages with more such information.
Timebased indexing was also used infrequently.
There are several possible explanations:  messages were short enough to replay without undue cost, reducing the need for precise control during information extraction;  users found it hard to anticipate what notes would be useful for future retrieval;  sparse notes may be sufficient to remind users of the contents of the message, without the need for reaccessing the underlying speech.
Other work is consistent with the reminding explanation, arguing there are important trade-offs between the efficiency of relying solely on hand-written notes as  reminders versus the accuracy of accessing the verbatim speech record itself .
There are also important system extensions we are currently investigating.
These include using automatic speech recognition to produce transcripts of voicemail messages.
Although the transcripts are errorful, they nevertheless provide a browsable text for each message, allowing users to read rather than listen to voicemail.
Like user annotations, they also serve as a visual analogue to each voicemail message.
We are also exploring techniques for automatically extracting significant information such as names, dates, times and telephone numbers from these transcripts.
These new automatic techniques should provide further support for information extraction and scanning tasks.
Finally, there are both practical and theoretical implications to our results.
First our tool successfully addresses a significant problem for many users - namely efficient voicemail retrieval at any location where there is Web access.
It seems to address many of the problems that users currently experience with TT voicemail.
Our data also contribute to a growing body of research on general methods for speech access.
We present data showing that, consistent with the claims of prior work, providing a visual analogue as an index into underlying speech structure is important for supporting browsing and retrieval .
As with other approaches , our results suggest that for personal data such as voicemail, a combination of automatically generated data and personal annotations provides a general technique for accessing complex information in speech.
