Learning a new language is hard, but learning to use it confidently in conversations with native speakers is even harder.
From our field research with language learners, with support from Cognitive Psychology and Second Language Acquisition, we argue for the value of contextual microlearning in the many breaks spread across different places and throughout the day.
We present a mobile application that supports such microlearning by leveraging the location-based service Foursquare to automatically provide contextually relevant content in the world's major cities.
In an evaluation of Mandarin Chinese learning, a four-week, 23-user study spanning Beijing and Shanghai compared this contextual system to a system based on word frequency.
Study sessions with the contextual version lasted half as long but occurred in twice as many places as sessions with the frequency version, suggesting a complementary relationship between the two approaches.
This is true both for people seeking to cross the "language divide" by gaining a world language and improving their socioeconomic mobility , and for second language learners with non-instrumental sources of motivation .
For all such learners, the challenge is to maintain the executive motivation  to spend time learning in the face of competing demands from family, work, and social life.
One solution is to use the mobile phone as a platform for "microlearning" , helping language learners to identify and exploit the many moments during the day where other distractions are temporarily halted and attention can be diverted to language learning.
In contrast with PCs, the ultra-portability of mobile devices, combined with the low costs of retrieval, use, and stowage, makes them ideally suited to exploit opportunities for microlearning.
Moreover, since such opportunities naturally occur in different places, context-aware mobile systems that provide contextuallyrelevant content  could provide immediately valuable learning material .
Learning a second language is a significant lifetime goal for many people all over the world, but it is rarely easy to achieve.
Even for skilled linguists, it takes around 2200 hours  of dedicated classroom instruction to reach general proficiency in languages dissimilar to their native language  .
Living in countries where these languages are spoken is often necessary to reach fluency.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
In this paper, we present a mobile application for the microlearning of language in its context of use, in a way that encourages use of that language in meaningful interactions with native speakers.
Our model of context is based on location, leveraging the location-based social networking service Foursquare to find the venue closest to the learner's mobile GPS coordinates.
We use the type of this venue  to automatically suggest the study of language  tagged with that context.
Contextual microlearning is thus the frequent but brief study of material whose meaning is relevant in the current context.
Our approach is based on flashcards, with the user prompted to recall the translation of each contextual card.
Our initial rationale for such contextual microlearning was based on three findings from Cognitive Psychology: 1.
Encoding specificity  means that recall is best when the contexts of learning and retrieval share perceptual cues.
If we learn language in its context of use , it should help us to recall that language when and where we need to use it.
Spaced repetition  means that learning is best when content is presented over time rather than in quick succession.
If we learn language in short bursts in realworld locations, we will naturally space repetitions over both time and the places where we need it most.
Situated cognition  supports the notion that knowledge cannot be fully abstracted away from the activities, contexts, and cultures in which it is developed.
Language is therefore learned implicitly through use in context as well as through explicit study.
We expand on this initial rationale in the next section of the paper, through analysis of prior systems, our own user research, and theories from Second Language Acquisition  research.
We then draw on this new understanding to articulate the key obstacle to language learners making progress: shortage of spoken interactions with native speakers in the pursuit of real-world goals.
This was most evident in our user research of English-speaking learners of Mandarin Chinese in China, and prompted the development of a mobile application for the contextual microlearning of Chinese.
Finally, we describe our implementation of this novel system for city-wide contextual learning using Foursquare, and its evaluation over a 4 week, 23-user study spanning the Chinese cities of Beijing and Shanghai.
In contrast, the "dynamic immersion" approach of Rosetta Stone is audiovisual, with the learner inferring mappings between constructions in the target language and photographic representations of the concepts they stand for .
Together with podcasts of situational dialogues , these approaches represent the lesson-based method of delivering content in 20-30 minute chunks of concentrated study.
Unlike lesson-oriented learning, flashcards operate at the granularity of facts  and measure the learner's ability to provide the correct response  in the presence of a stimulus .
Recent research into the testing effect exploited by flashcards--that learning is enhanced when the learner is required to recall information rather than restudying it--has shown that even covert retrieval practice, with no observable user response or immediate system feedback, suffices to increase the degree of learning and reduce the rate of forgetting .
Other work has attempted to model human memory to predict future performance based on a history of learning events .
However, most algorithms for automated flashcard review are derived from the Leitner system , developed in the 1970s for managing piles of physical flashcards.
In this system, successive piles represent increasing degrees of knowledge, with a correct response to a flashcard promoting it to the next pile, and an incorrect response relegating it to the first pile.
Review is based on the principle of spaced repetition--given that humans exhibit a negatively exponential forgetting curve , repetitions of things-to-beremembered should occur at increasingly spaced intervals, just before they are likely to be forgotten.
A typical Leitner schedule is to review each flashcard pile at increasing intervals .
Extending this algorithm, SuperMemo  and Mnemosyne  add graded recollection on a scale of 0- 5, Smart.fm  requires selection of an answer from a growing number of alternatives, Anki  allows many cards to be created from multi-field facts, and Lingt  adds levels and achievements to create a social game.
Another example of this shift towards social language learning is the community-based website LiveMocha , which helps complementary native speakers and language learners find and help one another around lessons matched to both learners' abilities.
The Hanjamaru system  for Koreans learning Chinese, on the other hand, is an example of a 2D platform game built around core learning mechanics of hearing the sounds of Chinese characters each time enemies labeled with those characters are attacked, and building new powers from `conquered characters'.
The Tactical Language and Culture Training System  supports role play in a 3D game world, using AI for speech processing, behavior interpretation, and content generation.
The activity of second language learning has many different forms, varying with the ages, motivations, aptitudes, personalities, learning styles and strategies, locations, and native and target languages of learners .
The technologies used to support language learning are equally diverse, covering all language modalities  and a range of media types.
In this section, we first present established and emerging technologies for language learning, before going on to describe how we came to develop our own understanding of what it is like to learn the two biggest world languages-- English and Chinese.
We then discuss our findings in light of research on Second Language Acquisition .
Whereas most established systems for language learning have clustered around the methods of content delivery-- dialog-based lessons and vocabulary-based flashcards-- research has focused on how learning can be made more mobile, more multimodal, more ubiquitous, and more fun.
Much research has targeted learners of English as a Second Language , including systems for mobile audioblogging of language use experiences in response to oral assignments , AI-based chatterbots that engage the learner in simulated human-human conversation , and second language interaction within the virtual worlds of computer games .
Other ESL systems have attempted to leverage the context of learning, such as TenseITS --an intelligent tutoring system  for Chinese learners of English tenses that adapts to context through the learner's explicit input of their location, concentration level, interruption frequency, and available time.
More automatic location-based learning using indoor positioning of PDAs over Wifi has also been prototyped, but not deployed or evaluated as a system .
Aside from ESL systems, many research projects have tackled the particular challenges of learning Chinese.
For Chinese children learning the stroke order of the 3500 or so characters required for literacy, "Let's play Chinese Characters"  gives examples of mobile games that aim to be social and fun compared to rote learning.
For foreign students learning Chinese in China, the idea of a ContextAware Mobile Chinese Language Learning system that would provide language based on the learner's level and location has been proposed but not implemented .
Two systems that use location to support teacher-directed learning are the LOCH system for tasks that require interaction in particular places with native speakers , and the CLUE system for the association of sentences and language questions with the GPS coordinates of specific locations .
Two further systems that use RFID for context detection are the JAPELAS system  for learning how to talk in tagged rooms and the TANGO system  for learning the how to talk about tagged objects.
A similar approach has also been used to support learning in the home .
A bracelet RFID reader and various sensors are used to detect learners' interactions with objects and appliances throughout an instrumented home, responding with English to Spanish noun translations.
Although we see a number of interesting context-aware systems for language learning, none offers automatic, contextual language at locations across entire cities that would fit into the everyday activities of language learners.
We conducted a web survey of English and Chinese native speakers, learning Chinese and English respectively, in both the U.S.  and China .
The survey was circulated on both mailing lists and community forums.
In Beijing we had 103 respondents learning English and 64 learning Chinese, whereas in Seattle we had 77 and 59 respectively.
All were educated at college level or higher.
Overall, our learners of English had more self-reported experience and ability  than our learners of Chinese .
All groups stated they most wanted to improve their speaking and listening.
Drawing from this initial pool, we conducted 23 open interviews in preferred study locations, covering 7 learners of English and 4 learners of Chinese in Seattle, and 6 of each in Beijing.
Questions addressed the study, practice, and goal-directed use of the second language as well as existing and potential tool support.
Our main finding was that satisfaction was not based on the language or location of learning.
Rather, salient attributes were if the learner needed to use the language to achieve other goals  and if they had a supportive relationship with one or more native speakers.
The learners with the lowest satisfaction levels were those who studied language but were not able to practice it with supportive native speakers.
They were primarily expatriates in Beijing studying Chinese because they lived in China, rather than for work or formal education.
They did not use dictionaries or other media to mediate communication with native speakers, but would look up vocabulary before or afterwards.
They reported becoming more confident after a study session and then being more likely to take the emotional risk of speaking.
In comparison, the learners with the highest satisfaction levels were those who were happy to learn the language by using it, despite the mistakes and misunderstandings that would sometimes arise.
These were predominantly people learning a language spoken natively by friends, partners, or family members who were willing to implicitly recast or give explicit feedback on the learner's incorrect utterances.
Although this latter group of use-directed learners was in general more advanced than the former group of studydirected learners, language study does not naturally translate into use over time.
We learned that our studydirected learners would often avoid using language that they knew unless it was absolutely necessary, and refrain from speaking at all unless they knew in advance what to say and how to say it.
This was exemplified by one learner who was reasonably fluent when speaking with the language partner he trusted, but unwilling to negotiate basic exchanges in shops if he didn't know the names for things.
The usage-based model of SLA is based on the premise that "language is learned from participatory experience of processing input and producing language during interaction in social contexts where individually-desired non-linguistic outcomes are goals to be achieved" .
The slow development of our target learners can be explained by their habitual avoidance of such participatory social interactions.
We analyze this behavior by drawing on the accepted fivestage model of SLA , which moves from apperceived input  and comprehended input , via intake  and integration , through to output .
The two input stages are strongly affected by the learner's executive motivation  to place themselves in situations where they can learn the language by using it.
It is through second language interactions with native speakers whereby intake is integrated into the learner's unique interlanguage , which shares elements of both their native and target languages.
In our study, embarrassment over the breadth, depth, correctness, comprehensibility, and automaticity of interlanguage were all widely reported, leading to learners raising their affective filter .
This filter determines the extent to which learners actively seek input, as well as how, when, and where they will choose to speak based on their emotional experiences of prior communication attempts.
The implication for design is therefore to extend the conventional Leitner flashcard system to space repetitions not only in time, but also across the places that the learners visits during the day.
Learning is best when performed through participatory experience , and this principle is implicit in the many systems for conversation-oriented systems .
By encouraging learners to use the language they are studying, we can potentially help lower learners' affective filters in a way that helps them both notice and take advantage of contextual opportunities for speaking with native speakers.
The implication for design is therefore to incentivize what we might call the "micro-use" of language at the level of individual flashcards, which we can track and give feedback on along with conventional flashcard study statistics.
In the introduction, we outlined a vision for contextual microlearning based on three principles from Cognitive Psychology--encoding specificity, spaced repetition, and situated cognition.
In this section, we have reviewed prior systems for language learning, our own preliminary user research, and theories from Second Language Acquisition .
Given the evidence from these sources, we decided to tackle the challenge of getting our study-directed learners to adopt a use-directed attitude towards learning.
To promote such behavior change, our key design goal became to support contextual microlearning that helps study-directed learners to study in context, with the effect of exposing them to more opportunities for speaking.
The context-aware systems for language learning reviewed in this paper, as well as many other context aware systems for activities such as understanding virus outbreaks , wildlife behavior , and climate change , are predominantly based on teachers or researchers manually associating learning content with the GPS coordinates of real-world locations from within tightly constrained geographic regions.
For a scalable approach to the automatic presentation of language based on a learner's context, we decided to leverage the web API of Foursquare to retrieve nearby "venues" and their types.
Learning is best when performed in the context of future use , and this principle is implicit in the many systems for context-aware language learning .
By providing learners with language that they might need to use in any given location, we can potentially develop their interlanguage in a manner more appropriate for the achievement of real-world goals.
The implication for design is therefore to build a system that contains language tagged with its context of use and which presents language according to the learner's context.
There are many advantages to using an established locationbased service for context-aware systems research: the ontology of venue types is pre-constructed, the location-tovenue mapping is pre-populated, and the location data in the new system will automatically improve over time.
No existing system for language learning has exploited these advantages for the automatic presentation of contextual language at a city-wide scale across the major world cities.
For our system, we decided to use a model of context based on venue type, obtained from the category attributes of the Foursquare venue closest to the learner's GPS location.
Inspired by human computation for language translation , we created a database of English-Chinese translations associated with their context of use.
Our native English speaking team members first entered at least five English language words for each venue subcategory of Foursquare and then translated that into Mandarin using Bing Dictionary, Google Translate, and Nciku.
The Chinese-English bilinguals on our team then verified the resulting flashcards for accuracy and relevance.
In addition, we added context tags to existing flashcards that we imported by spreadsheet from the Mnemosyne project, resulting in around 3000 contextual flashcards in total.
Our MicroMandarin application supports 4 key functions: studying language based on where you are, using language you have learned based on where you are, browsing all language you have seen through the application, and tracking progress by referring to statistics of flashcards seen, correct, incorrect, learned, and used.
These are implemented as four application screens .
The use screen  presents flashcards for the current context that have already been learned.
Below each flashcard are two buttons, skip and used today!
Skipping a card moves onto the next--the idea is to provide users with a means of browsing the language they have learned in a way that encourages them to use it.
If they have used it earlier in the day, or in response to seeing the card, they can reward themselves by hitting the used today!
This results in a dialog box congratulating the learner with the total number of flashcard-based language items they have now used in second language exchanges.
When all speaking challenges are exhausted, the learner is invited to study more.
The study screen  is responsible for showing flashcards according to the current context.
Our extension of the Leitner algorithm to multiple contexts is as follows: 1.
For each flashcard, maintain a correct count that represents the number of consecutive correct responses to that flashcard.
Increment this count when the learner knows the answer, reset to zero when not.
The mapping of Chinese and English to the front and rear of flashcards alternates with increasing correct count, and a flashcard is "learned" when this count reaches four1.
For each context, maintain a set of 10 related but unlearned flashcards and a Leitner count that determines which flashcards are shown in the current Leitner session for that context.
Flashcards with a correct count of N are shown to the learner every Nth Leitner session such that better known cards are spaced further apart.
After every 10 flashcards, present quantitative feedback about progress made in that microlearning session.
Whenever one of the 10 current flashcards is learned, replace it with the next available flashcard for the current context.
For any given context, flashcards are presented according to attributes of that context in the order , where subcategory is all flashcards tagged with that subcategory, category is all flashcards tagged with the "Other" subcategory of the parent category and general is the non-contextual language in the database .
At the top of the user interface is a persistent context bar that indicates the name and type of the venue closest to the learner's current location.
For example the context bar in Figure 2 lists the venue "Upper East Side" of subcategory "Home", resulting in home-related language being shown2.
Hitting the Change button results in a scrollable list of the three ways in which the context can be changed .
These are Find My Location, using GPS to update the context automatically; Select Category, using a hierarchy of scrollable lists to set the category and subcategory of the context manually ; or selecting one of 10 nearby locations as returned by the API call to Foursquare.
The top such result, representing the closest venue, is automatically selected as the learner's context when the application loads.
Although the language content is associated only with the subcategory of the closest venue, not the learner's specific GPS coordinates, we present the venue name to communicate the reasoning behind our selection.
We implemented the user interface as an HTML5, CSS3, and JavaScript mobile client that uses JSONP to communicate in a RESTful way with our Ruby on Rails Web service.
We exploit geolocation, offline caching, and animation in Webkit-based mobile browsers, and Rails at the back end to connect with our language database, Foursquare, and mobile carriers.
Our client is instantly deployable and updatable through the Web browser, with an additional administrative interface for live interaction with language content, notifications, and user logs.
The two versions thus shared the same contextually-tagged flashcards but differed in their selection of cards to present to the learner.
Matching the difficulty of flashcards with learners' ability levels was beyond the scope of this work.
The natural order  in which the vocabulary of a language is learned is highly correlated with word frequency, and so being exposed to language in order of frequency is likely to be optimal in terms of pure learning.
However, as presented in this paper, many similar such systems exist and form the mainstream approach to language learning.
We recruited participants for our study using a Web form that we circulated via direct email to previous survey respondents, postings to social network groups, messages to mailing lists, and Twitter.
We received 115 responses in total, which we filtered down to 28 based on the constraints of our study: that participants were fluent English speakers actively learning Mandarin Chinese, were based in Beijing or Shanghai , used an iPhone as their primary mobile device , and were not travelling for more than 6 days of the four week study period.
Ages of the 23 participants who completed the study4 ranged from 23- 42, with 14 males and 9 females.
Self-reported language levels were distributed novice low=2, novice mid=6, novice high=9, intermediate low=1, intermediate mid=4, and advanced=1.
Internet connection was by Wifi only for 5 participants and by Wifi or data connection for the other 18.
SMS links to an online Web survey were automatically sent to participants' phones 4 times a day throughout the study.
Participants completed these based on Chinese interactions since the previous survey.
Completion of 75% or more of these surveys was a condition of entry into a prize draw for 3 copies of Rosetta Stone Mandarin Levels 1-3.
All participants received a gift worth $100 for responding to ESM surveys, trying both versions of the application, and completing a post-study survey.
No conditions were placed on application use, other than to use it if they wanted to.
We adopted a within-subjects study design comparing the two application versions, dividing participants into two groups and counterbalancing the condition order .
Groups were balanced first for self-reported Chinese ability, second for internet connection, third for city, and fourth for gender.
The structure of our four-week study was based on an initial week of ESM for everyone, followed by 10 days using one application version, then another 10 days using the other application version.
On the remotely-triggered switch between versions, all of the learner's active flashcards were archived such that each card was only ever seen in a single condition.
After the study, participants contributed feedback through a Web survey .
The frequency-based version of our application was the same as the contextual version except that the Change button was removed from the context bar; the context label was filled in automatically based on the subcategory of the flashcard being presented; and the Use screen, used today!
We augmented both versions with initial dialog boxes that would help us to verify the accuracy of our Foursquarebased location lookup.
When the application first loads, we take the top result from the venues nearby the learner and ask whether this is their current location.
In the contextual version, we also ask the same question whenever the user manually changes their context .
This provided data on the extent to which our participants studied and used language based on their context.
We organize our hypotheses and subsequent presentation of study results around the key components of contextual microlearning that we outlined as implications for design following our initial user research: the need to suggest contextual language for contextual study and use.
Our hypotheses target six possible differences between the contextual and frequency versions, based on the various ways in which user experiences and usage patterns could vary: language novelty6 , session frequency , session length , session locations , flashcards seen , and flashcards learned .
Since we only ran tests against this small number of a priori hypotheses, it was not necessary to apply a correction  for controlling the family-wise error rate.
To track real-world speaking as well as application use, we adapted the Experience Sampling Method   to capture the frequency, quality, content, and purpose of participants' interactions in Chinese with native speakers5.
Five participants dropped out due to technical problems or unexpected travel, resulting in 12 of the finishing participants starting with the contextual version and 11 with frequency version.
There was no substantial loss of balance.
Guidelines from the American Council on the Teaching of Foreign Languages   were used to craft questions and responses tied to speaking proficiency levels.
Immediate needs were by far the most common purpose , following by social small talk , with work/school and professional being rare .
In our post-study survey, 18% of participant reported almost never becoming frustrated in their interactions with native speakers, 32% about a quarter of the time, 18% half of the time, 9% about three quarters of the time, and 23% almost always.
Reasons for frustration include lack of effort from the listener and lack of appropriate words to say: I find talking to new people is the worst case.
Because i am a foreigner they already assume they won't understand what I say and they stop trying to figure it out.
Sometimes I think I'm doing well, but then I realize later I made lots of `rookie' mistakes, relying on set phrases when the situation calls for more specific vocabulary.
Overall, our study participants experienced many of the same conversational difficulties as our earlier interviewees.
Learner modeling may resolve this difficulty, but the following quotes and ratings indicate that our system can be considered a successful proof-of-concept at providing contextually-appropriate content in the wild: I really loved the specific vocabulary provided by the Contextual version.
For instance, I once logged into the application from a coffee shop ... although I already knew the basics, MM also offered words for items on the menu .
I really like the contextual version because I felt like I was studying language points that were relevant but that I might not have chosen to study on my own.
In the post-study survey, the greatest number of participants reported that our system was "good" in its quality of language content  and in the variety of that content .
However, for the purposes of the study our language set was limited, closed, and impersonal.
To function at the level required by the following participant, we would need to open up our means of flashcard creation to the broader user community and investigate the detection of richer contextual features: If it could not only detect location  but also be more specific as to what I want to say.
Being at the hospital and getting phrases for "he has a cold" etc.
The greatest number of participants thought that the system was "ok" in its ability to detect their exact location  and generally better at finding it within list of nearby venues .
This was supported by our logs of context switching: of 435 automatic requests for nearby Foursquare venues, the closest venue was the correct one 208 times .
When participants manually switched away from the automatically selected context, they more often selected a context that represented where they were  rather than an unrelated context .
The value of such automatic location detection now and in the future was also supported by participant quotes, such as: I could see using it in nearly every situation - further at work, when shopping, at restaurants, etc., particularly if  were highly accurate.
Although not everybody thought the location detection was good enough--"the context wasn't accurate enough, however it was useful when it got the location right"--we found Foursquare to provide an immediate and reasonably accurate solution for our location-based research needs.
Analysis of our log data showed that the two application versions did not significantly differ in the number of sessions they were used for .
In other words, the contextual version resulted in behavior that closely resembled episodes of microlearning constrained by time demands and motivated by concrete needs: Studying the words while in the location  has helped me retain and remember them.
I had a similar experience after logging into the app from home to review the names of household objects.
On several occasions I learned office related terms that I then immediately used in my workplace.
I would use the Contextual version to prepare myself for a specific situation  or to simply review or learn relevant words on the go.
Students might find the frequency version more useful, as they set aside specific time to study, but for a busy businessperson ... having the ability to learn terms that are contextual to your location or activities is fantastic and a differentiator for this tool.
However, in terms of the number of flashcards presented to the user and "learned" according to our implementation of the Leitner algorithm, the significantly longer frequencybased sessions resulted in more cards being both seen  and learned  with the frequency version.
Based on other qualitative feedback and quantitative results, we interpret these negative results as follows:  studying was substantial in both versions;  our implementation of the Leitner algorithm made it possible to "learn" a flashcard in a single sitting, even though such "cramming" is rarely beneficial for real retention .
A further longitudinal study is therefore needed to fully understand the implications of contextual microlearning on language competence, performance, motivation, and affect.
I got much more out of the Contextual version because it was able to immediately apply what I was learning and it fulfilled a gap in my language-learning routine.
The Contextual version was like having a smart phrasebook.
In a future system, we imagine combining frequency and contextual approaches to language presentation, as well as conventional features like a dictionary, to create a more balanced learning tool providing personalized learning content across a wide range of levels.
As suggested: I'd like the option of both, to be honest!
I think they both have their advantages and can't really be compared - they are different products for different needs.
An app that can switch between the two would be best.
Given that the greatest number of participants agreed that both contextual and frequency versions encouraged them to study more often than usual compared to their previous habits , we hope that such a combination will help promote a "micro" approach to language learning.
The main feedback was that while for some people "it seemed to be effective ...
I still remember the words!
More research is needed on how to explicitly motivate people to use the language they are studying, and we anticipate that more persuasive, gamebased, social systems will help provided such motivation.
When asked to submit a preference for either application version, the split was 12:10 only slightly in favor of the contextual version.
For beginners, the frequency version simply gave them all they needed: I would use the frequency version to occupy time when waiting at home or out and do not have specific language needs, but just want to improve my language skills.
Given my level , I found  the best because it was a continual reminder to do more and sneak some in.
The repetitiveness of it helped me learn/remember.
For learners beyond the mid-novice stage, the frequencyonly version was less well-regarded: I didn't seem to benefit very much from the Frequency version ... the cards were not challenging enough.
Contextual appears to be more useful at my level.
I found the contextual version much more effective.
The frequency version was still a very useful learning aid.
In this paper we have presented MicroMandarin--a system based on the principle of microlearning in which opportunities for language study and use are created through the automatic suggestion of contextual language.
We were interested in how such contextual learning can complement existing language learning tools based on the principle of spaced repetition, by leveraging the phenomena of encoding specificity and situated cognition.
To understand the potential trade-offs and synergies between contextual and frequency-based learning, we conducted a 4week study of expatriate language learners in China.
Through our prior user research, we had already identified expatriates in China as needing more executive motivation to spend time learning, since they typically lead lives in which language learning is not a strongly instrumental motivation for career success.
These primarily studydirected learners had problems interacting in real social interactions with native speakers--their frustrations with the limitations of the interlanguage raising their affective filters over time, leading them to pass over or even avoid opportunities to practice the language they had learned.
Through its exploitation of the kinds of location-based services that are fast becoming mainstream, our MicroMandarin application goes some way towards demonstrating the value of contextual microlearning.
Although our current work targets learners who are immersed in Chinese in the developed cities of China, in contrast with prior work on supporting foreign language learning in underdeveloped regions , we hope that future work will be able to bridge these two extremes and improve language learning for all.
