We believe any vocabulary has to also tie back to neurophysiological and psychophysical research, which holds valuable knowledge about the characteristics of human mechanoreceptors .
Without tying back, the vocabulary will be intricately linked to the experimental setup and haptic device used in the study .
In this paper we explicitly address the challenges reported in previous work and relate participants' verbalizations on tactile experiences to the specific characteristics of two selected receptors in the glabrous skin  of the human hand: the Meissner corpuscle  and Pacinian corpuscle .
We conducted a study with 14 participants using the explicitation interview technique, a qualitative method based on a psycho-phenomenological perspective, for stimulating participants to verbalize their tactile experiences .
For this study we used a haptic system to generate acoustic radiation pressures modulated at 16Hz and 250Hz to stimulate tactile sensations on the hand.
We analysed the participants' verbalizations according to the diachronic and synchronic structure of the expressed experiences.
The diachronic analysis revealed insights on the temporal unfolding of participants' verbalizations  while the synchronic analysis provided insights on the specific configuration of an expressed tactile experience .
The findings are presented in 14 categories for both stimuli - 6 comparable, 6 distinct, and 2 non-distinct categories.
The six comparable categories at first glance present similar facets of tactile experiences but participants' verbalizations show the specific characteristics of these categories .
The two non-distinct categories include tactile experiences that can be described as paraesthesia of the hand  and have no clear delineation between the two stimuli.
The physiological mechanisms of these sensations are less understood and a matter of current investigation within the neuroscience community .
Each of the 14 categories is described in our results section, including further references to participants' verbalizations,
A common problem with designing and developing applications with tactile interfaces is the lack of a vocabulary that allows one to describe or communicate about haptics.
Here we present the findings from a study exploring participants' verbalizations of their tactile experiences across two modulated tactile stimuli  related to two important mechanoreceptors in the human hand.
The study, with 14 participants, applied the explicitation interview technique to capture detailed descriptions of the diachronic and synchronic structure of tactile experiences.
We propose 14 categories for a humanexperiential vocabulary based on the categorization of the findings and tie them back to neurophysiological and psychophysical data on the human hand.
We finally discuss design opportunities created through this experiential understanding in relation to the two mechanoreceptors.
With the proliferation of haptic devices there is a demand for designers to create content that includes tactile feedback.
This demand has pushed to the forefront the lack of a vocabulary that allows one to describe and communicate about tactile experiences when designing such systems.
For example, a designer might use words like `pulsing' or `tapping' to describe a sensation but without any knowledge of how this relates to a specific tactile experience it is hard to design for this experience.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Their findings show that the phoneme-meaning associations can be learned in a reasonable time  and can persist if further trained.
The haptic phoneme created by the authors is a form of haptic vocabulary that represents the smallest distinguishable haptic unit, but there is no relation between the vocabulary and experiences.
Our paper has a different focus, as we are interested in the vocabulary used by participants themselves to describe tactile experiences.
In the recent years there have been several attempts at establishing a vocabulary around tactile experiences by exploring it in relation to product design or in combination with other modalities .
However, most researchers note that their methodology is either limited or involves a workaround, as participants lack a vocabulary to express tactile experiences.
O'Sullivan and Chang , for instance, point to the limitations of people's ability to express haptic sensations.
In their study discussing the combination of sound and vibrations they observed that participants had difficulties in describing and distinguishing haptic experiences, such as when caused by different vibrations.
They used a set of adjectives along pre-defined experience dimensions, which were completed with words from their participants.
They note that they used this approach due to people's lack of a haptic language.
Jansson-Boyd  also questions if there is such a thing as a tactile language, which goes, for instance, beyond the framework suggested for pleasant or unpleasant haptic experiences in product design .
The author  points out that unfamiliar stimuli reveal more consistent tactile patterns than familiar stimuli , as they do not follow pre-established preferences for tactile input .
Chang and Ishii  also argue for a common understanding of sensory experiences and introduce a `sensorial mapping', comprising all human senses.
They aim to support designers in matching digital information with sensory information for enriching users experiences.
The mapping provides a starting point but remains on a general level with respect to tactile experiences.
Furthermore, Brown and Kaye  conducted a study investigating how material properties of a vibrating device changes user's haptic experiences.
The study revealed, that participants used similes and metaphors to describe the sensation of holding the different vibrating device using words such as `soft' and `tingly'.
However, the authors  note that the participants' expressiveness may have come from the material used on the vibrating device rather then from the vibration itself.
A key element missing in exploring the tactile experience space is the human-experiential vocabulary for verbalizing the experiences .
Another problem that was noted by many of the above researchers is that it can be hard to separate the expressions used to describe the tactile experiences from the object/ material properties .
To be able to create a human-experiential vocabulary for tactile experiences one needs to understand the neurophysiological and psychophysical characteristics of the specific part of the body.
From this understanding we can create tactile stimuli that target specific mechanoreceptors so that any vocabulary that emerges can be precisely linked to the characteristics of the receptors.
This is essential to not only create a vocabulary that allows designers to talk about tactile experiences but to also enable developers to relate this vocabulary to specific tactile stimuli.
Moreover, this form of vocabulary allows designers to create enhanced experiences, as they are better aware of how the sensory receptors contribute to the overall experience .
Below is a brief overview of the mechanoreceptors of the human hand, of which two are relevant  to situate our user study explained later on.
The rate of adaptation of the nerve fibers which the receptors are connected to can be broadly categorised as rapidly- or slowly-adapting.
Rapidly-adapting fibers detect the transients of skin deformation, discharging only at the onset and at the removal of a stimulus whereas slowlyadapting fibers detect sustained skin deformation, discharging at stimulus onset and also if stimulus persists .
In our study we focus on 2 out of the 4 mechanoreceptors due to their characteristics.
We chose the two rapidlyadapting receptors  as they are the only receptors that respond to vibration.
The remaining 2 receptors  are sensitive to other types of tactile sensations, which are not vibrational .
We use the explicitation interview technique to elicit verbalizations of participants' experiences when each of these two receptors is stimulated.
The receptive field is the area on the skin where the `right' stimulus will evoke neural discharge in a nerve fibre.
The receptive fields of RA and SAI are smaller and well-defined when compared to PC and SAII.
These larger receptive fields may cover a whole fingertip  or even up to a whole hand .
The relative densities of the RA and SAI receptors decrease from the fingertip to the palm compared to the densities of the PC and SAII receptors, which are more evenly distributed across the hand.
This suggests the suitability of the RA and SAI receptors in spatial analysis and stimuli localization .
Neurophysiological and psychophysical studies have shown that each of these mechanoreceptors contributes to different aspects of perception .
The RA receptor is sensitive to low-frequency vibration.
The perception of tiny, low-frequency skin motion  helps provide the feedback signals required for grip control of an object.
The PC receptor is sensitive to high-frequency skin deformation at the nanometer level and helps in the perception of distant textures or events when the vibrations are transmitted through a hand-held object.
The SAII receptor is sensitive to skin stretch and is for detecting object motion or forces parallel to the skin surface and the perception of hand/finger shape.
The explicitation interview technique  brings together a psychological and phenomenological perspective to elicit verbalizations of subjective experiences.
This psychophenomenological approach  is a form of guided introspection technique that seeks first-person accounts by using distinctions in language, internal sensory representations and imagery that have been incorporated from neuro-linguistic programming .
This interview technique is a retrospective approach and is thus typically applied after an experience has happened.
For example, the technique has been used in the field of ergonomics for studying discomfort and negative emotions when driving a car , in the pedagogical domain by giving students access to their own thinking processes , and in human-robot interaction research for investigating how mental models are formed and influence participants evaluation when interacting with a robot .
Although a retrospective technique, Light , for instance, also used it in-situ to describe thoughts that went through the minds of the participants as they approached and started entering text when performing web-based tasks.
The value of this interview technique lies in the way of asking questions that supports participants in expressing their experiences linked to a specific moment.
The participant is encouraged to keep talking, about the experiential  aspects of the moment without building on rational comments and explanations about it .
For example, the interviewer asks questions like "Please describe what you feel, see, hear, or perceive" and follows up with questions that help to place the participant in an evocation state so they talk about that specific lived experience  in all its details rather then focusing on conceptual , imaginary and symbolic verbalizations .
This technique helps to explore the unfolding of the experience in time, referring to the `diachronic' dimension and examining the specific facets of the experience in a particular moment referring to the `synchronic' structure of an experience .
The RA and PC receptors are most sensitive to stimuli, which continuously change with time .
The RA receptors generally respond to vibration in the 2 - 40 Hz frequency range with a relatively flat response curve whereas the PC receptors operate in the range above 40Hz with a distinct U-shaped response curve with sensitivity peaking between 250 and 300 Hz .
Thereby, the specific configuration of the experiential sensation at a given moment of time can be investigated.
Compared to other interview methods using an open questioning approach, this technique is non-inducive but directive .
Non-inducive because it keeps the participant talking about the experience without inducing any content, as it focuses on the structure of the experience.
Directive, because it keeps the participant focused on the singular experience, which is explored.
In this paper, we use this interview technique both in-situ and retrospectively.
We primarily use it in-situ for exploring the tactile experiences, which have rapidly decaying memory  and retrospectively to examine interdependencies between the different tactile stimuli.
The study was carried out as part of a larger two-day workshop with designers, artists and developers with a focus and interest in haptic systems.
The workshop explored design possibilities with a non-contact haptic system.
The workshop encouraged free and open exploration of the haptic system without any application or scenario restrictions.
This study was conducted on the second day of the workshop, where all participants already had the chance to try out the haptic system as part of a tutorial and open exploration phase.
We chose to do our study in this manner, as we wanted to provide the participants with a context to imagine so they can express their tactile experiences easily  while at the same time not shoe-horning each participant to a specific context  and limiting the scope of this study.
We felt that the selected user group is most able  to verbalize tactile experiences knowing from previous research  that people have difficulties in expressing tactile experiences, even for ordinary objects.
The study system was setup in an open corner office at the workshop venue.
This was a quiet corner where only the study participants  and two researchers were present.
One researcher was exclusively managing the study system and setup for each participant  and the other researcher carried out the explicitation interviews .
This study setup was out of sight from the other workshop happenings and no one else from the workshop could hear or observe the proceedings.
We also instructed each participant to not talk about the study  when they return to the workshop.
The study took about 20 minutes per participant.
The system creates a focal point of fixed pressure  in mid-air using 40kHz ultrasound waves by applying the correct phase delays to an array of ultrasound transducers.
This focal point of pressure, which was kept the same throughout the study, can then be felt when modulating the ultrasound waves within the frequency range of the mechanoreceptors of the human hand.
The system was built with 64 ultrasound transducers arranged in an 8x8 array.
We used this tactile system rather than a vibrator  to allow the tactile stimuli to be experienced in both the palm and the fingertips.
With vibration motors mounted on a surface, exploring different hand regions can be burdensome and the onset and off-set of touching the vibrating surface can be associated with other receptors; leading to unnecessary confounds in our study.
The system used allowed the isolation of the haptic stimuli from the devices thus shielding any textures or geometry of the device from influencing the results.
Participants were allowed to explore an area of 9x16x20.5 cm3 above the transducers .
In order to provide all participants the same space for exploration we created a box around the ultrasound system.
The transducer array was built 12.5 cm above the surface of the table and the entire setup was then covered by a white foam board box with a cut-out the same size as the exploration space to obscure all wires and electronic components.
We did this as previous research has shown that people use different kinds of exploratory hand movements to experience tactile stimuli .
This active exploration emphasizes purposive touch that increases information received by the brain to help discern surface qualities such as roughness and hardness .
A total of 14 participants  aged between 23 and 50 years  took part in this study.
All participants were native English speakers based in the UK.
No participant reported any neuropathy or vascular problems associated with their upper limbs or diabetes.
Participant 11 reported primary Raynaud's on all three phalanges of the index, middle and ring finger on both hands.
As a result for the 16Hz stimulus there was no data from participant 11 as s/he experienced no tactile sensation for this stimulus.
This meant that this person's threshold for the 16Hz stimulus was higher than that provided in the study.
Before we started the study, we measured the room temperature  and skin temperature using a calibrated digital thermometer.
Studies have shown that PC and RA receptors  have little variance in sensitivity in these skin temperature ranges .
As noted earlier, the interview technique was used in-situ and included a retrospective questioning at the end after both stimuli were experienced.
In-situ questioning for each individual stimulus is essential to reduce the effect of a rapidly decaying tactile memory, which is within just a few seconds .
Retrospectively each participant was asked to recall the particular moment when they switched from the first to the second stimulus .
We introduced this final step to explore the tactile experiences and interdependencies between the two stimuli, in particular in relation to the diachronic structure of an experience.
All sessions were audio and video recorded, transcribed and then analysed according to the diachronic and synchronic structure of the experience .
The A5 question cards were transcribed too and included in the further analysis.
In a first step, two coders one with a background in user experience research and the other in psychophysical research went through all transcripts independently.
We picked coders with different expertise to draw from the data the two different perspectives we wanted to capture in this paper.
Despite the different disciplinary backgrounds of the two coders the first coding step resulted in a fair inter-coder reliability  .
Each coder started with independently writing down the words and expressions used to describe each stimulus.
These words  or groups of words  formed the initial groupings for each participant per coder.
Each grouping was assigned as diachronic and/or synchronic dimension of the experience by referring to the temporal evolvement and the context of the verbalizations in the transcripts.
Repeated verbalizations of the same verbal descriptors were subsumed in one `word/expression'  adding the line number as reference to the transcripts.
The main author then merged the resulting groupings from both coders using NVivo 9  resulting in 35 categories for stimuli 1  and 31 categories for stimuli 2 .
Each word or single expressions from a participant belonged to only 1 of these 66 categories.
In total we had 279 words/expressions for stimuli 1, and 283 words/expressions for stimuli 2.
To verify the merged grouping, the second coder was instructed to review the coding results and examine the categories based on the underlying sources in NVivo .
In a next step, both coders examined the categories again together in order to ensure that only categories specifically focusing on the participants' tactile experiences are included.
There were two modulation frequencies presented to the participants, the frequency of 16Hz  and another of 250Hz .
We picked these two frequencies as the receptors in question have peak sensitivity to these frequencies.
The order of presentation was alternated between the participants to account for order effects.
The participants were informed that the study involved two different stimuli and that each of the stimuli will be presented to them for maximum of 5 minutes.
Participants were given the option to withdraw their hand earlier in this exploration phase if they wished to or when they thought nothing more can be said about the sensations.
After each stimuli, they were asked to answer three open questions on a prepared A5 question cards:  What words would you use to describe how it felt on your hand, if at all?
These questions were inspired by the explicitation interview questioning technique and allowed participants to verbalize and reflect upon their tactile experiences in a written form .
Participants were also informed that throughout the 5 minutes of exploring each stimulus, we will ask questions about their tactile experiences, and encourage them to speak out loud whatever comes to their mind.
Any comparisons made between the two stimuli  were subsumed in an extra category.
Furthermore, specific codes related to the position of the sensation on the hand  were categorized separately in order to allow specific conclusions regarding the relation between the tactile experiences and the receptors in the human hand.
Finally, expressions related to temperature, i.e.
While these can be genuine expressions related to the specific stimulus this could have also been from other contextual factors like ambient temperature in the box.
Using the box for providing a constant region of hand movements for exploration across the participants  may have caused expressions of warmer sensation.
The specific receptors in this study are not triggered by temperature and in order to only classify unambiguous associations we eliminated them.
Finally, the original 35 categories for stimuli 1 and 31 categories for stimuli 2 were further assessed by each coder for similarities and differences and merged into a higherlevel categorization, resulting in 7 categories for each stimulus.
Each category was named to best describe the subsumed verbalizations expressed by the participants.
We involved an expert in the field of tactile/haptic systems, to review the wording of the final categorization, as finding the right wording for the higher-level abstractions is a key step during this formalisation process .
When presented as second stimulus, the analysis showed, that words such as `weak/weaker' and `strong/stronger' are mentioned first  and `Strong'  categories.
Apart from these two aspects , the verbalizations regarding the two tactile stimuli unfolded differently and are summarized below.
With respect to the 16Hz stimulus, participants' continued their exploration  by referring to the localization of the sensation identified in the category `Focused', which is followed by expressions on weak/subtle and prickly experiences.
Participants further verbalized their tactile experiences with references to the irregular appearance of the sensation, describing it as coming and going.
Finally, participants verbalized a pulsing vibration experience and associated the sensation with physical materials, such as thin textiles.
In the cases where the 16Hz stimulus came after the 250Hz, participants expressed the non-constant and the pulsing vibration experience much earlier than the focused and prickly experiences.
For the 250Hz stimulus, after expressing the airyexperience, participants continued describing the tingling and constant experience, followed by references to the physicality of the tactile stimulus.
Further expressions were then related to the vibrating experience, associated with flowing of blood or water.
Finally participants pointed out the dispersed character of the experience on their palm and fingers.
In the cases where the 250Hz stimulus came after the 16Hz participants expressed the dispersed experience right after the strength of the tactile stimulation.
The order of the other verbalizations on air, physicality, tingling and the vibration experience did not change notably.
To draw out the relevance of our findings to HCI we will present the final high-level categorization  for the tactile experiences, include a discussion of potential design opportunities in each revealed category, and relate our findings back to characteristics of the RA and PC mechanoreceptors in the non-hairy skin of the human hand.
Overall, for stimuli 1  a total of 247 single references are classified along 7 categories and for stimuli 2 , a total of 272 references are classified along 7 categories.
Figure 4 provides an overview on all 14 categories for both stimuli along with the number of participants, number of participants' verbalizations  and examples for each category.
Our 14 categories contain 6 comparable, 6 distinct, and 2 non-distinct categories.
These categories represent a formative classification to compare the tactile sensations and offer an initial H-E-Vocabulary.
We start our description by presenting participants' temporal evolution of expressed tactile experiences based on the insights from the diachronic analysis.
The participants' initial references in both stimuli were verbalized around the airy-experience.
The analysis of the detailed descriptions of this particular experiences revealed that expressions used for the 250Hz experience were related to familiar concepts  and included the sensation of a continuous blowing of wind/breeze against the hand.
The expressions around 16Hz were less precise referring to, for instance, `hand-held fan on a low battery' or `wind'.
The sensitivity thresholds of the RA receptor are much lower than that of the PC one , meaning that for the same intensity of the stimuli, one is able to perceive sensations in the range of the PC much better than that of the RA .
Thus, at 16Hz one feels light puffs of air and at 250Hz stimuli feels a strong breeze.
The 250Hz stimulus was for instance associated with `a mechanical breeze "it feels like a breeze from the machine"  or a generated breeze `like a rush of air' .
In contrast to these examples of strong and larger areas of experiences, the verbalizations around the 16Hz were more abstract including references to electrostatic feelings "just that thing of an electric current, when there's a serious amount of it you can kind-of almost feel" .
One participant expressed "I can feel a slight draft on my hand" .
The comparable experience in these categories is distinguishable based on the participants' abstractions of the experience , as well as the dimension of the perceived tactile experience .
H-E-Vocabulary: These results suggest that words referring to light weather conditions such as `slight draft' or `gentle wind' are stimulating the RA receptors of the hand whereas words indicating a strong breeze such as `air-conditioning' or `rush of air' are stimulating the PC receptors.
This knowledge is not only useful in terms of how a designers choice of words might be translated to a specific tactile feedback but it can be useful for creating tactile feedback in ubiquitous/ambient interfaces .
The result suggests that users refer to low frequency vibrations  as rhythmic or pulsing whereas vibrations at higher frequency  are referred to as flowing or continuous.
H-E-Vocabulary: These results suggest that words referring to rhythmic vibrations such as `tapping' or `pulsing' are stimulating the RA receptors of the hand whereas words indicating continuous vibrations such as `flowing' or `electric current' are stimulating the PC receptors.
This knowledge could be useful for tactile feedback in music interfaces .
In both stimuli participants expressed vibrating experiences.
Expressions for the 16Hz stimuli included references to a certain pulse/rhythm of vibration  and were associated with small and clearly defined concepts .
For the 250Hz participants expressed their tactile experiences with references to something moving and associated it with broader concepts .
Although our system was using air pressure with noncontact stimuli, 5 out of 14 and 8 out of 14 participants described physical experiences for the 16Hz and 250Hz stimuli respectively.
The 16Hz stimulus was amongst others related to touching thin material .
The 250Hz stimulus was described with a broader sensation of physicality and materiality .
Participants used strong physically related expressions for the 16Hz stimulus: "feels like I'm maybe holding onto something"  or "it feels more solid" .
For the 250Hz stimulus one said, "It just feels more physical... it feels like I can sort-of push down" .
The verbalizations for these categories were not dominating the categorization however provide quite clear insights on the differences of the perceived physical experiences.
The 250Hz stimulus seems to be more dispersed  and `strong', so participants feel an uneven wall or piece of foam, while the `softness' of air and the `weakness' of the 16Hz stimulus gives rise to references of thin or perforated materials.
The `solid' or `holding on to something' feeling arises as the RC receptor is responsible for skin motion to detect slip between object and skin, generating a perception of holding an object.
H-E-Vocabulary: These results suggest that words referring to soft materials and textiles such as `soft brushes' or `muslin' are stimulating the RA receptors of the hand whereas words indicating larger, physical surfaces such as `wall' or `piece of foam' are stimulating the PC receptors.
This knowledge can be useful for stimulating specific physical experiences and reaffirms work by Kildal  demonstrating that one can create a button-press illusion on a rigid surface through vibrations below the surface.
The verbalization difference in the physical properties of the two stimuli can explain why Mousette  noted that "hard does not always feel exactly hard"  when qualifying haptic experiences like relative hardness.
One possible explanation for the different expressions could be the user is being stimulated at different frequencies and thus feeling sensations corresponding to different mechanoreceptors.
Participants localized the two tactile experiences on their hand or fingers differently.
The 16Hz stimulus was described to be `localised', `focused' or `reaches a point of focus' while the 250Hz stimulus was expressed to be dispersed and described as `like across the whole hand', `across my palm and fingers' or `not focused'.
Based on the participants' verbalizations, the 16Hz tactile experience is likely to guide participants around and provide them different points of attention  while the 250Hz is dispersed and less precise in indicating positions on the human hand .
These experiences relate to the receptivefield size and distribution of the receptors.
The RA receptor  has a smaller receptive field and has distinct borders allowing for better localization compared to the PC receptor , which has a larger receptive field and has indistinct borders limiting its ability to localize .
H-E-Vocabulary: This suggests that words referring to precise locations such as `localized' or `centralized' are stimulating the RA receptors of the hand whereas words indicating unclear positions such as `non focused' or `diffused' are stimulating the PC receptors.
This knowledge can be useful for example in navigation/way finder systems as an unobtrusive tactile aid to guide people through a city.
A very distinct difference between the two stimuli was found in the participants' verbalizations of the availability of the tactile stimulation.
The 16Hz stimulus was described as `coming and going', `not constant', and perceived at different locations.
One participant described the 16Hz as "I feel like dancing ... getting ... finding where it is and then losing it again" .
In contrast, the 250Hz stimulus was experienced as always accessible, nothing which needs to be hunted for, as it is like "a static stream - can't feel it changing" .
This is either because the 16Hz experience is close to the threshold of the RA receptor, so some participants feel it coming and going, or that the receptor is responsible for skin motion to detect slip between object and skin, generating a perception of movement.
The PC receptor is responsible for high frequency vibration and has a much lower threshold at 250Hz thus participants are always able to feel the stimulus.
H-E-Vocabulary: This suggests that words referring to altering movements such as `coming & going' or `dancing' are stimulating the RA receptors of the hand whereas words indicating constant movements such as `stream' or `not changing' are stimulating the PC receptors.
This can be useful for improving the interaction in games, for instance providing accelerator feedback in a racing game through 16Hz and 250Hz tactile stimuli for the steering wheel.
Participants described the 16Hz stimulus as `very very subtle', `difficult to detect', or `quite faint'.
Its weakness was further expressed as "didn't have much kind-of power in it to sort-of create a strong sensation in any way really" .
In contrary, the 250Hz stimulus was described with respect to its powerful character, including expressions such as `pushing' or `it seems quite forceful'.
To specify the strong experience participants described it as "kind-of bad hand dryer in terms of its strength" .
One participant related it to the hand as such: "like if I splay my fingers it kind-of seems to go through my fingers as if it had, youknow, capacity to go further than the box, that it's contained within" .
Comparing both tactile experiences, the 16Hz stimulus was lacking strength, and requested a higher level of attention: "It wouldn't grab my attention" .
This matches the sensitivity of the receptors; RA receptor although localized has a much lower sensitivity so is felt as weak and sporadic while the PC receptor has higher sensitivity so is felt as being strong and persisting.
H-E-Vocabulary: These results suggest if you keep the physical intensity of the tactile stimuli the same, words referring to weak intensity such as `faint' or `subtle' are stimulating the RA receptors of the hand whereas words indicating strong intensity such as `powerful' or `forceful' are stimulating the PC receptors.
One should note that the perceived intensity of a stimulus varies across frequencies.
Although the described tactile experiences are somewhat different, it is still difficult to distinguish them.
These particular tactile experiences, also known as paraesthesia sensations , are challenging, as neuroscientists are still trying to understand the physiological mechanism of paraesthesia .
16Hz frequency range and stimulates the Meissner corpuscle receptor.
Our H-E-Vocabulary described in the previous sections provides further examples on the verbalizations used by participants for tactile experiences and can be further explored in relation to other efforts for designing haptic interactions .
The H-E-Vocabulary not only provides to talk about haptics but also identifies haptic sensations that can be created by each receptor and relates them to the receptor's features .
A haptic software development toolkit can be created from this vocabulary.
Such a toolkit could provide API calls for each of these high-level tactile experiences in the H-EVocabulary, and relate them to the features of the signal required to recreate them.
As a result, programmers could describe tactile experiences at a high level, making them accessible to visual programming languages like Flash.
Based on our analysis, we can however provide insights on the participants' verbalizations for the two tactile stimuli, which we classified as `Prickly'  and `Tingling'  in our overall categorization.
Descriptions for the 16Hz stimulus were more focused on the `palm'/`pad and in the center' , while for 250Hz the experiences were described as more dispersed across the whole hand including the palm and fingers .
One participant further associated the 16Hz sensation with the prickly experience after you got a cramp in your arm: "it's the good feeling when the blood starts pushing through again" .
While the 250Hz the tingling experience was still associated with a numb experience: "when your palm is going to sleep or your hand is going to sleep or something if you've been lying on it funny" .
The differences between the two stimuli can be seen in their localization on the human hand.
250Hz is related to a larger area , while 16Hz stimulates smaller parts of the human hand, such as at specific parts of the palm .
Stimulating the RA and PC receptors individually seems to give rise to paraesthesia experiences.
Paraesthesia is associated with similar nerve fibres that innervate the mechanoreceptors .
This would mean that it is possible to artificially stimulate prickly and tingling by using air within the frequencies range of the two receptors.
H-E-Vocabulary: These results suggest that participants use words such as `pins and needles' or `prickly' more for the lower frequency  that stimulates the RA receptor whereas words such as `tingling' or `ticklish' are more used for the higher frequency , which stimulates the PC receptor.
This knowledge can be useful in health-related work .
Here we presented the results of a user study that used a specific interview technique to elicit the structure of tactile experiences related to two specific  receptors in the human hand.
Our analysis of the verbalizations resulted in 14 categories of tactile experiences and revealed that users are able to verbalize their tactile experiences specific to the receptors stimulated.
We are able to identify several opportunities to support the design of haptic systems for tactile experiences.
The methodology used  to elicit the H-E-Vocabulary can be used to identify verbalizations for other parts of the body and for the other mechanoreceptors and thermal receptors .
Future studies can validate the vocabulary and extend it with richer qualitative descriptions.
We thank the members of the Pervasive Media Studio for hosting the workshop, particularly Tom Carter, David Coyle, and Beatrice Cahour for their support and valuable comments, and the participants for taking part in this study.
We can draw several implications for the design of haptic systems using non-contact tactile sensations from this paper.
The participants used nuanced and consistent choice of words to describe the different tactile experiences from each stimulus.
This allowed us to explore participants' words further, which can be expressly mapped to specifically stimulated mechanoreceptors and thereby tying back their verbalizations to specific tactile feedback.
