Search engines help their users decide which results to visit using captions comprising titles, URLs, and snippets containing the query keywords and proximal text from landing pages .
Although caption content can be a key factor in these decisions, snippets provide only basic support for orienting users with landing page content from the search-engine result page , and no support during the transition to landing pages or once users reach the page following a selection decision.
As a result, many searchers must employ inefficient strategies such as skimming and scanning the content of the landing page.
In this paper we propose a novel method, called clickable snippets, to address this shortcoming.
Clickable snippets provide searchers with a direct and actionable link between SERP captions and landing-page content.
We describe a user study comparing clickable snippets with extant methods of orientation support such as query-term highlighting on the landing page and thumbnail previews on the SERP.
We show that clickable snippets are preferred by participants, and lead to more effective and efficient searching.
Our findings have implications for the design of the user experience in search systems.
In response to search queries, Web search systems typically display lists of search result captions comprising surrogate information.
The captions may have titles, document snippets containing query terms and their context from the landing page, and URLs.
The captions are optimized to facilitate result selection decisions and the development of better snippets has been researched extensively .
However, if searchers base result selection decisions on snippets, it is likely that they will want to pursue snippet content on the landing pages .
Beyond supporting result selection, search systems must also help searchers situate or orient themselves within results they visit.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
There is some limited support for search-result orientation.
Browsers offer find-in-page  functionality, but this is seldom used and training users to adopt this support is difficult .
Snippets provide some clues about the context of the keywords, but the association between the snippet text and its location in the document is often unclear and does not persist during the transition since searchers are always taken to the top of the landing page.
Query-term highlighting is offered on landing pages via search toolbars, or search engine cached pages, but the relationship with the snippet text that motivated the click may be unclear and users may miss it, especially if they spend only a little time reviewing pages .
Users may also find such highlighting distracting and obtrusive .
Passage highlighting has been explored, but not in terms of SERP-to-landing page transitions .
Thumbnail previews  can offer a condensed snapshot of the landing page, sometimes augmented with the location of the snippet .
However, the previews may only be used to assess the overall relevance or visual appeal of landing pages  and these provide limited support for the transition between SERP and landing page, requiring users to remember where on the page the snippet occurred.
To address the shortcomings of existing approaches, we developed a technique called clickable snippets that supports orientation at different phases of search result examination.
It adds an affordance to SERP snippets giving users the option to click snippet text and transition to it on the landing page .
The transition occurs immediately or gradually , with the goal of the latter reinforcing the relationship between the clicked snippet text and the landing page content.
We conjectured that clickable snippets may help people more easily locate information of interest on landing pages.
Once searchers transition to a landing page, they need to locate the particular information of interest.
To support this, search engines provide query-term highlighting in browser toolbars and cached pages in result lists.
The use of highlights for reviewing and recall of specific information has been suggested in many systems, studies of which have typically found users are faster with highlighting than without .
They found that highlighting related passages captured more fixations and resulted in more accurate answers than keyword or no highlighting.
Google Quick Scroll , an extension for the Chrome browser, disseminates passage highlighting more broadly.
On landing pages visited via a Google SERP the system highlights and scrolls to snippets shown on the SERP.
However, this does not help orient the user on the SERP nor in the initial landing-page transition.
The most widely available support for orientation on landing pages is Web browsers' find-in-page  functionality.
Although people regard this as an advantage of electronic documents, they rarely use the feature .
Beyond highlighting, others have studied methods such as the application of relevance profiles or text segmentation to find relevant content in documents.
ProfileSkim  computes a relevance score for each section and provides overview and within-document navigation options that highlight the most relevant parts of the document.
This support is only offered once the user navigates to the document and does not help with the transition between SERP and landing page.
Carracciolo and de Rijke  developed a "go-read-here" retrieval functionality, which points users to a segment where they can best start reading to learn about the topic of interest.
However, their focus was on text segmentation technology rather than the user experience, as we focus on here.
Our research extends previous work in a number of ways.
First we focus on orientation during the search process, not just the estimation of relevance from SERP content.
Second, we propose clickable snippets, a novel method for orientation during search result examination.
Third, we focus on support for orientation at all three phases of result examination: on the SERP, during the transition to the landing page, and on the landing page.
Finally, we perform a comparative evaluation of different orientation support methods, including term highlighting and SERP result previews, both of which are offered by current search engines.
There are four relevant areas of prior research to this study: result summarization, previewing and transitioning to landing pages , highlighting terms and snippets on landing pages, and finding relevant landing-page content.
When examining search results, users need some amount of information about each result to decide whether or not they should visit it.
Snippets showing sentence fragments matching one or more query terms have become popular and have been found to be useful for search tasks  and in information access interfaces in general .
Despite their promise, result snippets are typically short, terse, and incomprehensive.
Visualizations of result pages have been proposed to aid selection decisions.
TileBars , for example, simultaneously and compactly indicate relative document length, query term frequency, and query term distribution.
The patterns in a TileBars column can be quickly scanned and deciphered, aiding users in making judgments about potential result relevance.
Thumbnails have also been examined to provide additional information about the content of landing pages.
The enhanced thumbnails, including various treatments such as highlighting and magnifying keywords, led to faster search completion times across several task categories.
Their findings suggested that text snippets help find unseen pages and thumbnails help re-find pages for which users have seen the thumbnail.
However, showing only thumbnails, with no text information, resulted in poorer performance than showing only textual summaries.
While providing thumbnails can give users a general feel of a page's layout with respect to a set of search terms, it does not provide detailed content.
This allows more results to be shown and richer, more context-filled snippets to be selectively revealed, helping users make better decisions about which results to visit directly from the SERP.
The authors found participants preferred the system to static result lists.
Beyond search, Zellweger et al.
The only difference with traditional results is that the snippet text has an additional affordance that allows users to click and be taken directly to that text in the document.
For discoverability, we convey this affordance to users by underlining the snippet text as though it were a hyperlink .
Note that only the snippets with matching content are underlined.
If a snippet does not appear in the landing page, it is not underlined on the SERP and is not clickable.
There are a number of reasons for snippet mismatches, including if the snippet is based on the HTML META description tag or updates to page content since the engine last crawled it.
For the queries used in our study described later, snippets were underlined for 61% of the results on the SERP.
Transition: There is either an immediate or a gradual transition from SERP to landing page.
In the former case, the landing page is automatically scrolled to the part of the page containing the clicked snippet text and displayed to the user.
In the latter case, the transition is performed as a fluid sequence of fades and layer moves.
As Figure 2 illustrates, there are four stages to the transition:  isolate the snippet and fade out other captions;  scroll the landing page so that the snippet text is visible in the viewport ;  move the snippet so it overlays its source on the landing page; and  reveal the landing page by fading it into view while at the same time fading out the snippet.
The gradual transition takes under two seconds.
It is designed to clarify the relationship between the snippet and the content.
RQ1 : Which type of orientation support from the SERP is most effective and most positively perceived?
We study three methods:  basic ;  previews ; and  clickable snippets .
RQ2 : Which type of orientation support from the landing page is most effective and most positively perceived?
We study three methods:  none ;  keyword highlighting ; and  snippet highlighting .
RQ3 : Which type of orientation support during the SERP-to-page transition is most effective and most positively perceived?
We examine three methods:  basic ;  gradual ; and  immediate .
This system is similar to Baseline, but offers a preview of the landing page on the SERP to the right of a result caption when a user hovers on it and clicks a chevron  shown adjacent to the caption after a short delay.
The preview provides an image of the landing page which is similar in size to the preview currently offered on Google SERPs .
To answer the questions, we performed a within-subjects experiment.
Participants completed two distinct tasks on each system, for a total of 12 tasks per participant.
Each task consisted of a question, a fixed query, and 10 results.
The results originated from a commercial search engine, were scraped before the start of the study, and fixed for all participants.
The correct answer was present in exactly one result.
No questions were answerable with only the SERP snippet text.
The search experience screening helped ensure that participants were familiar with current search engine technology.
Participants completed an entry questionnaire that elicited limited demographic information and background about their search experience.
We also asked about how they oriented themselves on landing pages .
Participants completed the study using a computer outfitted with an eye tracker.
Each study lasted one hour.
Before each experiment began, the experimenter gave a written overview of the study and then calibrated the eye tracker.
Participants then attempted the tasks using the appropriate systems in a pre-determined order.
For each system, participants were given a description of its features, an example SERP to see how it worked, the two assigned tasks, followed by a questionnaire qualifying their experience on the system, including eliciting a relative ranking all of the systems they had used up to that point.
For each task , participants were instructed to find the answer to a question given the fixed SERP or to abandon if they believed they could not complete, but had spent a reasonable amount of time searching.
Participants provided answers through a study dialog.
They were then asked to complete a questionnaire about the task.
At the end of the study, participants completed a questionnaire providing summary feedback on the systems, including a final system ranking, an explanation for it and suggested improvements.
So as to not reveal too much about how they varied, we used pseudonyms comprising a random color and a name  to refer to the systems in experimental materials.
We wanted to assign representative Web search tasks.
To do this we started with a week of query-click logs from the Bing search engine  and manually selected informational queries, associated with an informationacquisition intent , that we believed would make interesting tasks.
To identify candidate informational queries, we favored frequent queries with high click entropy  since they are likely to be informational in nature .
We focused on informational queries since they often describe search scenarios where a particular answer is being sought, which is when orientation support may be helpful.
A total of 12 tasks were identified from the set of candidate informational queries.
Figure 6 has an example task.
To control experimental variability, we fixed the initial query for each task so that it could not be modified.
At most one of the results in the top-10 contained the exact answer to the question.
For some queries, we also adjusted the ordering of the result lists so that the page with the answer was distributed over the ranks across search tasks, ameliorating the ef-
Gaze position was recorded with respect to the upper left-hand corner of the landing page approximately every 16 milliseconds, facilitating accurate estimates of saccades and fixations on the page.
To counteract effects related to the position of the answer on the landing page, we divided the tasks into two categories: for half the tasks, the answer to the question required the landing page with the answer be scrolled ; for the other tasks, no scrolling was necessary.
Around 7-8 result captions were shown on the SERP before participants needed to scroll.
We now present the findings of our study.
Parametric and non-parametric statistical testing is performed where appropriate, with = 0.05 unless otherwise stated.
Bonferroni corrections adjust to reduce the likelihood of Type I errors, i.e., incorrectly rejecting null hypotheses, by dividing by the number of variables.
Five-point scales are used to measure preferences, with a higher rating indicating more agreement with attitude statements.
In total, four surveys were created:  entry ,  task ,  system , and  exit .
The experiment was controlled by a study interface that guided participants through the steps of the experiment.
For each task, participants were given the description and a button to open the task interface in a new window.
This contained a navigation bar with "Back" and "Forward" buttons, the system description, the task question, an area to place the answer, and a "Done" button.
Below the bar was the SERP containing results for the task's fixed query.
Participants were allowed to visit the results freely, but links on the landing pages were disabled, preventing participants from diving deeper into the host site.
Once they found the answer, they were instructed to fill in the answer box and click the "Done" button, bringing them back to the main study interface.
Participants could use the find-in-page functionality using the Ctrl-f shortcut or via the browser File menu, which was made visible.
To avoid biasing behavior, we did not explicitly remind participants about find-in-page.
All pages were prefetched before the study to remove landing-page variability.
At the outset of our studies we wanted to understand how people oriented themselves during search result examination.
As part of the entry questionnaire we described titles, snippets, and URLs and asked participants: How useful do you generally find each of these in deciding which result to select?
The response options were on a five-point scale ranging from very useful  to not useful at all .
The responses, summarized in Table 1, reveal that participants considered the titles and the snippets similarly useful, and more useful than URLs.
Next we wanted to understand how users transitioned from a SERP to landing pages.
Unlike titles , snippets are drawn directly from landing pages.
We therefore wanted to understand:  if searchers sought out snippet content on landing pages , and  if so, how they located snippet content on landing pages.
We asked participants: How often do you attempt to find text from a result caption on that result's landing page?
Response options: never, for some searches, for about half of my searches, and for almost all my searches.
We used JavaScript embedded in SERPs and landing pages to log behavior such as clicks and cursor movements.
We also manually marked up the landing pages, including adding keyword highlighting, snippet highlighting, and the bounding box of the answer passage .
We did this manually to ensure correctness and isolate the effect of the orientation methods.
We asked participants to describe in free text how they find snippet content on landing pages.
By not listing possible methods, we avoided biasing their opinions.
We received a range of responses .
We hand-coded the responses and identified two emergent themes:  direct, where people use the browser find-in-page functionality, and  indirect, where people scan or skim-read the page, leveraging headings and section breaks.
The percentage of participants who reported using each strategy is summarized in Table 2.
Note that eight participants did not respond to this question and two provided spurious responses, which were dropped.
The findings suggest that direct navigation on the landing page is fairly common, but not as common as indirect navigation.
Skimming and scanning is inefficient and since users often make rapid Web page assessments  indirect navigation may lead to missed answers.
Searchers may benefit from rapid direction to relevant landing-page regions.
We now report our findings along different analysis dimensions related to our three research questions.
We compare the six different systems using a repeated measures analysis since it is potentially more powerful than an independent measures analysis of the three system groups, and allows for a finer-grained comparison of different systems at each orientation phase.
We begin with participant perceptions.
Responses are summarized in the top two rows of Table 3 .
Baseline, TermHighlighting, and SnippetHighlighting all performed similarly .
This was expected since there were no differences in the SERP presentation method for these three systems.
The strong performance of the clickable snippets systems may be because they underlined the snippet text present on the page  clarifying what they would see before they went to the page .
ThumbnailPreview was most effective at setting expectations before visiting the page  = 15.87, p < 0.01; all : Z  2.52, all p < 0.01 .
We analyzed participant responses to the system questionnaire.
In addition to asking people for their responses to attitude statements, we also asked them to describe the features that they liked best and least about each system.
We present quotes from participant responses to those questions when we believed that they may help explain the findings.
We also asked participants specifically about the transition between SERP and landing page using Likert scales and these statements:  The system helped you transition between search results and landing page;  The transition assisted you in locating relevant information on the landing page; and  There was a clear association between the information you saw in a result caption and the result's landing page.
Participants preferred being taken to the snippet rather than the top of the landing page and the gradual transition was favored over immediate  even though it took longer.
This may be because it more clearly connected snippets with the landing page, as evidenced by the comments .
The results show preference differences between the four systems with the basic transition strategy .
Support on the SERP and the landing page may help transitions without supporting them directly.
The results show that:  SnippetHighlighting and ThumbnailPreview helped users transition more than other systems  whereas the TermHighlighting system performed worse than the others , and  SnippetHighlighting helped users locate relevant information and established clearer associations between captions and page content .
Once users clicked on a result caption, they were taken to the landing page.
We now focus on their experience once they reached that page.
We asked participants:  How easy was it to determine if a landing page was useful for a task?
Participant responses are summarized in rows 6-7 of Table 3.
Mirroring previous work , we found that highlighting all query terms on the landing page was obtrusive; 60.4%  found the term highlighting distracting .
In the system questionnaire for the highlighting systems we asked whether participants noticed the highlights.
91.7% of participants reported noticing term highlights, and 75.7% noticed snippet highlights.
We also asked participants about the utility and the obtrusiveness of highlighting.
As the ratings in Table 3 show , participants found term highlighting more obtrusive than snippet highlighting, perhaps because there were often a large number of highlighted query terms on the landing page   = 14.70, p < 0.01; all Z  2.30, all p  0.01.
The results also show that participants found snippet highlighting systems more useful than TermHighlighting or no highlighting, perhaps because it drew their attention to the part of the page containing the information they sought when they clicked the search result.
On the SERP we focused on clicks on the titles, clicks on the snippets , and the use of the thumbnail previews.
The average number of clicks on SERP titles on systems not offering additional assistance on the SERP was 2.86 .
When clickable snippets were available, the total number of clicks was similar , but clickable snippets cannibalized title clicks: 28.3% of result clicks from SERPs to landing pages come from clickable snippets.
The average number of result previews viewed per task in ThumbnailPreview was 7.61 .
Two statistics are worth computing:  the total number of unique page visits on each system and  for clickable snippets, the fraction of successful clicks on the titles versus snippets.
The former captures the effect of preview strategy on page selections and the latter helps gauge the benefit to users of engaging with the snippets.
The number of page views for each system is shown in the first row of Table 4.
The findings show that the total number of landing page views is slightly higher in the systems that do not offer additional orientation support on the SERP, although the differences are not significant with one-way analysis of variance   = 0.99, p = 0.42, = 0.01.
Comparing clickable-snippetclick versus title-click outcomes, we see that when participants clicked on titles they found the correct answer  for 69.2% of clicks, whereas clicking on a clickable snippet increased task success to 80.1%.
When participants transitioned to the landing page via a snippet, they were more likely to find the answer  = 9.44, p = 0.003.
Further support was obtained via the phi correlation  between whether the snippet was clicked  and whether the participant found the answer on the page .
The value of was 0.81, signifying a strong relationship between clickable snippet use and task success.
We computed a number of features of user interaction with the landing page, averaged per landing page: * Scan path length: Total distance traveled by the eye when examining the landing page .
Since our eye tracker recorded gaze positions 60 times per second, microsaccades were also included in the scan path length.
The values for these features for each system are shown in the last four rows of Table 4 .
In combination, these measures provide an estimate of the amount of effort users employed to find information on landing pages.
The post-hoc tests show no difference between the two clickable snippets systems for any features .
In contrast, the highlighting strategy affected a number of aspects of search interaction.
Other differences between SnippeHighlighting and other systems were not significant.
In contrast, TermHighlighting appeared to have a negative effect on participants' interactions with the landing page: Table 4 shows that scan path length, total number of fixations, and the time to the first fixation on the answer passage were all longer with TermHighlighting, signaling that participants may have experienced difficulty in locating information on the landing page   3.56, all p < 0.001.
ThumbnailPreview led to longer gaze trails than all systems other than TermHighlighting , a similar time to fixate on the answer passage as the baseline , and a longer time than the other systems , even though it provided an indication of where the relevant content resided on the landing page.
Participants were more focused on using the previews to obtain a general sense of landing-page layout  and quality  rather than where the snippet appears in the landing page and remembering that location during the transition.
As well as studying how participants perceived the systems and their engagement, we were also interested in system effects on task completion.
We were specifically concerned with the following:  whether they reached a landing page that contained the answer;  the time from the start of the task until they visited the relevant landing page;  the duration of the task ;  how successful they believed they were in finding the answer; and  the actual correctness of their answer.
The correctness of the participants' answers was determined by an experimenter who reviewed the responses provided.
Overall 66.5% of tasks were answered correctly, and participants believed that 72.0% of answers were correct.
Table 5 shows the task completion metrics for each system .
McNemar's chi-squared and exact tests are used for the binary variables .
ThumbnailPreview led users to a similar percentage of pages with the answer as were visited in the two clickable snippets systems  .
There were no differences between the clickable snippets systems  suggesting that the transition had no effect on task outcomes.
Turning attention to the highlighting strategy on the landing page, we see that TermHighlighting resulted in longer tasks  = 3.85, p = 0.002; Tukey tests: p < 0.01, perhaps because it was distracting, as was suggested earlier.
Tasks with SnippetHighlighting took longer than with the clickable snippets systems and participants were less successful.
This suggests that the better performance of the clickable snippets was not only due to the highlighting, but also the preview and transition orientation strategies.
Observed differences in whether participants visited answer pages for each of the systems emphasizes the importance of the text on SERPs in directing users toward relevant pages.
However, reaching an answer page does not guarantee the correct answer will be located on that page.
To test this we computed the fraction of occasions where a user found the correct answer after reaching an answer page .
The values show that while reaching an answer page helps, there is a significant gain in answer correctness beyond helping people reach answer pages  = 16.82, p = 0.005; all Z  2.45, all p < 0.001.
This demonstrates the practical value of clickable snippets and suggests that the transition support may be primarily responsible for the observed gains in task performance from the clickable snippets systems.
This also suggests many answers may have been near the snippet text in the landing pages.
66.7%  ranked one of the clickable systems in their top two.
This shows a clear preference for this type of orientation support.
Interestingly, the gradual clickable snippets system is preferred more than the immediate clickable snippets system, despite the transition delay .
Beyond clickable snippets, the findings show SnippetHighlighting was preferred over TermHighlighting or no highlighting systems .
In addition, the post-hoc testing shows there was no significant difference between TermHighlighting and ThumbnailPreview, the two commonly used orientation systems, although both ranked above Baseline , which only four participants favored.
In open feedback about clickable snippets, participants liked the transition , including its gradual nature.
They also liked how it emphasized the connection between the SERP and the landing page, being shown where on the landing page the snippet appeared, and the guidance on where to look on the landing page.
Some participants did not like the delay in the animation and preferred the immediate transition .
However, more participants found directness of the transition disorienting .
The main findings from this study are that participants: 1.
Frequently wanted to locate snippet text in the landing page  .
Reported often using skimming/scanning to locate information on landing pages .
Felt that previews gave them a better idea of what to expect but did not help them navigate to content of interest from the SERP .
Preferred and were more effective with snippet underlining than other SERP orientation methods .
Preferred and were more effective with snippet highlighting compared to term highlighting and no highlighting, and found term highlighting to be particularly obtrusive when used on landing pages .
Preferred gradual transitions from snippet click to page over immediate transitions  and basic transition  .
At the end of the study, participants were asked to provide a final ranking of the six systems they had used in terms of their overall preferences.
As noted earlier, participants ranked systems progressively, incrementally adding a new system to the overall ranking after they had used it .
Participants had to rank systems in descending order of preference; no facility was provided for ties.
The final relative rankings  are summarized in Table 6.
Our findings show participants preferred and were more effective with the clickable snippets systems.
Of the two clickable-snippet variants, almost twice as many participants preferred the system with the gradual transition, which made the relationship between the SERP and landing page more obvious and was less disorienting than the immediate transition, according to participants.
However, the gradual transition requires additional time for the animation and more research is needed to fully understand the effect of transition time on preference and performance.
We manually identified relevant regions in the landing pages to help separate the evaluation of clickable snippets from its implementation.
A deployed system, however, requires automatic snippet-content matching that can match snippets spanning multiple HTML elements, different document types, dynamic pages, and ill-formed HTML.
Access to search engine crawling and indexing infrastructure may also assist in addressing some of these challenges.
Only 14.6%  of participants used find-in-page functionality on landing pages.
While we did permit the use of find-in-page, we did not include it as a baseline because:  the functionality could be applied in all systems, and its introduction could affect behavior on systems that followed, and  some of its functionality was already present in TermHighlighting.
The data we gathered does not allow a direct comparison of clickable snippets and find-in-page functionality; a separate controlled study is needed.
Although participants liked clickable snippets they suggested improvements by combining multiple orientation methods .
More work is needed to understand the costs and benefits of this technique for landing pages where scrolling is or is not required, as well as navigational and transactional tasks.
The methods described could also be expanded to blended and non-text search scenarios .
For example, for results represented on the SERP by video thumbnails, the search engine could offer single-click transitions to the exact frame depicted in the thumbnail, not just the start of the video as is current common practice.
Methods such as clickable snippets may also work well in mobile settings, where limited screen real estate could make landing-page orientation more challenging than on the desktop.
