ABSTRACT People are increasingly acquiring huge collections of digital possessions.
Despite some pleas for `forgetting', most theorists argue for retaining all these possessions to enhance `total recall' of our everyday lives.
However, there has been little exploration of the negative role of digital possessions when people want to forget aspects of their lives.
We report on interviews with 24 people about their possessions after a romantic breakup.
We found that digital possessions were often evocative and upsetting in this context, leading to distinct disposal strategies with different outcomes.
We advance theory by finding strong evidence for the value of intentional forgetting and provide new data about complex practices associated with the disposal of digital possessions.
Our findings led to a number of design implications to help people better manage this process, including automatic harvesting of digital possessions, tools for self-control, artifact crafting as sense-making, and digital spaces for shared possessions.
Possessions can also serve as critical symbols of self and relationships, with the result that collections of digital possessions need to be actively managed.
One context that demands active engagement with digital possessions is bereavement.
Here people cherish the departed's inherited digital possessions, feeling the need to organize them to honour the memories of their loved ones .
In contrast, in familial spaces, digital possessions seem to be less significant than their physical counterparts.
Digital possessions are less salient , less well integrated into family life, and do not seem to be cached for immersive reminiscing .
For these reasons, such digital possessions have been described as less evocative  serving more like commodities rather than things imbued with symbolic meanings .
As a result, in family settings people have a laissez faire approach to dealing with digital possessions, letting them passively accumulate on personal hard drives or in social media applications.
Although they are preserved, but not actively curated.
Both these approaches for handling digital possessions, laissez faire and active management, emphasize retention.
Most work on memory in HCI has also emphasized exhaustive capture of digital information, with the lifelogging approach arguing for the benefits of exhaustive recordings in supporting `total recall' .
As a result, the topic of forgetting and deletion of digital possessions has received much less attention.
One exception concerns pleas for `forgetting' to preserve privacy in ubiquitous computing .
However while many users see putative benefits to forgetting, they are also extremely resistant to actual deletion.
They want to avoid loss  and find it hard to `clean up' digital possessions, even though these are often poorly organized and valuable information difficult to find .
Autobiographical memories; sense of self; disposal; digital possessions; relationship dissolution; intentional forgetting.
Information interfaces and presentation : Miscellaneous.
INTRODUCTION People are now living more of their lives online, acquiring vast collections of digital possessions which we define as personal digital artifacts acquired through daily activities.
Digital possessions include photos, messages, music and videos, that are stored across multiple devices such as computers, phones, cameras etc.
Previous work has shown that such digital possessions can be imbued with symbolic meaning, or ensouled through appropriation and personalization .
They become extensions of the self, triggering attachment just like meaningful physical possessions .
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
This paper examines digital disposal and forgetting.
We looked at a situation in which people may be highly motivated to forget, namely a romantic relationship breakup.
Being in a relationship could be central to one's sense of identity, and separation may be experienced as a loss of one's sense of self.
Other work has begun to explore digital networking after a breakup where feelings are ambivalent or negative .
We wanted to examine people's attitudes to their digital possessions in a context where these possessions may serve as upsetting reminders of past events.
We interviewed people about their romantic breakup, asking them to characterize possessions related to it.
We addressed the following questions:  What types of digital possessions are relevant to romantic relationship dissolution?
Are they predominantly photos and videos as suggested in familial spaces, or are there other types that are specific to relationships?
What functions do such possessions serve in the breakup?
If they support reminiscing, does this interfere with the process of moving on?
What strategies do people use for managing possessions?
Do they tend to avoid deletion although the memories they trigger can be painful, or do they actually delete them?
How do people enact disposal practices?
Do they dispose impulsively or more deliberatively?
Do they delete everything or preserve treasured possessions?
Field et al  found that using the departed spouse's possessions to gain comfort prolongs grief symptoms, whereas merely thinking about fond memories can alleviate grief.
Divorce bears similarities to bereavement.
Both involve loss and the need to negotiate a new life, as well as complex decisions about how to deal with shared possessions that symbolize the relationship.
Sometimes divorce can be more difficult than bereavement, because of the ambivalent emotions that need to be processed.
McAlexander  explored the disposal of marital possessions following divorce and identified three strategies: break free, hold on, and dissolve ties.
In breaking free, the initiator intentionally discards valuable possessions to ritually end the relationship.
In holding on, the person resisting the divorce keeps possessions to ensure the maintenance of marital roles, while dissolving ties involves the equitable division of possessions.
Dissolving premarital romantic relationships bears strong similarities to the grief process involved in divorce.
Like divorce, it is a challenging life transition requiring reappraisal and sense-making.
Some of its negative outcomes include distress, depression and lack of self-concept clarity, while positive outcomes relate to opportunities for personal growth .
Shared possessions in romantic relationships are often significant gifts that may symbolize important moments in the relationship and are difficult to dispose of.
HCI has recently begun to tackle relationship dissolution.
Also relevant is literature on autobiographical memories addressing the role of emotions and self-relevancy in intentional forgetting.
We place this work in the context of research on life transitions and sense of self, examining disrupted relationships with significant others as a specific type of life transition.
We also review work on material culture and consumer research on the effects of possessions' disposal for one's sense of self.
Forgetting is an adaptive mechanism for limiting the impact of outdated past experiences on current ones , especially when such memories are emotionally rich  and selfrelevant, but discordant with the current self .
Reconstruing self-relevant autobiographical memories is particularly important during life transitions.
Self-relevant memories are woven into one's life narrative.
If central to self-identity such memories strongly resist forgetting.
Most research on material culture has focused on the acquisition of possessions to support the extended self, while the disposal of significant possessions has received less attention.
Disposal is often triggered by changes in self perception when possessions are associated with an undesired self  or no longer fit the ideal self .
The adaptive disposal of possessions in relationship dissolution, especially bereavement, often follows a creative process of craft or writing as sense-making.
Jacoby  developed a taxonomy of disposal behavior including retention, temporary relinquishment and permanent relinquishment.
Theories of life transitions focus on how significant events affect identity reconstruction .
Such reconstruction is challenged by the tendency to recall things supporting current identity, and to inhibit memories undermining it.
A particular type of life transition relates to disrupted relationships with significant others, through death, divorce or premarital relationship dissolution.
In these situations, adjustment to the loss of the loved one is stressful and emotionally charged and is usually captured by theories of attachment, stress, and grief .
Bereavement is conceptualized through the stage theory of grief  and recent work in grief therapy has shifted from an emphasis on breaking bonds with the deceased to continuing them.
Here, possessions become invested with symbolic value representing the deceased whose proximity is strongly sought, particularly in the initial stages of grief.
Most HCI work on interpersonal relationships has focused on positive aspects such as relationship forming and maintenance of intimacy .
There is a vast literature into online social networks' value in maintaining close ties, and for exchanging informal information .
Intense negative aspects such as relationship dissolution are indirectly addressed through life transitions such as divorce and bereavement .
HCI has been explored from the perspective of parent-child communications across post-divorce household and children's access to joint family cultures .
Designing for bereavement raises many issues from supporting bereaved parents , to continuing bonds with the deceased  or across generations .
They also emphasized the value of `letting go' of significant possessions for honoring the deceased and moving on.
This is, however, a reverential act, performed after careful reflection.
Odom  also suggested the need for rituals of putting digital possessions to rest, and that crude deletion of digital artifacts should be replaced with more graceful degradation usually employed with physical artifacts.
Odom and colleagues  described how bonds with the departed are maintained through digital communication, and how people invoke artifacts to reflect about the departed, or conceal them to avoid the negative emotions they elicit.
Such bereavement work has addressed negative aspects of possessions, but with a different set of emotions and issues than this paper explores.
Massimi and Baecker's bereavement work suggests the value of narrative and sensemaking for communicating feelings and expressing grief through meaningful artifacts .
Massimi et al focused on survivors' repurposing of digital artifacts into online memorials, and on how recovering from painful past experiences allows evolving aspects of self to emerge .
Other work has examined the problematic role of digital identity in abusive relationships where the abused wants to create a new identity that allows access to friends and family without surveillance and contact by an abusive partner .
The effects of social media on romantic breakup have recently begun to be explored.
Facebook can threaten romantic relationships, because a tantalizing lack of context in casual interpersonal interactions causes doubts about fidelity .
Breakup practices on Facebook are complex with reported difficulties in signaling changes in relationship status, removal of ex-partners from the friends list, and repeated surveillance  visits to the ex-partner's profile .
Unfriending is difficult as its online conventions have yet to be agreed, and digital traces of the relationship are persistent on Facebook, suggesting exhaustive removal although this is not always under one's control .
Participants reported on breakups related to relationships lasting 3-72 months, .
Overall quality of the relationships was average  and the breakup was generally negatively evaluated .
We selected this age group for three reasons: they are deeply interested in love and intimacy within friendships and romantic relationships; they belong to generation Y  which effortlessly exploits multiple technologies for work, leisure and everyday practices; finally both 6 months and one year are significant milestones in the grief process following conjugal bereavement and relationship dissolution.
Participants were happy to volunteer and highly involved in the interviews.
Participants were not married or cohabitating during the relationship.
We conducted semi-structured interviews to capture participants' experiences of relationship dissolution, and to examine the role of possessions in the process of moving on.
We asked about moving on: "How was your journey from the breakup until now?
What helped and what hindered this process?"
Participants were asked to show the possessions that were most relevant to the relationship.
We explored how these salient possessions served as mementos and the memories that they triggered: "do you still have photos from the relationship?"
In each case, we talked about digital and physical possessions: what participants had retained, disposed and why, feelings about the process and decisions they had made.
The interviews took place face to face at participants' residences or via Skype, to ensure participants were surrounded by the technologies that were ordinarily part of their lives.
The interviews were recorded, generating over 14 hours of audio that we fully transcribed.
The analysis involved standard inductive techniques of coding and thematic analysis.
A conceptual framework developed from prior literature provided initial categories, namely types and roles of possessions, strategies of dealing with them, i.e.
This was refined from interview data and new codes emerged, i.e.
The identified themes were discussed extensively between researchers to reach consensus.
RESULTS We now describe the various types of possessions relevant to relationship dissolution, together with their roles and critical functions.
We also describe strategies of disposal and the enactment of disposal practices.
This contrasts with previous findings on home mementos , where people place far stronger emphasis on physical objects.
However, it confirms other findings on teenagers' more strategic use of digital possessions , highlighting the importance of digital possessions in the lives of the young technology-savvy generation.
They are also pervasive distributed among a variety of devices, platforms and applications, hosted on PCs, mobile phones, web blogs, instant messenger services, emails and SNS.
We also computed percentages of items among all digital possessions, finding that collections of photos predominate across all devices , followed by SNS contacts , music collections , relationship status on SNS , email collections , text messages , mobile phone contact , and videos .
Less frequent were messages and posts on SNS, blog and micro-blog entries, archived IM and computer files .
Physical possessions feature mostly as romantic gifts , such as clothes, handmade jewelry; birthday and Valentine cards ; as well as some perfect gifts  .
Before the breakup possessions were valued because they:  facilitated awareness, intimacy and contact,  served as evocative triggers for reminiscing about shared experiences, communications and feelings, and  were tangible symbols of the relationship.
In contrast, after the breakup these functions all become problematic as we saw participants seeking to limit contact and awareness, suppress and control reminiscing, and achieve symbolic detachment.
Limiting contact and transforming self-presentation.
Limiting contact and awareness of the ex-partner was highly problematic.
Digital possessions were pervasive in participants' lives, almost compelling them to stay in touch.
To sever connections therefore demands radical action.
Communication technologies and social networking sites are designed to promote rapid, continual contact and connectedness.
Consequently they feature crude, unsophisticated methods for discontinuing contact, while the emphasis on continuous connection makes breakup particularly challenging.
Many participants reported severe problems in using common technologies such as Facebook during the breakup, such as P9's difficulties with an expartner who maintains ties with her family, hindering her efforts to move on: "Facebook doesn't help because he can still contact my family even if I don't speak to him.
He could get in contact with my little sister or auntie on Facebook.
That hindered  because every time I thought I had got to the point of moving on, something would happen that would take me back to square one ".
P2 also experiences difficulties with an ex-partner who is visible online but uncontactable: "I miss him.
His uploads on Facebook make me feel hurt.
What hurts are pictures with his new friends and new experiences, because I can see him but cannot talk to him.
I have thousands of questions in my mind but I cannot ask him".
Other problems related to stored messages, P13: "I deleted all emails; whether they were exchanged for studies or personal"; text messages, P1: "
Deleting all of the SMS texts from the phone"; because these led participants to repeatedly encounter traces of their ex-partner's communications.
Seeing messages presented a grave temptation to regress and reinitiate contact via a short communication, or more passively check an ex-partner's recent activities.
Participants were aware of these problems, although for some, these problems could only be resolved by irreversible measures, P13: "I deleted her number from my phone.
That took the longest and I'm better off not having it because at least now I can get drunk and not worry about having called to shout at her."
In addition, SNS presented problems because they featured not only self-presentation , but also relationship presentation conducted within joint networks of friends.
Digital possessions not only vary in the content they capture about the relationship but also in the roles they support:  Communications that express intimacy and connection, include:  records of conversations, i.e., email, IM, phone, SMS, and microblog messages;  contact information, i.e., ex-partner's phone number, email, and SNS profile;  relationship indicators usually on SNS.
Significant parts of the relationship were carried out online, so records of conversations, contact details and relationship status signals were all critical.
These could involve mundane interactions that acquired significance after the breakup.
Evocative symbols such as photos and videos; and emotional context for the relationship usually evoked by music.
Certain photos were evocative because they captured significant moments, and music tended to evoke intense emotions about the ex-partner .
Meta-aspects such as reflection about the relationship and breakup , i.e.
While possessions such as photos, videos, emails, text messages, computer files and SNS profiles confirm those identified in home spaces , we also found digital possessions specific to romantic relationships.
These can be public relationship indicators, i.e.
In the context of a breakup, the number and evocativeness of such possessions demand an active stance regarding disposal.
Most participants struggle not just with the loss of the partner, but also with the changes in their offline and online social networks, P16: "One major change was that my ex blocked my access to his friends on Facebook".
And as we have seen, online social networks currently offer few methods for gracefully handling this.
Participants were challenged in their ability to dispose of possessions with strong personal symbolic characteristics that were outside their direct control.
Participants also experienced serious problems with their digital possessions' power to evocatively remind.
Using common applications led them to encounter old photos, P9: "Pictures always let me remember some good memory and I tried to not look at them at all because good memories also link to a bad memory.
I do listen to them, and this hinders ".
Photos and songs provoke painful memories of events and intimacy.
Unlike the traditional predominantly positive view of possessions engendering positive reminiscing , in this situation our participants expressed strongly ambivalent feelings, P22: "I kept everything including pictures, videos and messages about her.
I do not look at them very often; sometime I feel sorrow but sometimes I feel happy when I see that beautiful time ."
Symbolic detachment: regaining one's sense of self.
Symbolic detachment is a response to the role of possessions  as extensions of self, and highlights the importance of disposal.
Disposal is critical when possessions evoke an undesired self  or no longer fit the ideal self .
Romantic breakup is a life transition requiring reevaluation of possessions from the old self, which influence the development of the new one.
Disposal plays a symbolic role in indicating a radical shift, P1: "Deleting everything was a kind of symbolic gesture of starting fresh as well as not having to look at it again ".
Few truly shared digital possessions, artwork and gifts.
Interestingly, unlike physical ones , we saw few examples of shared possessions and none of digital artwork.
Shared physical possessions are highly relevant in the case of romantic relationships, as emphasized in the divorce literature .
However with a few exceptions of shared blogs or music, we found no examples of complex negotiations around shared digital possessions.
A simple explanation is that digital possessions can be easily replicated, but since we found no accounts of such practices, more plausible is that partners do not have many shared digital possessions.
This contrasts with digital possessions in familial spaces where emotional disagreements between family members about how to curate digital collections indicate that these are genuinely shared .
Unlike previous work, we found few creative practices around digital possessions.
Our participants placed less emphasis on videos, and showed no evidence of artwork.
Among physical possessions, our findings also emphasized gifts  as relationship signals, to a larger extent than in studies of familial spaces.
However such gifts were rare in the digital context.
These outcomes open up new design opportunities for the creation of shared digital possessions and digital artwork capturing relationship symbolism.
Deleting everything eliminates contact awareness and reduces painful reminiscence.
Often performed immediately after the breakup, it provides space for dealing with loss and reconstruing identity , P4: "Having photos on my phone and computer did cause me to feel sad, but I immediately removed them after the breakup, in order to move on"; P7: "I got rid of all the things that were common between the two of us."
Disposal on SNS is particularly problematic because of limited control over the self-relevant material.
Deleters therefore had to untag rather than delete photos owned by others, P6: "Some pictures were untagged from Facebook because you can't really delete them."
Other radical deleters' practices on SNS include immediate unfriending or blocking ex-partner's access to one's profile , immediate changing relationship status to single , as well as discontinuing online surveillance, P8: "We do not follow each other or have any sort of conversation or contact through any social media".
Deleters engage in total disposal practices either actively as described above, or passively through willful neglect, P5: "There are still some pictures on Facebook but it is not worth the effort to delete .
I lost some copies when my hard disk crashed"; P7: "I did not make the effort to delete text messages; when they get old, they leave the system automatically"; P8: "I lost all my messages when I changed phones."
Interestingly, there appears to be a larger range of practices for disposing of physical compared with digital possessions.
Thus, beside active disappearance through throwing away, and willful neglect, people also engage in destruction through burning physical possessions, P6: "Some of them were burnt in a bonfire"; and passing onto others, P6: "The gifts that he gave me were donated to the charity shop ".
Although highly beneficial immediately following the breakup, some deleters later regret disposing of everything, P15: "some books and music that he recommended would continually remind me of him.
I didn't keep these because I just felt it would not be productive for my attempts to move on with my life.
Now I wish I had kept them because they form an important part of my life."
Outcomes also confirm the importance of self-relevance of autobiographical memories in intentional forgetting.
This allows new memories related to the emerging self to overwrite previous ones P12: "I think the best way to forget is to gain new memories".
When deploying the disposal strategy, deleters engage in two forms of intentional forgetting, tackling:  both good and bad memories, P7: "I wanted to get rid of all of them", or  good memories only, often employed by the breakup initiator to reduce the guilt associated with it, P4: "I attempted to push aside any of the good memories of the relationship, and tried to focus on the bad memories in order to feel better about ending it".
Deletion enforces cutting ties and is particularly beneficial on a short-term basis, providing separation from continual contact and painful reminders, as well as allowing for sense-making, P7: "I have grown emotionally and understood how relationships work".
Its main limitation is that is often impulsive; deleters sometimes later regret failing to save mementos symbolizing a chapter of their life.
Future technologies may help address this limitation.
Here the aim is to strip the object of symbolic meaning leaving it imbued exclusively with its functional meaning, P18: "Yeah, I still wear , but now they don't have any meaning behind them, they are just things".
Whether they are visible or concealed, such possessions have compelling evocative power, acting as continual reminders that can disturb or hinder moving on, P10: "Pictures hindered my moving on, when I looked at them would make me remember him, I just try to not look at them now, but at the very beginning of the breakup I looked at them frequently.
This leads the romantic attachment to persist, which prolongs the grief process , P23: "When I noticed her updated blog about her new life I felt pity and envy".
New designs that allow keepers to better control the reminiscing triggered by digital possessions could be critical for addressing these problems.
Keepers tend to be biased in what they remember, recalling only good memories, thus idealizing the relationship, P10: "I ignore the bad memories and just keep the good memories"; P18: "I like to keep all good memories,  I blocked out bad memories and don't really remember them, I tried hard to do that."
Keeping was more common in those who were not the initiator of the breakup.
It also depended on when the relationship dissolved, being more frequent in the first 6 months.
A contrary approach is employed by keepers who preserve all their digital possessions, i.e.
They often engage in reminiscing, P23:"I have kept everything to remind me about our happy time".
Keepers also persist with similar practices on SNS oriented towards proximity and continual contact, including subtle online surveillance, P10: "I follow his Facebook and I still check it.
Treasured physical possessions about relationships are also preserved, P10: "Pictures are still in my computer and gifts in my room".
Interestingly, keepers also try to manage painful evocativeness of their possessions through concealment and the ritual of emotional disinvestment.
While kept possessions are often visible, sometimes they are concealed.
Concealment tends to be immediate and reversible.
Here keepers store possessions in inaccessible places to reduce their negative impact.
Some people developed sophisticated practices of deleting everything from its original location after performing a complete backup to a hidden folder, P22: "I deleted all the messages though I have backed them up.
I put all the digital material into a file and set as "Hidden ".
They exploited meta-data, to signal the importance of the folder, along with the warning to stay away.
Concealment may also involve storing digital possessions on dedicated but less accessible storage devices, P11: "I kept all the pictures of him and me on a USB stick.
A final adaptive hybrid strategy involves two phases: immediate discontinued use creating the emotional space needed for the moving on process.
Later it can involve selective disposal of unwanted digital possessions with the aim of reminiscing around a small core of preserved valued possessions.
Discontinued use of possessions retains potential accessibility, while limiting or preventing reminiscence, P19:"I didn't look at photos, just knew they were there".
Selective disposers also engage in limited use of SNS, P13: "I stopped using Facebook as much and so did she actually.
For sure, as those things are kind of intense."
Discontinued use is different from concealment.
Unlike concealment it leaves possessions in their place while allowing participants to dismiss them from their minds.
In contrast, concealment can involve a preoccupation with possessions, triggering reminiscing and maintaining bonds.
Selective disposers later identified a subset of digital possessions to be kept.
Being selective avoided regret experienced by others who were too radical in their disposal.
P15 asserted: "unfortunately, I was too impulsive at the time and threw everything out", while P14 expressed overt regret about disposing of a perfect gift: "I got lego.
There was a letter with it too.
But it really disrupted my recovery because it made me think he knew me and it reminded me of him.
So I had to get rid of it because it was too painful to see although some days I do regret throwing it out."
Deleting a vast retained collection can take the form of a separation ritual usually performed after careful deliberation, and only when the person feels ready for it.
This can be any time from 3 weeks to 8 months, P17: "I only deleted pictures of us this Christmas.
I didn't look at them, just knew they were there and chucked them away 8 months later.
I had to do that one day."
Such behaviour differs from deleters' total disposal because it is performed after deliberation, leaving the most valued possessions untouched for later reminiscing.
Selective disposers tend to remember both good and bad memories, P15: "I think I kept the good and the bad, and still do.
So when I did miss him, it was usually because I was reflecting on the good things about him and the great memories we made, but it was important to keep the bad memories as well to balance the good ones.
Selective disposal is arguably a more adaptive strategy; it resists the temptation to act impulsively, and defers dealing with possessions until one feels ready, allowing for the construction of a redemption narrative, P15 : "I'm glad I met him and glad we broke up.
He helped me figure out what I don't want or need in a relationship, so for that I am thankful".
This strategy requires new designs to facilitate active selection of highly valued possessions to be retained.
It does not seem to depend on the status of breakup initiator, quality of the relationship or time elapsed from dissolution.
Instead it may depend on the type of attachment , but more work is needed to explore this.
Apart from being time consuming, disposal is also emotionally taxing, since people often re-engage with possessions while they make clean-up decisions, especially when looking at photos.
Because of this, even for deleters who want to disengage completely with the partner, disposal is seldom exhaustive.
And one negative consequence of partial disposal is that participants stumble upon digital traces of the partner they thought they had already disposed of.
This could be very upsetting, P1: "
Occasionally finding things that I had missed throwing out or deleting: the odd email stored in Outlook on the computer I didn't often use or messages I missed on a social networking site I didn't use much."
Enacting disposal is even more complicated within SNS because of:  a lack of control over digital traces of the relationship - photos outside one's profile can only be untagged not deleted;  the tension of maintaining or deleting shared friends.
Retaining ties enables unwanted access to the ex-partner's activities or raises problems with friends taking sides.
Deleting friends disrupts one's already compromised social network;  reduced access to an entire social world.
By default this provides information about the ex-partner unless one takes steps.
Relationship status causes particular problems in explaining one's new status to acquaintances who do not know the breakup details.
More perniciously, digital accessibility makes it easier to "check up" on the other person, which can be either maladaptive, or positive if merely done to `see if they are ok'.
Access to status updates also facilitates ex -partners' surveillance possibly promoting attempts to get back in touch, which may slow the process of moving on.
Disposal strategies are enacted in different ways with different temporal, spatial and emotional characteristics.
These are all important considerations for design.
Strategies varied in the length of time elapsed from the breakup until enacting them.
Duration-wise, for some they were swift and cathartic; e.g.
Gradual disposal is difficult as it can mean protracted painful reminding.
While length of time elapsed is under the user's control, the duration of disposal, and its reversibility are critical for design.
While deletion is final, a hidden possession can later be permanently removed or reengaged with.
The spatial dimension relates to the location of the disposed possessions.
Some people created physical distance from possessions they wanted to disengage with, storing them with trusted others, such as parents or friends, or lodged in inaccessible locations, e.g.
Many others created social distance by removing digital traces from SNS.
If and when people decide to engage in disposal, they experience difficulties in enacting it.
This is because digital possessions are in vast collections spread across multiple devices, applications, web-services, and platforms.
When the relationship is good, this promotes a rich digital life.
But when it sours and people feel compelled to dispose, they have to systematically cull collections across multiple digital spaces.
Feelings can also influence disposal strategy choice.
Hurt or a desire for control can lead people to impulsively and permanently dispose of many traces of their ex-partner.
However, choice of strategy can also affect feelings directly; people who kept possessions accessible experienced painful reminding as they encountered these on a daily basis.
Those who chose radical deletion sometimes experienced later regret about their impulsive purging.
Others wanted to defer symbolic cleansing until they felt ready.
DESIGN IMPLICATIONS We now discuss the design implications of our findings.
We address the problems of vast, heterogeneous and distributed collections of digital possessions serving as painful reminders, and promoting involuntary rather than mindful interaction.
We also discuss the need to support active selection of valued possessions, and the value of digital craft for sense-making as an opportunity to move on.
In addition, the value of genuinely shared possessions is also addressed.
Or keepers could engage social support by specifying trusted friends as `gatekeepers' to be consulted before accessing evocative materials.
Finally, such tools might steer keepers towards building a new life by engaging them with new SNS posts from friends rather than surveillance.
A different design might help impulsive deleters.
Instead of permanently destroying materials they later want, deleters could self-impose a regime that would make the Pandora's box totally inaccessible for a long period, e.g.
They could then revisit their decision to `delete everything' following this cooling off period.
Together such self-administered systems may block impulsive behaviors creating much needed space for understanding the breakup, and for retrieving inaccessible content if later requested.
Having a vast, heterogeneous, and distributed set of digital possessions is considered an advantage in supporting memory and sense of self .
In contrast, we found that such possessions are problematic when they challenge a newly emerging self, and that their pervasiveness and sheer number hinder people's attempts to dispose of them.
One solution is to design new ways to automatically harvest digital material about the relationship, using face recognition, machine learning or entity extraction to generate a unified set of possessions about the relationship.
Being automatic allows collation without participants having to confront painful reminders.
The resulting collection could be metaphorically captured by the term Pandora's Box.
Participants could dispose of this as they choose, e.g.
We also need new tools for active selection from collections of digital possessions to create a treasure chest of valued items.
Very few participants succeeded in retaining a small set of highly valued digital possessions to facilitate positive reminiscing .
New tools might allow users to actively select  valued materials during and after the relationship.
For instance, automatically-generated meta-data such as photo viewings might implicitly identify valued materials.
Of course we would recommend that systematic attempts by users to identify valued materials be deferred until separation is well underway to avoid upsetting reminiscence .
Few participants were able to dispassionately evaluate digital possessions about the relationship to retain only the most valued ones.
A lack of disposal tools meant most participants either kept, or disposed of everything.
For keepers, confirming grief therapy , possessions hindered recovery, triggering upsetting reminiscence.
Deleters responded very differently: often regretting impulsive decisions to dispose of digital possessions because these were painful, pervasive reminders.
However automatically harvesting relationship possessions into a Pandora's box offers new choices for strategically deleting or retaining problematic possessions.
We propose new technologies for self-control, explicitly designed to help manage emotions and control rash impulses, preventing deleters from destroying valued possessions and keepers from obsessively revisiting them.
We might help keepers reduce the temptation to maladaptively re-engage by providing self-administered mechanisms to block direct access to the Pandora's box.
Although a few participants wrote blogs to make sense of their breakup, none created digital artwork symbolizing the relationship, although crafting is an important ritual for sense-making following trauma .
This suggests new technologies for crafting creative symbolic digital artifacts as alternative ways of processing grief.
Unlike the current "delete" option, they should emphasize slow transformation of the contents of the Pandora's Box.
During a sepa ration ritual, people might generate collages of photos or emails employing visual techniques to transform them into compelling abstract visualizations; or symbolic objects might be embodied in tangible artifacts which when held might issue sounds for mood enhancement.
By supporting separation rituals, these tools afford closure, celebrating the good, acknowledging the bad and helping moving on.
Participants showed us individual not shared possessions.
One apparent exception was SNS.
However on closer examination, one critical source of user problems was that on SNS people had individual profiles, rather than shared digital spaces.
This could open up a new design space of systems for creating truly shared objects sets from private repositories.
Possessions on SNS are particularly problematic when it comes to disposal , arising from their predominantly individual- not relationship-focus.
Designing dedicated spaces for a couple's shared digital possessions, through a relationship profile, would allow celebration of successful relationships.
In the case of dissolution, it could afford transition to singlehood, without the need for laborious extraction of traces of coupledom from individual profiles.
Such relationship spaces might also provide opportunities where partners might `vent' or tell their side of the story.
This may explain why their relationships are strongly reflected in digital rather than physical possessions.
Future work could explore the role of digital possessions in life transitions , such as a job resignation, imprisonment, asylum seekers or even retirement and relocation.
They might also explore when people bequeath something ambivalent or confining.
Traditionally, digital possessions were thought to have limited materiality  serving more like commodities than things imbued with symbolic meanings .
Instead, we found evidence of the pervasiveness of digital possessions in SNS and a large range of devices.
Digital possessions are directly integrated into young people's lives, unlike their limited integration in family life .
The widespread impact of SNS in their lives, through visible daily reminders of mundane and important events, is also suggested by .
Much previous work shows that people archive physical possessions for occasional reminiscing .
However, using digital possessions in a similar way has not often been found .
In contrast, we found some people actively saved sentimental digital possessions for later reminiscing, and experienced regret when they did not.
Consistent with  our participants' reactions indicated that in other contexts the same digital possessions can be powerful reminders of negative  memories that must be avoided at all costs.
Their evocativeness, visibility, pervasiveness, and above all strong yet no longer self-relevant symbolic meaning, gives digital possessions gravitas, making them as real as physical ones.
Digital possessions that engender negative reminiscing cannot be simply ignored; instead they demand attention and strategic disposal, arguably even more than physical possessions, e.g.
However, not all digital possessions are equally disposable, some may be retained and treasured when congruent with the current self; others are disposed of when they clash with that self.
This requirement for active disposal supports new findings  and differs from previous accounts of laissez faire curation of largely positive digital mementos .
It supports pleas for `intentional forgetting' of digital possessions .
However digital disposal is far from straightforward.
Some participants kept too much and were subjected to painful reminiscence.
Others impulsively deleted possessions they later wanted.
Yet others engaged in immediate discontinued use and later selective disposal.
Disposal was emotionally taxing because digital possessions are ubiquitous occurring across multiple devices.
When disposal occurred it was often associated with strong emotion and contained ritualistic elements.
This also begs the question of why digital possessions engender these emotions.
Pervasiveness of digital possessions creates problems during a breakup, as people `inhabit' their digital space, where photos and music, constantly remind them about their prior relationship.
In SNS they encounter traces of their ex-partner and have to clarify their new status to others.
Self-control is required to resist the temptation to engage in surveillance of their ex-partners.
Future work needs to examine `active forgetting' of digital possessions to understand its characteristics and what determines strategy choices.
Prior work focused predominantly on treasured possessions cueing positive memories of happy events, personal achievements, or loved ones.
Exploring digital possessions through the lens of significant, negative, self-relevant events revealed that retention was not always positive.
Exploring possessions for some was like opening a Pandora's box.
While work on bereavement has examined digital possessions within emotionally challenging contexts, such work has emphasized their role in maintaining ties, with disposal practices that are less destructive than we saw here .
This is not surprising as, although tragic, bereavement tends to celebrate the life of, and relationships with, the departed.
Our participants were young, with strong interests in romantic relationships and they spent much time within the digital space.
Whereas previous findings emphasize the roles of digital possessions in self-definition and self-presentation , or in representing family relationships , our findings highlight the role of digital artifacts in dyadic relationship symbolism.
The meaning of sharing raises challenging issues for digital possessions, bringing up ownership , authorship , and content .
CONCLUSION Our field study explored the challenges of digital possessions following a breakup.
Our findings led to a number of design implications that would help people better manage this process, including automatic harvesting of digital possessions, tools for self-control, artifact crafting as sense-making, and digital spaces for shared possessions.
The proposed design implications should help people convert what is currently a Pandora's Box into a treasure chest of memories, to more adaptively respond to the difficult life transition of relationship dissolution.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Sas was supported by the EC DESIRE  and Swedish Governmental Agency for Innovation Systems to the Mobile Life VinnExcellence Centre, in partnership with Ericsson, Microsoft, Nokia, IKEA and the City of Stockholm .
We are indebted to the study participants, and to Lancaster MSc in HCI students for gathering and transcribing the data: Bhojani, A., Charisovaite, C., Marshall, K., Ren, S., Tapley, D., and Wen, W. Whittaker was supported by a Google grant.
