Writing about emotional experiences has been shown to have long-term physical and mental health benefits, but it also creates short-term discomfort.
We designed a system to motivate expressive writing by enhancing enjoyment and pleasure.
Using automated language analysis, we designed a system that maps sound onto categories of language resulting in a musical interpretation of expressive writing texts.
An experimental design compared the experience of 126 participants across musical and non-musical writing platforms Participants found the musical system to be more pleasurable.
The textual nature of the expressive writing technique makes it well suited for application in digital technologies.
We found a web-based platform designed specifically for expressive writing to be an excellent mode of incorporating positive health practices into ubiquitous computing tools that already rely on text-based communication.
In building the system, we relied on a automated language analysis program to translate language into sound.
The Language Inquiry and Word Count system   is based on 72 different linguistic and psychological categories.
We could then examine whether language-to-music feedback promoted greater pleasure and more enjoyment in the system.
To test this system, we designed an experimental study that compared participants' reactions to an expressive writing interface without musical feedback with a system that provided musical feedback based on writing.
The experiment also included a control condition in which participants were told to write their weekly schedules.
This was done in order to assess overall user satisfaction and emotionality of a web-based expressive writing system in its basic state, which could then be accurately compared to the same system with a musical component.
A history of research in psychology has supported the notion that expressive writing has marked positive effects on mental and physical well-being .
For example, when individuals write about personal issues for just a few minutes a day consistently for several days, there are drastic improvements in rates of sickness, use of medicines, and number of doctor visits.
Because of its non-invasive design, the expressive writing paradigm is a viable, cost-effective way to promote positive health .
For this reason, people may not be compelled to participate in an expressive writing exercise.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Technological tools available for individual self-expression have flourished in recent years.
Previous systems have included visual and audio approaches to self-expression, including animated characters and facial expressions representing specific emotions and attitudes , expressionbased movie generation systems , as well as numerous personal music recommendation systems that try to generate playlists based on a predetermined mood .
Each of these systems reflects a trend in encouraging selfexpression with technology.
However, to our knowledge, no system yet has translated expressive writing text into music and focused its emotional feedback for encouraging self-reflection.
This created a comprehensive model of affective categories to which we mapped the musical parameters of mode, harmony, tempo, rhythm, and loudness, each weighted individually to reflect the user's writing given the parameters determined in the previous text analysis.
As a simple example, if the text happened to have mostly "achievement" emotion words  in Figure 1, the system may plot overall affect in the "excitement" octant, translating to high tempo, major tonality, etc.
The music generation component then used these parameters to construct a short song, using a knowledge-based algorithmic music system utilizing Western music theory-based rules and probability theory.
Our system, Expresso was designed to attain text input from the user, analyze the user's language, and generate corresponding music that reflected the input.
The system was deployed online with JavaServer Pages Technology and a Java applet for sound playback and made available to participants remotely from any computer.
Expresso performed a statistical analysis of the user's language and extracted emotive and non-emotive qualities in the writing.
The system then translated this affective characterization into corresponding musical parameters and generated music in the form of a song, played through the user's web browser.
This process is described below.
The system computed the percentage of language from each category relative to the overall text to create a set of weighted parameters uniquely representative of each user's text.
A one-way experimental design was used to measure the experience of participants across three conditions: expressive writing-musical feedback, traditional expressive writing and writing about one's weekly schedule .
There are three research questions of interest in this study: Will people enjoy the writing system with music feedback more than that of traditional writing methods ?
Will users of this system find it more pleasurable, by providing a greater sense of creation, fantasy, discovery, exploration, captivation ?
And finally, will users who receive music feedback report greater levels of positive and negative affect, as an indicator of enhanced effects of expressive writing  ?
A description of each of these measures is provided in the results section.
In the traditional writing condition, participants were sent a webpage link that described the study as an opportunity to "get in touch with your creative self through self-expression in a digital space."
After reading and completing a consent form, participants were given a prompt and instructions to write for five minutes in a stream-of-consciousness style.
The prompt was a version of the prompt used by Pennebaker and colleagues in a standard expressive writing exercise .
At that point, participants completed the study with a link to a follow-up survey.
In the writing-musical feedback condition, participants were given the same introduction, consent form, writing prompt, and language summary.
Following this, participants were told that they would be able to "hear a musical translation of  thoughts and emotions."
The next page generated a song based on the language analysis of the personal expressive writing entries, which the participants could hear by pressing a "Play" button.
After listening to the song, participants were directed to a followup survey.
In the control condition, participants were told to spend five minutes providing "a detailed list of what  weekly schedule looks like."
The intention was to spend the same amount of time writing about something that was not creative or expressive.
After five minutes, these participants were given a summary of the language they had used during the exercise and directed to follow-up survey questions.
Enjoyment was measured with 3 items .
Consistent with our expectations , an analysis of variance revealed a significant effect of the use of different systems on enjoyment  = 14.86, p<.001.
A post hoc analysis of the Least Significant Difference between the means  revealed that individuals in the traditional writing condition enjoyed the music more than individuals in the control condition , and individuals in the musical feedback condition enjoyed the system more than individuals in the condition without musical feedback  .
An additional analysis of system satisfaction comes from previous work in HCI evaluation .
We used five items from a larger tool designed to assess pleasure at play with mediated artworks .
The items included impressions of creation, fantasy, discovery, exploration, and captivation.
Participants responded to the statement, "This self-expression tool gave me a sense of  .
A post hoc test with LSD  revealed that perceptions of all five constructs were enhanced in the expressive writing conditions compared to the control condition.
Perceptions of fantasy  and captivation  were also greater in the music condition compared to the condition without music, at significant and marginally significant p-values, respectively.
Previous work has concluded that because expressive writing usually leads to acute negative affect, followed by positive health, that higher levels of negative affect may suggest a more effective design .
The PANAS is an orthogonal measure of ten negative and positive states .
An LSD test of positive affect effects revealed no difference of being in the traditional writing  versus musical feedback condition , although each writing system produced more positive affect than the control condition .
Alternatively, in testing effects of negative affect, the LSD revealed no significant difference between the writing  and control conditions , though there is significantly more negative affect in the music condition .
A review of the free response data suggested that individuals did indeed find the writing with music condition more intriguing than the condition without music.
Overall, the qualitative data seems to support the quantitative data in suggesting that participants enjoyed the music system more than the other two systems.
The mean level of pleasure was higher on all dimensions in the musical feedback condition, particularly in the areas of captivation and fantasy.
In assessing enjoyment, participants reported more overall enjoyment in the traditional writing condition than in the control condition, and more enjoyment in the musical feedback condition than either of the other conditions.
In particular, participants reported being more likely to use the system again if they received musical feedback.
These findings support the notion that an expressive writing program that provides musical feedback based on text may encourage users to write more often, thus promoting positive health.
One of the most interesting results came from the enhanced negative affect in the musical feedback condition.
Participants were given the same instructions in both expressive writing conditions.
Thus, any difference in feedback was due to musical feedback.
At first, we suspected that this must have come from participants responding negatively to the music.
However, not one participant in the music condition reported disliking the music, according to open-ended feedback.
Moreover, the average score for enjoyment of the music was 3.4 on a scale of 1-5, and the correlation between negative affect and enjoyment of music was non-significant, r=.16, p=.34.
These findings suggest that the negative affect was not simply a negative reaction to the music, but rather a reflection of having a musical interpretation of one's textbased, emotional expression.
Based on some of the comments from participants, it seems that the music enhanced the emotional outcomes associated with expressive writing, in addition to making the experience more compelling.
Future work is necessary, however, to further support this conclusion.
If supported, this conclusion would have impressive implications for the benefits of a system that added a musical feedback component to the traditional expressive writing process.
This study is an important first step in designing an accessible, web-based platform that encourages the positive mental and physical health benefits associated with expressive writing.
According to these findings, adding a musical interpretation of an expressive writing text enhances user enjoyment, as well as user perception that they would use the system again.
