The experience of videogame audience members is poorly understood, which inhibits our ability to design games to enhance their experience.
In this work we seek to understand how audience members enjoy and engage with games.
There may be many reasons why an individual might be in the role of audience member rather than playing the game.
Pre-existing social roles might direct participants in one direction or another - for example, a parent might suggest their child play a game while they stand aside in a supporting role.
There may be constraints on the number of active players - fewer controllers than participants, or a game that only supports a limited number of players.
Or, individuals may simply prefer to watch from the sidelines.
Advances in gaming technologies and shifting consumer demands have led to increasingly physical and mimetic games, and these games lend themselves to use by a variety of people who do not fit the stereotypical gamer profile .
As such, one factor that might influence the experience of audience members is the level of physicality of the game being played.
It seems reasonable to expect that these increasingly physical forms of gameplay also lend themselves to a more performative situation: a player jumping, ducking, and punching certainly seems more engaging and enjoyable to watch than one who is pressing buttons on a controller, and the division between those standing up to play and those sitting back watching becomes more striking.
Another factor that might influence the audience's experience is the anticipation of their own play.
That is, there may be a difference between a person who spends the entire gaming session watching and a person who watches knowing that they will soon take a turn to play themselves.
In many social gaming scenarios turn-taking is a core part of the situation, but the effect of turn-taking is not well understood.
More generally, the social situation in which a game is played will be influenced by a number of factors;
Videogames are often played socially with both co-players and audiences.
Audience members' experiences are not well understood, nor are the factors of videogaming sessions that influence their experience.
We conducted a study to examine the effects of game physicality and turn anticipation on audience members' experiences in social videogaming sessions.
Pairs of participants played games under three conditions of physicality  and their expectation of turn-taking was manipulated.
Their enjoyment, game engagement, social engagement and sense of participation were measured.
We found that the introduction of turn-taking into the session had positive effects for audience members - both anticipated and residual play effects - and that Kinect gameplay resulted in a more enjoyable experience for audience members.
We argue that audience members' experience changes as they become more active within a session, and suggest there are design opportunities between purely active `players' and passive `audience members'.
Audience experience; social gaming; physical videogames; turn-taking.
Information interfaces and presentation : Miscellaneous.
However, there has been little consideration given to the differences in roles within a gaming situation.
Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Publication rights licensed to ACM.
From a theoretical perspective, an account of audience experience will contribute to our understanding of social gaming and social computing more generally .
Audience members occupy an interesting and underexplored space between `user'  and `non-user' .
From a practical perspective, game designers and marketers should consider audiences when planning and designing games, and it is important that they understand the social and physical influences on audience members' experiences in order to broaden the appeal of their games.
In this paper, we outline an initial account of audience experience in physical videogaming sessions.
We begin by reviewing the HCI literature, experimental and qualitative, looking at the physicality of game controllers and the sociality of gameplay.
We then describe a study that was conducted to investigate the effects of physical gameplay and turn-taking on the audience members' experience.
The gestures required to engage in physical videogame play are, by their nature, more performative and publicly visible than the types of interactions commonly associated with traditional videogame play.
Through physical movements a player's game manipulations are made available to other co-actors and become a resource for sociality .
As such, the increasing role of physicality in videogames should be considered a core part of the sociality of games and gaming technologies.
Players' relationships with these physical games have been explored in a number of ways, including understanding their usefulness as promoting a form of exercise , as well as ascertaining how the changing forms of game control are leading to different types of player experiences.
Bianchi-Berthouze  conducted a series of experiments to examine the effect of controller type on engagement.
The more physical controllers emphasized higher levels of movement.
She found that movement was positively correlated with game engagement.
A review of the above experimental studies, and others, was provided by Vanden Abeele et al.
They noted that although the literature generally indicates that natural controllers present advantages over traditional game control systems, the marked differences observed in these studies' results - both in nature and extent - may reflect methodological differences, making cross-study comparisons fraught.
Additionally, each of these studies focuses exclusively on the experience of players; none of them speak to how game physicality might influence the behavior and experiences of those who are watching.
The experience of gaming with another person is generally regarded as having different, usually more positive, characteristics than playing alone.
Voida & Greenberg  described console gaming as having intensely social characteristics, seen as a place for players with varied levels of skill and different levels of status to come together, and to be given equal time and opportunity to take a turn or participate.
The effect of the presence of co-actors  has also been studied experimentally.
For example, Weibel et al.
By manipulating the players' expectations of an opponent  they found that the experience of playing against a perceived human was more enjoyable and also resulted in higher levels of presence and flow.
They found that playing against a human rather than a computer led to higher levels of engagement, arousal, and spatial presence, and that these effects were generally amplified further when playing against a friend over a stranger.
In recent years researchers and the gaming industry have turned their attention to videogames that require physical activity of varying degrees.
As certain genres of games become increasingly physical , there is also a need to understand the social effects of these systems and their place within gaming contexts.
This, in turn, provides coplayers and audience members an increased opportunity to be part of the gaming situation through their observation of and communication with the player and each other, and therefore to become engaged in the game.
There is little published experimental work examining the intersection of physical and social gaming .
The researchers measured a number of characteristics of the social setting and found that some did differ with higher levels of physicality.
Specifically, the players' reported engagement was higher with a physical controller, and video analysis showed they were more vocal and more willing to use non-game gestural movements when using the physical controller.
However, the small and homogenous sample  make it difficult to draw strong conclusions from this study .
In general their results were consistent with expectations - physical controllers were perceived as increasing the players' sense of spatial presence, but at the cost of lower perceived control.
Enjoyment was not directly measured in this study.
Their results also indicated a gender difference, which they suggest may be due to males' tendency to be more competitive and to adjust their gameplay strategies accordingly.
However, it should be noted that in both of these studies , no aspect of the social situation was manipulated.
Additionally, the social relationship between group members was not controlled.
As such these studies would be better characterized as studies of videogame controller physicality within a fixed social setting, rather than examining the sociality of physically controlled games.
If we consider the broader HCI literature outside of experimental work, there is some consideration given to the sociality of physical gameplay.
Harper & Mentis  described "the mocking gaze", a sense of playful derision of the active player of a Kinect game, who must perform oddly exaggerated physical gestures in order to be recognized by the sensor technology.
They argued that this leads to a sense of social fun, and that the gestures provide a resource for play and for gentle mocking of family members within the safe space of a videogame.
This includes the types of mocking and derision described by Harper & Mentis , as well as the emulation of players' movements, the provision of sportslike commentary, the peculiarities of the sensor's technical abilities and the resulting effects on players' avatars, and the use of the Kinect games' video replay features to capture and re-experience moments.
Games are complex social systems that afford a variety of social roles to emerge.
If we consider collocated console games, these roles can be seen to be on a continuum, with the most active roles involving full co-play, and the most passive being co-present others who pay no attention to the game.
They presented several phenomena from the field of social psychology that may be relevant to understanding the experience of social videogaming for all of the individuals involved, regardless of their social role.
One such phenomenon is evaluation apprehension, or more broadly, social facilitation effects .
These effects suggest that the performance of a player will be affected by the presence of a co-player or a spectator, and depending on factors such as the player's experience with the game, the influence may be facilitatory or inhibitory on their performance.
Social facilitation effects have been empirically assessed with games .
However, social facilitation effects focus on the player's instrumental game performance, not their overall experience .
Returning to the HCI literature, when Harper & Mentis  described the idea of passively watching a co-present player play a Kinect game, they suggested that this is a form of "selfishness" since they will be gaining enjoyment from mocking the player without allowing themselves to be subjected to the same ridicule.
In each of these examples, the research has primarily focused on the experience of the player, not that of the audience member.
There is relatively little literature specifically examining the role of audience members or spectators of technological systems, within the field of videogaming or more broadly.
One notable exception was Reeves , who constructed a framework for understanding the role of spectators of public interfaces and their role transitions as they become more or less involved in the system.
This work is most relevant to public interactions, but aspects are germane to the consideration of audiences of videogaming.
The framework includes the concepts of `manipulations' and `effects' - the interactions necessary to interact with a system and the resulting output.
Public systems tend to require and promote more obvious manipulations and present larger, more visible effects.
As videogames begin to require more physical exertion and larger, more obvious gestures , and as there continues to be a trend toward larger television screens, we can see that games are becoming more publicly oriented.
Consider, for example, the difference between playing a Kinect game and a game on a Nintendo DS or Apple iPad - the console game's control system and screen both lead to a more social experience .
Some researchers have presented case studies of spectatorship within specific games, usually qualitative in nature.
In an interview-based study of the audio channel by spectators of Super Street Fighter IV, Su & Shih  highlighted the importance that the gaming technology plays in enabling spectatorship experiences.
Although it might seem that information asymmetry would be reduced in a collocated, physical gaming scenario, Downs et al.
Although some of this literature hints at the audience experience of gaming, there is little examination of these experiences explicitly, and few attempts to ascertain the types of social, technological, and game-related factors that might influence audience experience.
In the following sections we present a study that examines the sociality of physical console gaming and looks specifically at the experience of audience members.
As observed by Vanden Abeele et al.
They suggest that this is due to a wide variation in the games and controllers used across studies, in their experimental procedures and measures, and in their participant sampling.
Another potentially confounding factor is that in many cases these studies compare games using controllers for which they were not designed.
Our study begins to address the issues of audience experience in social videogaming sessions.
We aimed to isolate the effects of different levels of physicality on the audience's experiences.
We operationalize physicality as the amount of visible physical activity performed by the player.
74 pairs of friends  were recruited for this study.
Seven pairs were removed due to violations of experimental protocol, leaving a total of 67 pairs .
Participants were not reimbursed but were provided with snacks and beverages throughout their session.
Participant demographics are detailed below.
At the beginning of each session participants were randomly assigned to one of two roles: * Participant P A , who was led to believe they would be the player for all four game rounds; or * Participant P B , who was led to believe they would be the audience member for all four game rounds and would not actually play the games themselves.
A 3 x 4 mixed model design was employed.
Game physicality was manipulated as a between-groups factor with three levels  and turn expectation was manipulated across four rounds as a within-subjects factor.
Each group participated in all game rounds, each with one game lasting ten minutes.
In total each experimental session lasted approximately one hour.
The experiments were conducted in a laboratory.
Two rooms were used - one for the `low physicality' condition and the other for the `medium' and `high physicality' conditions.
The laboratory rooms included one-way windows; behaviors and conversations were not recorded, however the experimenter did casually observe participants to ensure that the technology worked correctly.
Participant groups were randomly assigned to one of the three physicality conditions.
Based on these areas of previous work, and in the absence of directly related studies of audiences in videogaming situations, we set out to investigate two conjectures: that audience members' experiences are affected by both their own participation in the session and the characteristics of the game itself.
The level of participation in a gaming session has not been manipulated in the literature we reviewed.
In all cases, social gaming studies have been conducted using co-players or players' perceptions of mediated co-player presence.
Based on the principle of social facilitation  it would be expected that the player's performance  would be affected by a co-present non-player; it is less clear what the non-player's experience may be.
In the `medium physicality' condition players would need to perform simple gestural movements, isolated to one limb, using a gestural control system.
In the `high physicality' condition, players would perform large or whole-body movements, generally involving multiple limbs, using a whole-body control system.
The participants' expectation of turn-taking was manipulated through the use of four game rounds.
At the beginning of round 1, P A was told that they would play all four rounds, and P B was told they would always be the audience member.
However, between rounds 1 and 2 the participants were informed that the experimenter had changed their mind and that in round 3, P B would play the game and P A would watch.
Round 2 proceeded as round 1 had , and in round 3 the participants swapped roles .
In round 4 they returned to the original configuration .
This manipulation is summarized in Table 1.
We considered using a custom game, or using non-standard controllers with existing games, but this would have resulted in a less naturalistic experiment.
Although the use of different games may present a potential confound to the study design we believe that our approach presents the best tradeoff between full experimental control and ecological validity.
For the `low physicality' condition a Sony PlayStation 3 gaming system was used with a standard wireless controller, and the games were diving, track running, archery, and swimming, all from the game title `London 2012: The Official Videogame of the Olympic Games'.
For the `medium physicality' condition a Nintendo Wii gaming system was used with a single Wii Remote with built-in MotionPlus, and games were table tennis, bowling, wakeboarding, and golf, all drawn from the game title `Wii Sports Resort'.
For the `high physicality' condition an Xbox 360 with Kinect sensor were used, and games were boxing  and skiing, golf and tennis .
Groups played all four games within whichever physicality condition they were assigned to, but the order of games was counterbalanced between participant groups.
All participants completed a short demographic questionnaire at the beginning of the session.
In addition, at the end of each game round participants completed a 30item questionnaire.
In the case of round 1, this was completed before the participants were informed of the upcoming player switch in in round 3.
Each item was on a 7-point Likert-style scale .
Both the player and audience member completed these questionnaires, although the wording for some items was reversed depending on the participant's role.
The order of items was randomized for each questionnaire version.
The questionnaire included items measuring the following constructs: enjoyment , mood , game engagement , social engagement , and subjective participation .
Multiple items were used to measure each construct.
Post-study analysis found that Cronbach's alpha was above 0.7 for each subscale, so the arithmetic mean of the items in each subscale was calculated and acted as the dependent variable for subsequent analyses.
Dependent variables generally did not correlate highly with one another.
Due to this manipulation, P B 's expectation about the turntaking nature of the session was altered during the session: in the first round P B watched and expected not to have a turn; in the second round they watched again but expected to have a turn later; in the third round P B did in fact have a turn; and in the fourth round they watched having now had a turn.
Participants were fully debriefed on the deception at the conclusion of the session.
No participants indicated they guessed the deception during the session; at the beginning of each session all P A s expected to play throughout the entire session and all P B s expected to watch.
Games were selected that were similar enough to compare , but that required different types of physical movements .
After a review of game titles for all three platforms we determined there were no suitable games that were designed for all three platforms, and so decided to use similar but slightly different game titles for each condition.
Further details about the questionnaire are published separately .
Except where stated, statistical tests reported are mixedmodel analyses of variance  with post-hoc t tests.
Eight missing post-round questionnaire responses were imputed using the Expectation-Maximization function in SPSS 21.0.
Because P A and P B are non-independent samples , data for each participant type were analyzed separately.
In the analyses below we principally discuss the results from P B , since they were predominantly the audience member.
Although condition assignments were random, participants in the Wii condition were slightly older .
68% of participants were male.
Most participants were regular gamers: only 20% reported they played games `rarely' or `never'.
51% of participants reported they sometimes played games socially , and 41% reported they sometimes played games with the other participant they had come to the experiment with.
93% of participants had prior experience using the Wii, and 44% had prior experience with the Kinect.
Although analyses were separated, both are shown in Figure 1.
P A consistently rated physicality as very similar to, but slightly lower than P B , but the significance of this effect could not be assessed using inferential statistics.
The differences between the Kinect and Controller conditions were not significant.
Repeated measures ANOVAs showed no significant main effects of round number on subjective performance for either participant.
Post-hoc tests showed the Kinect condition  was rated significantly more enjoyable than the Wii condition .
There were no significant differences between the Kinect and Controller  conditions, or between the Wii and Controller conditions.
Although other constructs  generally showed a similar pattern of results , no significant main effects were observed.
In addition, breaking down each physicality condition by mini-game showed no significant differences in these constructs.
From these results we can identity four distinct effects.
First, when participants played the game themselves they reported higher levels of enjoyment, game engagement, subjective participation, and social engagement than when watching.
While this may seem obvious, it is an important validation of the underlying assumption that playing and watching games are different experiences.
Second, there is an anticipated play effect: when participants were told they would have a turn themselves their experience changed.
Third, these changes in experience persisted beyond their own turn, lasting even when they knew they would not have another turn - we term this the residual play effect.
Fourth, there is an effect of game physicality on audience enjoyment.
In the following sections we discuss these effects in more detail.
Their engagement in the game followed a similar pattern.
This suggests that at the point where audience members found out that they would be more actively involved in the session they became more engaged in the game itself, and their enjoyment also increased.
It is interesting to consider how these two factors  might be related.
This increased engagement may act as a mediator of their enjoyment.
Somewhat surprisingly, social engagement was only affected when the participant actually had a turn.
In contrast to game engagement, the social engagement construct measures the participant's sense of being part of a team, and of being attentive to and attended to by the other person.
One's own direct participation in the game would not immediately seem to affect these directly.
A possible explanation is that the active player is dividing their attention between the game and the social situation.
While they feel that they are giving a high level of attention to the audience member, they are in fact generally more absorbed in the game and have fewer attentional resources available for socialization than they might assume, but subjectively sense that they are attentive to the social situation.
In contrast, the audience member has more resources available to evenly split their attention and is more cognizant of their split attention.
Future work could attempt to validate the existence of such an `audience attentiveness bias', and how it might change in the presence of evaluative and nonevaluative audience members .
This provides additional support to prior work that suggests that there may not be a strict dichotomy between `player' and `audience', but that an individual can sit along a continuum between these extremes .
Interestingly, we found that their experience changes for the entire duration of the session - even once they have had a turn and sit back down to watch again .
The interaction of physicality and round on enjoyment may provide some clues to this phenomenon.
When using a traditional controller the audience member has little reference for what it is like to be the player of the game; using Reeves' terminology , the manipulations that the player performs are secretive and not publicly available.
As such, when the experimenter reveals that the audience member will have a turn, they have no physical frame of reference for what this experience might be like, and their enjoyment does not shift until they actually have a turn themselves.
At this point they more fully appreciate and understand the game.
In contrast, in the Wii and Kinect conditions the player's actions are public and obvious from the start of the session, and so the audience member is able to appreciate what their own involvement will entail from the point at which they find out they will take a turn.
However, the interaction effects we speak of here were not significant, and so these explanations require further study and the factors require further correlation with other variables.
There was a significant effect of physicality condition on audience enjoyment: Kinect games were rated as the most enjoyable for audience members.
Interestingly, Wii games scored lower than controller-based games even though they included elements of physicality.
There are several possible reasons why this might be the case.
While it could certainly be argued that Kinect games also provide only gross control mechanisms, without the tangible presence of a controller  there is less potential for direct comparison between Kinect- and controller-based games.
The experience of playing a Kinect game feels qualitatively different to either a Wii-based or controller-based game.
In Wii games, if players expect a high degree of control and do not get it their performance may be impaired, and as their performance degrades this could in turn negatively influence audience experience.
Indeed, we found that participants' subjective game performance ratings were slightly but significantly lower for Wii games than for Kinect or controller games.
Overall, there is a characteristic pattern for several of the effects we observed: in round 1 they are lowest; in round 2 they increase; in round 3 they peak; and in round 4 they return to round 2 levels.
We assume that the differences between rounds 1 and 2 are due principally to the revelation that the audience member will, in fact, have a turn.
Of course there may be other factors at play: the player may generally become more used to the control system of the game after the first round, or might adapt their play style on the basis of knowing there is now a potential competitor.
However, we did not set up the situation to be competitive, we found no evidence of a novelty effect , and we did not observe a significant change in either participant's performance by round.
As such we argue that the turntaking manipulation is the most likely candidate for any changes in audience experience after round 1.
It is certainly plausible that a player struggling with a game or its controls will be less interesting to watch than a player who plays expertly.
Another potential explanation is that the games used in this study are less visually interesting to watch, or that participants are simply fatigued with Wii gaming or its aesthetic.
Over 90% of our participants had used a Wii before.
This made it difficult to compare the experiences of audience members who had prior Wii experience with those who did not; however, we conducted such a comparison for the Kinect condition .
No significant differences were observed, suggesting that platform novelty may not be a key determinant of experience.
A more interesting possibility is that Wii gaming exists in a zone between controllers and full-body gaming: a welldesigned controller game might be interesting to watch with one's full attention on the screen, and a Kinect game might be interesting to watch splitting one's time between the screen and observing the  full-body gameplay.
Wii games still promote this dual attention between the screen and player, but the gestures that players perform are less interesting to watch.
Further work would be needed to disentangle the factors of the game design, platform novelty and physicality.
These results may also have implications for the design of turn-taking mechanisms in games.
Our results suggest that by declaring a turn-taking session ahead of time the experience of audience members will differ.
Although this work is intended principally to inform an understanding of audience experience, the findings do suggest that there may be design implications that future work could extend and validate.
The suggestion that the mere foreknowledge of having a turn changes an audience member's experience leads to the implication that notions of a strict dichotomy or barrier between a player and an audience member are problematic and limiting.
Most commercial games, including the ones used in this study, are designed to be played by one or two players at a time.
However, there is an opportunity to expand the design space of games to include additional gradations of `audienceship'.
For example, it may be possible to allow different degrees of participation by audience members.
When considering more private, physical gaming technologies like the Kinect, one can imagine using the sensor's capabilities to detect the presence of audience members and allow them to participate in various ways, if they so choose.
Similarly, `second screen' interactions  might provide opportunities for audience members to participate in games beyond standing up and playing directly.
In this paper we have argued that audiences are frequently a part of social gaming situations, but that their experiences are not well understood.
The main aim of this paper has been to describe an experimental study of social videogaming audiences within the context of physical gaming.
We found that the experience of audience members changes when they are informed that the gaming session involves turn-taking rather than mere observation.
At this point audience members seem to shift from a passive to an active state, even before and after they have their own turns, and this active state results in higher levels of enjoyment and engagement with the game.
We introduced the terms anticipatory and residual play effects to describe these changes in experience based on the introduction of turntaking.
However, contrary to expectations, increasing levels of physicality did not necessarily lead to a more positive audience experience.
While Kinect gameplay was rated as more enjoyable for audience members than other types of gameplay, Wii gaming was rated as the least enjoyable.
Several potential reasons for this finding were suggested, including issues with game control, novelty, difficulty, or having intrinsically uninteresting gestures.
Of course, this study only considered the influence of two factors on audience experience.
We also only considered the experience of a single audience member at a time; undoubtedly, larger audiences will have very different social processes and dynamics that will influence the experience.
We also temper the results of our physicality manipulation on the basis that different games were used in each of the conditions.
Although we went to great lengths to mitigate any confounding factors, the differences between the games used in each condition may have affected the physicality manipulation results in unexpected ways.
Additionally, the sizes of the differences observed are often in the order of one scale point.
Finally, as noted above, this study considered `audience member' and `player' as a strictly dichotomous separation.
Our findings suggest that audiences are in fact much more complicated and nuanced, and we hope further work and future game designs will begin to color in this gap.
We acknowledge the contributions of The University of Melbourne Statistical Consulting Centre, the Interaction Design Lab's Usability Expert Review Panel, and the Institute for a Broadband-Enabled Society.
