ABSTRACT This report describes an experiment in which 64 elderly participants, average age 71, used  a text-only or  a multimedia computer interface to obtain information-in this case, about prescription drugs.
The participants, none of whom had used a computer before, compared the computerized information systems to a more traditional "interface" of words printed on paper.
Results indicate that, for this group of elders, who were recruited from a seniors' group at a college, a multimedia presentation was better than a text-only screen or a printed leaflet, on both performance and preference measures.
Difficulty with reading due to vision problems associated with aging was the most commonly cited reason for preferring the multimedia system.
While men preferred both computer interfaces to the leaflet, women liked only the multimedia system and expressed very negative feelings about the text-only interface.
KEYWORDS: multimedia, elderly users, health care, information search and retrieval, interactive video, user interface, aging, user study, computers and medicine INTRODUCTION The computer revolution is being coupled with yet another unprecedented trend--the aging of the American population.
As shown in Figure 1, more of us are growing older every day, with the proportion of persons aged 65 and older expected to reach more than 1/5 of the population by the year 2030, when the baby boom generation reaches old age .
A number of studies suggest that television viewing is the most frequently reported daily activity for elderly Americans who view TV, on average, over five hours per day .
Since the elderly people in our society are encountering more and more computers--at home, in the workplace, and in the community--in their daily lives, this study was conducted to ask some elders what type of interface would work for them.
Whereas early studies of "hands-on" computing by elders focussed mainly on playing computer games , elders soon began to explore a wider range of computer activities.
In 1984, Furlong and Kearsley published Computers for K& Over 60, which described a computer education program designed for senior citizens ; the program has since grown into a nationwide network called "SeniorNet" .
Other experimental studies have also shown that elders are potentially capable computer users, in areas ranging from word processing and electronic mail to information retrieval and computerassisted decision making .
It has been consistently reported that, in supportive environments, learning to use a computer increases elders' self-confidence, ability to learn, and memo~ retention .
Surveys conducted by the AARP  and the Aspen Institute  indicate that elderly people have generally positive attitudes toward technology and want to learn to use computers.
Elders are more likely to experience vision loss, hearing problems, and other chronic health problems which may be counteracted by design features such as larger fonts, louder audio tones, and easy-to-use input devices .
Common cognitive changes, which include memory loss, decline in perceptual flexibility, and slowing of "stimulus encoding," may be minimized by giving older computer users more help and time to complete tasks .
The Elderly and Multimedia Studies have shown that interactive multimedia improves information retention; people retain 10 percent of what they see, 20 percent of what they hear, 50 percent of what they see and hear, and 80 percent of what they see, hear, and do .
While it is hoped that user interfaces which are extended to include audio and video will be more expressive and easier to use, they will also be harder to build and maintain than traditional user interfaces .
Multimedia interfaces may be particularly beneficial to elderly users.
For example, research shows that the amount of time spent reading decreases with age, mainly due to vision problems associated with aging .
Carlson  suggests that print technology is one of delimitation, improving proficiency by taking things away--sound, touch, picture, and movement.
Multimedia, on the other hand, provides "cognitive tools as extensions of the senses."
For elders, such systems may one day function in the same way that eye glasses and hearing aids do now.
Elders have lived most of their lives with the printed word, while computers are a relatively new invention.
Would they prefer to get information in a more familiar format like a leaflet than try new computer technology?
9 Null Hypothesis 2: The type of computer interface--text-only or multimedia--will have no significant effect on task performance or preference ratings.
A within-subjects design was used to compare the leaflet with the computerized presentation methods, with each participant using both a printed drug information leaflet and a computer-based system.
Half of these subjects used a text-only interface, while the other half used a multimedia system which extensively used full-motion video.
Both computer interfaces used a touchscreen as the input device.
Each treatment group was half male, half female.
The order of presentation method  was counterbalanced to control for the effects of learning within a session.
In addition, the association of informational retrieval task with presentation method was also counterbalanced.
Having all participants use the leaflet method eliminated variability and at the same time established a baseline measure against which the computerized methods could be compared.
Dependent variables consisted of performance and attitude measures, which were collected with task sets and written surveys.
Qualitative analysis is based on written responses to open-ended survey questions, videotapes of experimental sessions, observational notes, and post-experimental interviews.
Participants The average participant age was approximately 71 years old, with the majority of participants falling in the 65 to 75 year range.
None of the participants had experience using a personal computer or any complex computer information system similar to the ones which were tested.
All but three of the participants were retired and the majority described themselves as having "some college" education.
Only elders without serious vision or hearing impairments were included in the sample.
Participants were elders recruited through the Worcester State College "Interconnect" program, which hosts a variety of activities to bring older and younger generations together both at the college and in the community.
Computer use by the elderly has been a subject of research for the past ten years the college, with over 300 elders having taken computer courses.
Information Content Both printed and automated systems contained information contained in the United States Pharmacopoeia Drug Information for the Consumer, published by Consumer Reports and the United States Pharmacopeial Convention  .
Included is information concerning the drug's brand and generic names, how the drug works, and other drugs which may cause interactions.
The leaflet information format, with important four-page-long leaflets is presented in outline and list points printed in boldface.
These contain no pictures or diagrams.
The spoken narration in the multimedia system is, for the most part, a word-for-word reading of the USP DI text.
Some information in the leaflet, such as extensive lists of brand names, is not included in the multimedia presentation.
Access to information is through menu choices, such as "Unwanted Effects" and "Brand/Generic Name," each of which begins a short video presentation on its topic.
To access all the information through the various menus takes about 25 minutes.
The text-only interface was programmed to correspond to the multimedia system, but without the graphics, video, and voice.
In place of the audio-visual segments, the spoken narrative was transcribed and presented as text on the screen.
A larger-than-normal font was used with black letters on light blue background for easy reading.
Information Retrieval Tasks One task involved information for the drug theophylline, which is used to treat bronchial asthma.
The other task involved phenytoin, used to treat seizures.
While both drugs are commonly used by elderly patients, none of the elders who participated in the experiment were taking theophylline or phenytoin, thereby removing any risk that participants' health would be affected by using the computer system.
For each of the drugs, participants used either the leaflet or computer information system to complete a items questionnaire containing ten corresponding designed to test whether or not participants were able to use the methods to find the "right" answers to questions about the medicines.
Accuracy score - Each task set consists of ten items.
Participants have two accuracy scores-one for the leaflet and one for the computerized method--describing the number of questions answered correctly.
Completion time score - The time from when the participant began the task until he or she signalled completion was measured in minutes.
Preference score - A 5-point Likert-scale attitude survey was administered after each method was used.
While individual items varieq there was a core set of 15 comparable items for the leaflet and computerized methods.
The Visualized USP DI, a prototype multimedia version of the pharmacopoeia, uses audio and video to illustrate the use of prescription medicine.
For example, rather than simply reading about the side effect of "blurred and double vision: the user sees a blurry video clip of medicines on a shelf, presumably what one would see if one were experiencing the side effect.
The system is currently being developed by IBM, the Auburn University School of Pharmacy, and the USPC.
Procedure At the beginning of the testing, the participants were acquainted with the general purpose of the experiment.
They were told they had unlimited time to complete the task set, which was not a test of their abilities but rather an exercise to see how effectively the leaflet or computer communicated the information.
In order to create as realistic a situation as possible, participants were asked to imagine themselves in the position of someone using the drug and to answer the task set questions based on the information presented in the leaflet or on the computer, as opposed to their prior knowledge or opinion.
Participants were left alone in the room with the leaflet or computer and observed via video camera.
Several participants used a magnifying glass and magnifying reading glasses which had been placed on the table.
When the participants completed each set of questions, the experimenter returned to the room and asked them to complete the attitude survey for that presentation method.
Upon completion of both task sets, they were asked to complete a forced-choice survey where they could express a preference for either the leaflet or computer.
Procedures for the computer were identical to those for the leaflet, except that a brief training period was required for the computer.
The Visualized USP DI prototype system begins each session with a brief instructional overview of how to use the touchscreen, how to select options from the menu, and so on.
The user is guided through this training session by the voice on the soundtrack.
An identical training session was implemented for the text-based system, with instructions appearing as text on the screen instead of as voice.
The experimenter sat with participants as they went through the training session.
None of the participants had any difficulty understanding how to use the touchscreen or make menu choices.
Data collected also included written responses to openended survey questions, videotapes of experimental sessions, observational notes, and post-experimental interviews.
RESULTS Performance Scores were calculated to adjust for variation in completion time by expressing the participant's performance in terms of the number of questions which could be accurately answered in an average period of 20 minutes.
Data are shown in Table 1.
There were no significant task.
Preference Preference scores were calculated by assigning point values to the 15 core items on the preference scales and summing them up.
A positive score indicates a predominantly positive attitude toward the presentation method .
Square statistic, it was found that men and women expressed similar positive attitudes toward the multimedia interface.
When the text interface was considered, men's attitudes were only slightly less positive; women, however, expressed significantly negative attitudes when asked to agree or disagree with a number of descriptive phrases describing the interface, including : well-organized, trustworthy, convenient, userfnendly, virual~ pleasing valuable to seniors, easy to understand, and could be used to answer questions before calling the doctor.
Analysis of the forced-choice survey administered at the end of each session showed a similar pattern, with men preferring both computer interfaces to the leaflet, while women liked only the multimedia computer, preferring the leaflet if the computer had a text-only interface.
Difficulty with reading due to vision problems associated with aging was the most commonly-cited complaint about all three methods of getting information, including the multimedia interface.
No one mentioned or seemed to have problems with the audio portion of the multimedia interface, however, although a number of participants wore hearing aids.
Responses to the touchscreen were overwhelmingly positive, although some participants had distinct problems which seemed to be due to physical problems such as arthritis.
Participants also indicated that, for all the presentation methods, categoty names did not clearly indicate the information which would be presented.
This was particularly a problem with the computers, since information was not visible to be scanned until the category name was chosen.
Many participants expressed concern that the computers themselves would break down or not be physically accessible, located in doctors' offices or stores which would be closed at night when most problems and questions arise.
An ANOVA test  involving between-subjects variables showed a significant interface-gender interaction.
White men indicated a slight preference for the multimedia interface, women preferred it overwhehningly and gave a negative overall rating to the text-only interface, indicating that they would rather read a printed leaflet than use a computer with a textonly interface.
Men, on the other hand, preferred the computer to the leaflet regardless of the interface.
When these summed preference scores were broken down by individual item and analyzed using the Chi-
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This study was completed as part of a Ph.D. thesis at Northeastern University and was supported by an equipment grant from IBM, the United States Pharmacopeial Convention, and the Auburn University School of Pharmacy.
Special thanks to Dr. Judith Perrolle, Dr. Greg Wassail, and Dr. Leonard Buckle of Northeastern University, Dr. Bill Felkey of Auburn University, Mike Fligg of IBM, Keith Johnson, Cara Sterling, and Mitchell Lapidus of the USPC, Dr. Robert McCarthy of the Massachusetts College of Pharmacy, Dr. Gari Lesnoff-Caravaglia of the University of Massachusetts Medical Center, Lizabeth Johnson of Johnson Media, Inc., and Dr. Maureen Power of Worcester State College.
Most of all, thank you to the Worcester State College elders who participated in the experiment.
In general, participants said that they wanted more information from the computer.
They wanted to be able to enter the names of various drugs they were taking and get information about interactions.
Many participants felt that computerized services could be expanded to include the dispensing of prescription drugs, replacing pharmacies altogether.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS Overall, most participants felt that elders will be able to use computers effectively, not only to learn about their medications, but to shop, manage money, and perform other daily life activities.
Quite a few, however, did address the conception that computers are for younger people and that many elderly people might have trouble getting used to new technology.
Such age differentials may be eliminated, or at least minimize~ by the interface design itself.
For example, this study suggests that reducing the amount of required reading can make information more accessible to the elderly.
Although they represent just a small subset of the elderly population, the participants in this study were selected from members of a seniors' group associated with a college, suWesting that they may be more literate and educated than most people their age.
Yet, even these elders preferred a video presentation to either computerized or printed written material.
The study also pointed to gender as a significant factor in determining interface preferences.
When using the multimedia system, the computer itself remained fairly transparent for both men and women during their information gathering activities.
With the text-only interface, however, men seemed captivated by the "machine-ness" of the computer .
Women had a negative view--there were a number of comments about machines breaking down and being inconvenient.
This supports Turkle and Papert's thesis that as computer interfaces become more concrete and friendly, they will become more acceptable to women .
This is especially important when considering that 60 percent of the over-65 population is female.
It is difficult to categorize and draw conclusions about "the elderly," since they comprise such a diverse and heterogeneous population.
Cohort effects compound the problem of making predictions; for example, even those people who enter their elderly years just ten years from now will have a much greater exposure to computer technology than the elderly participants in this study.
Nevertheless, it is hoped that this study will make a modest contribution to the existing knowledge of computer interface design and elderly users, and that it will generate further research in this area--in our own best interest, for we are all growing older every day.
Charness,N., Schumann, C., and Boritz, G. Training older adults in word processing Effects of age, training technique, and computer anxiety.
Pharmacopoeia Drug Information for Mount Vernon, New York: Consumers United States the Consumer.
Edwards, R. and Englehardt, K. Microprocessorbased innovations and older Americans: AARP survey results and their implications for service robotics.
Eilers, M. Older adults and computer education: "Not to have a closed door."
Fletcher, D. Effectiveness and cost of interactive videodisc instruction in defense training and education.
Institute for Defense Analyses  Report Number IDA Paper P-2372, 1990.
Furlong, adults: The Communication M. Electronic community for SeniorNet network.
Facilitating intergenerational education Connection': with information technology and multimedia.
Ogozalek, V. and Vanpraag, J.
Comparison of elderly and younger users on keyboard and voice input computer-based composition tasks.
Designing the Strategies for effective human-computer Reading, Massachusetts: Addison-Wesley, user inte~ace: Interaction.
Attitudes and technologies--Striving to match new electronic information products and services to the needs and interests of elderly people.
Turlde, S. and Papert, S. Epistemological pluralism: Styles and voices within the computer culture.
Current Population Reports, Janua~, 1989: Estimates and Projections of the Population of the United States @ Age, Sand Race 1988-2080.
