ABSTRACT a new form of interactive ActiMatesm Barneym represents learning product for two- to five-year old children: a small computerthat looks like an animatedplush doll.
He can be usedasa freestandingtoy and,by meausof a wirelessradio link, he can interact with PC-basedsoftware and linear videotapes.
In each mode, Barney takes advantage of children's social expectationsabout playmate performance to engagethe user in learning interactions.
The theory and practice behind Barney's performance in each mode  are described,as well as how key researchresults shaped the interfaceacrossthe different modes.
A critical part of scaffolding as a learning intervention is the use of language.
Language in this framework gives form to thought by guiding and directing mental processes.
Young children are thought to acquire concepts and abilities by gradually internalizing the verbal support and direction of others, until they become capable of guiding their own behavior using the sameskills and strategiesthat were initially provided externally .
A theory of interactive learning Recent theory and research in children's learning has emphasized the importance of social interaction as a mechanismfor mental growth .
A key learning processidentified by this school of thought is a type of social intervention called sca#Xding.
Scaffolding is the processwhereby an adult or more mature peer supportsa child's acquisition of a new skill by providing assistance at key points during the execution of the skill itself, in a form of collaborative effort.
An exampleof scaffolding might be helping a child learn to count by filling in numbersin the count sequence when the child is unableto remember them, or manually guiding the child's finger to eachobject being countedwhile counting along, to structurethe task as it is executed.The metaphorof the scaffold is meant to capture the temporary and transitional nature of the learning intervention.
Just asa scaffold is gradually removedfrom a new building as it is completedand can staud on its own, support of the child is gradually reducedas repeatedeffort leadsto masteryof the new skill.
Scaffolding theory holds great promise for educational technologies,becauseof the strong parallels betweenthe nature of the user interface and the nature of scaffolded learning.
Learnerscontrol the paceand courseof action in scaffolded learning efforts, just as they do in their use of interactive technologies.
And scaffolding requires contextspecific responses to repeatedefforts over time, something that computerscanprovide very well.
The key limitation in translating this model of learning into technology use has always been its fundamentally social nature, and its heavy reliance on language.
Most computerinterfacesare strictly visual, relying on a small screen with two-dimensional images controlled by some form of pointing device - a form of interaction that is hardly social.
Even when a small, talking character is included in the graphical interface itself, the abstract nature of the interface often fails to evoke the basic social expectationsof cooperation andverbal engagement that makescaffoldingpossible.
Act&fates Barney  represents a unique interface that uses the social dynamics of pretend play to integrate technology and learning.
By virtue of being an animatedplush doll who resemblesand behaves like a familiar media character, A/Barney taps into powerful pretendplay andtoy experiences commonto early childhood.
Young children `animate' dolls and other objects on their own, treating them as if they are sentient and respondingto them in ways that mimic familiar social interactions  .
Using speech and movement, A/Barney invokes similar pretend responses as an interface strategy.
The goal of NBarney's design was to use the social mimicry of pretend play, combined with the differential responsiveness of interactive technologies, to provide scaffolded learning experiencesfor young children, both during toy play and in combination with other learning media.
The remainder of this article describes the application of scaffolding theory to the content and design of each of A/Barney's modes of interaction, and the iterative designand researchprocessthat shapedthe feature setincluded in the final product.
Playmates should be directive,but friendly In fleestanding toy mode, A/Barney is assumedto be the child's sole playmate, and his interactions are designedto promote the child's direct engagement by being conversationaland familiar.
He refersto the child using the pronoun "you," and to their joint activities using the shared pronoun "we."
Researchon adults using phone interfaces and on speechin the softwareinterfacehas found that direct queries  prompt user responses less often than do explicit directives .
Building on thesefindings, AfBarney doesnot ask questionsas part of his verbal interface.
Instead,he makes simple directive statements such as:"Cover my eyesto play Peek-a-boo!
The core interface acrossall three of A/Barney's modesis A/Barney himseE A/Barney is a 13" animatedplush doll.
Motors provide simple arm and head movement, and a small loudspeaker provides audible speech A/Barney's interface is a set of five sensors:Four touch sensors, and a light sensorlocated in his left eye.
A ROh1 chip hidden in his body allows him to respondto children's inputs by moving and speakingusing pm-recorded, digitized speech and programmed motion.
A/Barney interactsWith other media using an internal radio transceiver similar to that of a walkie-talkie.
When a special transmitter is attachedto a TV and VCR, he can receive new speech and motion from encodedvideotapes that play as the child is watching the video.
When a transmitteris attachedto a PC nmning encodedCD-ROMS, A/Barney both receives and transmits dam He both receivesnew speechandmotion content from the computer and transmits inputs from his own sensors back to the computer,aswell In this way, AlBarney not only reactsto children's'actions as they use softwarewith a conventional pointing device such as a mouse, but children's actions on his sensorsalso affect what happensin the software.
The task of creating an integrated model for A/Barney's performanceas a pretendplaymatewho could be integrated into a variety of electronic media interactions presenteda novel design challenge.
It required defining a set of conventions for interacting with A/Barney that were both consistentacross all modes of use and flexible enough to accommodatethe context-specific variations each type of interaction required Consistencywas createdby building the interface conventions around the one element that remained constant across all modes of use: A/Barney himself.
In practice, this meant that even though A/Barney's fkeestandingtoy mode performance diiered from that in the other modesin important ways, it was this mode that set the standard for his performance when watching television or playing at the computer.
Testing of A/Barney's games and activities demonstrated that the use of concretedirectives was an effective interface strategy,but also revealedthat it had a significant drawback in the social context of a two-personplay dyad: over time, the directives had the unintentional effect of making A/Barney seembossy and task-driven.
It often seemed that every statementhe made was an instruction, particularly when no game or song was active, and he was prompting the child to select an activity.
This constant browbeating quickly reducedchildren's interest during free play use.
To remedy this situation, A/Barney's interface instructions were intermingled with a set of compliients and positive other-directedstatementshaving no functional value, such as "This is fun!"
Adding these phrasesto the interfacemadeA./Barneyseemmuch lesstask-oriented,and as forms of unconditional praise, they bolstered children's pleasureduring interactionsaswell.
To each sensor,it's own funcfion Early testing of the doll's sensor interface with young children clearly demonstrated two critical facts.
First, children easily understoodthat acting on A/Barney's body parts  initiated interactions.
They responded immediately to requests such as "Squeeze my hand to play a game!"
However, children of this age were consistently unable to use A/Barney's sensors in any combinations, simultaneous or sequential, as part of an interface.
That is, children could not be askedto squeeze both a hand and foot sensortogether to start a game, nor could they be askedto first cover A/Barney's eye and then squeeze his hand in a two-step sequence.
Theseresults led to a highly simplified design, whereby each class of body part is dedicatedto one and only one class of response.
Squeezing the touch sensorsin either of A/Barney's feet causeshim to sing one of 16 familiar preschoolsongs.
A/Barney's hands are dedicatedto activities and games.
I lie rainy days and sunny days!"
There are a total of 12 different interactionsin all.
AIBarney's eyes are dedicatedto the game of peek-a-boo.
Peek-a-boo was designed as an open-ended series of alternating "Ws dark" / "It?
When A/Barney detectsa loss of light, he respondedwith an `It's dark commentsuch as "Where did everybodygo?"
After playing an "It's dark" comment, when A./Barney detects an increase in light, he respondswith an `It's light" comment: "Peek-aboo, I seeyou!"
The effectiveness of dedicatingsensors to functions by their location on his body was assessed by having children return repeatedlyto play with A./Barneyover severalmonths, for different studies.
When children returned,they were asked to makeA/Barney sing a song,play a game,or play peek-aboo.
The results were striking: even after just a single session,most children recalled exactly which sensorstarted a given function, and executedit confidently andreliably.
Evelythingintemrptseverythingelse A key element of play is the intrinsic motivation derived from its self-directed form .
Similarly, in social pretendplay children experiencea feeling of control as the participants jointly create play events .
How could A/Barney mimic this responsivity?
The answercamefrom studying two key elements of children's patterns of interaction with A/Barney: their deliberate disruption of ongoing interactions, and their conscious searching for favorite songsor gamesaspart of their play.
Children's typical performanceduring play sessions was to squeezeA/Barney's hand or foot, and then play or sing along with whatever activity or song A/Barney produced.
Since he randomly varied the items in his hand and foot menusand moved through all items before repeating any, the selectionswere always different with eachround of use.
This variety of presentationkept children's interest high.
However, during many play sessions,particularly after children had become familiar with A/Barney's offerings, they frequently did somethingstriking: they starteda given song or game, only to then deliberately try to terminate it by acting on a different sensor.
Interruptions were viewed as accidentsto be avoided, so once a song or gameWasstarted,it had to be completedbefore a new activity could be selected.
But the researchclearly documented children purposefully trying to stop a song by starting a game, for example, or trying to stop a game they themselveshad started in order to play peek-a-boo,and so on.
Even within the game of peek-aboo, a similar play pattern was observed.
Children would cover A/Barney's eyes, and then uncover them while he was still speaking,to stophis speechmid-utterance.
In addition to the deliberateinterruptions,anotherpattern of interactionwas for children to try to force A/Barney to play one specific game or song they desired, by trying to Children squeeze the same sensor repeatedly.
They showeda similar preferencefor finding particular games.
As with cross-sensor interruptions, A/Barney's early interfacesdid not supportthis form of searching,and children's reactions to their limited choices were very consistent: diminished interest.
Their attention wandered as they waited for unwantedsongsor gamesto end; several children actually becameaggressive with A/Barney aswell.
Interruptive functions had not been included in the design becauseit had been assumed children would `play along' with A/Barney.
Instead, children expectedthe opposite:A/Barney was supposed to play along with them.
Subsequently,all of A/Barney's interfaceswere changedsuch that  any action on any sensorcausedA/Barney to changewhat he was doing to the function associatedwith the triggered sensor; and  repeatedinputs on a single sensorcycled the contentof that sensor's menu.
These changes increased A/Barney's responsivenessto child action, and subsequent testing showedthat it increasedthe length and tempo of children's play with him.
It also introduced a new risk: unintentional interruptions.
This was especially true of the light sensor, since it respondsto changesin light level - somethingnot always due to user action.
The new risk was judged acceptable,however, becauseof the overall enhancement A./Barney'sresponsiveness brought to the quality and tone of children's interactionswith him.
Oncethe PC transmitter establishes the two-way radio link with A/Barney, all of his intelligence becomesa subsetof the computer's processing power, and his internal functionality is suppressed.
At the PC, therefore, his intelligence is liiited only by the power of the PC itself.
PAPERS that if they squeezed A/Barney's foot during softwareuse, for example,he would respondashe did in freestandingtoy mode: He would sing a song.
This expectation persisted even if A/Barney had explicitly indicated otherwise in his comments.
In other words, children did not expect A/Barney to changehis behavior just becausea computer was present.
Basedon theseresults, the software and A/Barney's role in it were deliberately designedto build on children's existing expectations,not only about A./Barney,but about software use aswell.
Subsequent testing refined the elementsof this design,producing a media-specificextensionof the original principles createdfor freestandingtoy mode.
The content of &Barney's interactionsat the computerwas shapedby reviewing the literature on cooperativelearning methods used with computers in formal instruction in Cooperative learning, like schools .
Thesestudiesprovided insight into the dynamics of situations where social interactions take place around the computer as the common focus of attention.
This research also documented the types of verbal interactions used by learning partners, especially thinking aloud during task execution, praise, and hints, which are most effective in promoting learning and mastery.
The cooperative learning literature did not, however, provide insight into how A/Barney, as a simulacrum with his own interface, should be integrated with the computer.
Wasit possibleto createinterfacesthat combined NBamey's sensors with mouse use and integratedhim closely with softwarecontent?
An initial test of a mixed interface, using AlBarney and the mouse together in a simple counting task, provided important guidance.
All of the subjectswere familiar with A/Barney from previous tests, and all were computerusers in their homes.
When they played with A/Barney in his freestandingmode at the start of the testing session,they interacted with him directly, attending to him visually, listening to him, and acting on his sensors.
When it was time to use him with the computer, however, their petiormance was markedly different.
They sat A/Barney next to them by the computer, and then immediately stoppedinteracting with his sensorsand graspedthe mouse, while gazing expectantlyat the computerscreen.
When he spoke to them, they demonstrated an unexpectedability to listen to hii while using the mouseat the sametime.
When A-/Barneycommentedon their actions with the mouse, or gave instructions for pointing and clicking, children kept their eyes onscreen,yet respondedto him with smiles and comments,and most importantly, by using the mouse ashe asked When he asked children to use both his sensors and the mouse together for software tasks, however, a host of problems emerged.
Children would inadvertently move the cursor when they releasedthe mouseto grasp his sensors, forcing them to have to recover its location before going on With the activity.
They were easily confused by the sequenceof events, as welL When, exactly, were they to usethe mouseversusA/Barney's sensors?In an attemptto coordinate the two interlaces, some children adopted a strategy of keeping one hand on the mouse and one on &Barney, an awkward posture that degradedtheir cursor control, especiallywhen they choseto keep their dominant hand on A/Barney and their other hand on the mouse.
But perhapsthe most striking result of the study was a strong transfer of expectationsabout content.
The social dynamics of shared computer use differ from those of sharedplay.
In sharedplay, the play partner is the focus of attention.
In shared computer use, both partners focus their attention on the computer instead.
Since A/Barney's goal is to stimulate the child's learning while using the computer, his reactions and comments are all about the child's perjkmance using the computer.
Unlike fieestanclmg toy mode,in computermode he never attempts to draw the child into playing with him, except during long periods of mouse inactivity.
When the child is using the mouse interface, A/Barney respondsto the child's actions in several specific ways, all primarily verbal, that mimic those that researchindicates are used by effective learning partners: Giving content hmts - If the child is asked to select a triangle f?om a set of shapes and makes an error, for example, A./Barney provides additional information, such asthe fact that triangles have three sides.
Praising performance- A/Barney congratulatesthe child whenever a right answer is selected,regardlessof number of errors or time on task.
He also makes task-specific compliments, such as "You have a good memory!"
Modeling performance - When A/Barney takes his turn during open-ended tasks, he models the cognitive and interface performancechildren can use.
On a coloring task, for example, he might say, "I think I'll color this part yellow!"
Articulating patterns - During open-ended activities, A/Barney recognizessimple logical and sequentialpatterns in the child's performanceand identifies them verbally.
If a child has used all the same color during a coloring activity, for example,A/Barney commentson that fact.
If the child squeezes A/Barney's hand after the comment,he will take a turn and continue the child's pattern, while verbally reinforcing it: "You used a Iot of red.
I'll color this part red, too!"
To keep the integrity of A/Barney's interactions,his role at the computer was transformed from that of direct play partnerto the less-dominant role of coach,or sidekick His own functions are carefully segregatedfrom computer control.
To thii end, although A/Barney reacts to the child's performance,the onscreenactivities are supervised anddirectednot by A/Barney, but by onscreencharacters in the softwareitself Everything related to computercontrol is done with the mouse, and the onscreencharactersrelay all relevant interface information to the child where to click, the goal of the task, and so on.
A/Barney remains true to his freestandingperformance,but with a new twist His feet remain an interface for songs, for example, but now the songsare new tunes,written asjoint performances shared by both A/Barney and the onscreen characters together.
A/Barney's handsremain an interfacefor games,but now the gamesare onscreen in the software in the form of simple, linear vignettes.
During structuredtaskslike drill activities, hand squeezes result in brief onscreen lessonsrelatedto the game content that are executed in squeeze-by-squeeze fashion, just lie freestanding mode games.
During open-ended activities like drawing or building collages with shapes, hand squeezes result in A./Barney"taking a turn" - coloring a section of the drawing himseli; or adding his own shape, andreflecting on his action.
Being part of the tape, the commentsare the sameeachtime the tape plays, and the child's actions on A/Barney cannot affect what happenson the tape or what A/Barney says about it.
Similar to PC mode, A/Barney's performancein TV mode is not the dominant role of playmate,but the less-engaged role of viewing partner.
A/Barney and the child again share a common focus of attention, but this time it is the television.
Children typically sat or lay with A/Barney while watching the television.
Since A/Barney's goal in this mode is to promote comprehensionof video content, his comments are like those in PC mode: his speech is directedto the child, but he is reacting to what is happening on the screen.
He never draws attention to himself or his functions.
He promotescomprehension by scaffolding TV viewing iu a variety of ways: Directing attention- A/Barney saysthings such as "Watch this!"
He also sings along with songs, counts along with onscreencharacters, andrecitesthe alphabetwith them.
Using vocabularv words - A/Barney labels objects onscreensuch as letters and numbers, and identifies the colors or namesof specific objects,as appropriate.
Encouraain~ physical particiuation - A key element of preschool learning is musical engagementand physical activity.
During musical events onscreen,A/Barney sings along with songs and explicitly encouragesthe child to imitate the dancing of onscreencharacters, saying "Spin all around!"
Research with children watching a program while A/Barney deliveredthesecommentsdemonstrated that they were highly effective.
Similar to their performanceduring computer use, children showed an ability to divide their attention, listening to A/Barney's spoken comments and watching onscreen events at the same time.
Subsequent testing with young children demonstrated that their interactions with A/Barney and the software were highly similar to their interactionswith A/Barney alone in one key respect:they showeda strong tendencyto `graze' across the different functions available to them.
They might, for example,usethe mouseto solve a problem,then squeezea toe to sing along with a song, then play peek-aboo, andthen usethe mouseagain.
As in their freestanding play performance,deliberate interruptions were common.
To accommodatethis pattern of performance, all of A/Barney's interactions were designedto be modular and mutually exclusive.
The mouse was integrated into the universal-intenuptibility design establishedin freestanding mode, and followed the samerules.
Just as with the other sensors,a mouseclick terminatedany ongoing interactions and started the next event associatedwith the object the child clicked on.
Researchon learning from television has establishedthat young children comprehendmore program content when their viewing is supplemented by the comments and questions of older peers or adults .
This form of interaction,describedas `co-viewing,' is almost completely verbal.
Even when children did not show an overt response,their eye movementsrevealedthat they were listening to ABarney and processing his comments as they kept their eyesonscreen.
The researchalso revealedthat the frequency and timing of co-viewer comments was a critical design element.
Educationalprogrammingfor young children is designedto maintain attention by being M-paced and full of sights, sods, and action.
Fitting A/Barney's observationsinto such content without his talking over onscreeneventswas difficult to accomplish.
Testing clearly indicated that too many comments distracted children by competing with action on the screen.
A low frequency of commentswas best; AJl3arney'sindividual prompts were novel enough to catch children's attention but not so frequent as to be disruptive.
In terms of timmg, the most significant discovery was the need to allow children plenty of time to react to what A/Barney said Attention directives, for example,neededto happen before, not during, the events they were targeting.
A commentthat was synchronouswith the eventit was targeting was ineffective becausechildren's latency to focus their attention was too long, and the event would endtoo quickly to be processed SensorfunctionsshouM35t the social confexf TV mode raised a troubling design issue for A/Barney: what was the appropriate role for his tieestauding functions, such as songs?
In PC mode, these functions were preservedand augmentedby keeping them intact and integrating them into the software content itself This designhad the virtue of both keeping AIBarney's interface consistent and at the same time keeping the child's attention focused on the computerscreen,even if his songs and gameswere not a part of the actual computertask The linear nature of video content precluded this design from the start.
A song on demandduring TV viewiug could not be integrated into what was on the screen; it would be a distraction, creating exactly the opposite of what was intendedin the co-viewing educationalmodel.
Onepossible solution was to simply deactivateA/Barney's sensorsduring TV viewing.
This meanthe would comment on what he was watching, but would not respondto child action.
Testing of this scenario,however, showed it was inadequate.
Children acted on AIBarney's sensorsfar less often than during freestandingplay or PC play, but when he failed to respondthey were perplexed Why was A/Barney talking, yet not responding to their actions?
His lack of responsivenessactually became a distraction in itself, as children turned their attention to A/Barney and tried to elicit a responsefrom him and began ignoring the content of the program they were viewing.
The key to the correct designcamefrom a careful review of how, exactly, children engagednot only A/Barney, but also their parents, during tests of TV mode.
Rather, they tended to reach over and act on A/Barney absently, as a secondary behavior during viewing.
What was striking what that they tended to act on their parents in the same way, ofien with an identical action.
If they patted their parent's arm while viewing, for example, they also patted A/Barney.
Would they be satisfied with a similar, abbreviatedresponsefrom A/Barney?
Subsequent testing revealedthat this was in fact the case.
No children protested or asked why A/Barney did not play gamesor sing while watching TV if his handsor feet were squeezed.Peek-a-boo, however,was a different story.
Although it was played more laconically, children still expected that A/Barney would respond to having his eyescovered- especially during an activity that dependedon being able to see.
In the TV viewing context, in fact, covering A/Barney's eyes seemedto be a sort of teasing behavior that children enactedwith a mischievous grin, as if they were deliberately obstructing his view.
To accommodate this specific interaction, peek-a-boowas kept fully functional in TV mode, and TV-specific comments such as "I can't see the TV!"
Unlike fieestandmg toy mode and PC mode, where children's own actions are the focus of A/Barney's attention, in TV mode A/Barney is reacting to the content of the programbeing viewed.
Yet for him to be responsiveto children, and be consistentwith his behavior in other modes, all child-initiated actions still take precedence over his reactions to the TV program, and interrupt them.
Squeezing a foot or hand causeshim to interrupt his TV comments and give one of special recognitory phrases,and covering his eyesmakeshim play Peek-a-boo.
In his other modes,keeping A/Barney's eyes covered for a long period of time leads to a termination of peek-a-boo.
In fieestanclmgplay, A/Barney stopsmaking commentsabout not being able to seeand prompts the child to play a game or sing a song.
In PC mode, the end of peek-a-booresults in either the samereaction from A/Barney or a requestfor mouse action from the onscreen character.
PAPERS able to "see" to play his games or sing songs.
In TV viewing, however, AlBarney's being able to "see" was a key elementof the pretend engagement and ending peek-aboo automaticallyraised difficult issues.
If A/Barney were put under a blanket and left there, for example,should he terminate peek-a-booand start talking about what was on the television, even though his vision would still be obstructed?
Should peek-a-boo be different during TV viewing, and never terminate until MBarney's eyes are uncovered,to maintain the pretend illusion of his having vision?
The decisionwas madethat the dangersof maintaining the pretend illusion outweighed the benefits in this scenario.
A/Barney's performance in TV mode needed to be consistent with his pretend-baseddesign, but to keep it consistenton this point createdunacceptable risks.
To take just one possible situation, if A/Barney's light sensor becamedisabledand peek-a-boodid not auto-terminate, he would never be able to interact with the TV at all.
Poor lighting conditions could also prevent him from interacting with the TV, even with the sensorintact.
Being consistent across modes and auto-terminating peek-a-boo, even thought it violated the logic of pretend in TV mode, was judged an acceptable trade-off in light of the possibility that all of his TV interactionswould be put at risk otherwise.
Accomplishing this goal required not only a careful analysis of existing researchon learning in social contexts, but also extensive study of young children's interactions with A/Barney himself.
A&Mates Barney is able to scaffold children's learning across three distinct social contexts because his performancein each context matchestheir expectationsof the social dynamicsof eachinteraction.
As a freestanding toy, he interactsdirectly with the child; as a TV co-viewer, he watches along and attends to the television; and as a learning partner at the computer, he offers assistance, encouragement, and observation.
These forms of engagement would not succeed unless children were willing to "play along" with the idea that Barney is a social being, and that his behavior should be consistentwith the friendly, supportive, and wiser play partner he portrays on his television program.
It would also not have succeeded if children's expectations about social interactions, both one-on-one and with electronic media, were not so clearly differentiated.
Indeed,perhapsthe most striking aspectof the researchand design on this product is the finding of just how elaborate and detailed children's patterns of engagement with different media are, even at three years of age.
Barney's interfacein eachmodehad to be carefully refmed to match children's existing social repertoiresfor each- repertoires that were divergent in surprisingly subtle ways.
By mimicking the performancechildren expect from a play partner acrossdifferent social contextsand in the company of different media,A/Barney is able to maintain an integrity of purposeand interface even as his specific functions and interactionsvary.
A&Mates Barney succeeds as a learning product by conforming to the demands of the situation and to the expectationsof his users,just as an intelligent, respectful play partner should.
And in this way he suggests an important lesson for future interface designs, especially those based on social conventions.
Whether it is an intelligent agentwho shopsfor you, or one that tutors you asyou learn, technology interaction is a form of consensual play-acting where both the user and the technology have specific roles to play.
Suchsharedpretendis a form of true partnership and collaboration, and achieving that level of user engagement is the ultimate goal of interfacedesign.
It seems particularly fitting that a product designed for our youngest users, for whom pretend play itself is a way of learning about the world, should remind us of this simple fact.
Shaping &Barney's interactions to provide educational content appropriate to each mode while maintaining consistencyin his interfaceproved to be the biggest design challengefacing this product.
Consistencyis critical to a good interface,because it makesinteraction predictableand reliable, resulting in less demandon user working memory and less effort spenton learning the rules of task execution Yet the demand characteristics of each of Pm.
A/Barney's learning modes required that some contextspecific changesin the interface be made, if the learning objectives appropriateto each interaction were to be met.
The issuesassociated with altering A/Barney's interface to fit changesin his functions can be consideredas a modem variant of the classic "mode" problem faced in early texteditor design.
In the erabeforegraphical interfaces, the design challenge was that a changein software mode often meant a changein the functions of a single interface.
The Fl key, for example,might mean "cut" in editing mode but then mean "abort" in run mode.
The arbitrary nature of the function changes,and the lack of visual feedback that the mode had changed, created confusionamongusersand led to high ratesof error.
For MBamey, the challenge was similar: functional changesin A/Barney's role meant changesin his interface that would be invisible to the child user.
Mevarech, ZR, Silber, O., & Fein, D. Leaning with computers in small groups: Cognitive and affective outcomes.
Norman, D. Design Principles for Human-Computer Interfaces.
Proceedingsof the ACM SIGCHI Conference , NorthHoIiand, Amsterdam,l-10.
Relief from the Audio Interface Blues: Expanding the Spectrum of Menu, List, and Form Styles.
Robson, S. "Best of aii I like ChoosingTime": Talking With Children About Play and Work Early Child Developmentand Care, 92, , 37-51.
Rogoff, B., & Gardner, W. Adult Guidance of Cognitive Development.
Everyday Cognition: Its Developmentin Social Context.
Slavin, R E. Cooperative Learning.
In Proceedings of NECC'91 , International Society for Technology in Education,Eugene,Oregon, 149-151.
The Cognitive Consequencesof Collaborative Problem Solving With and Without Feedback.
Vygotsky, L. S. Mind in Society: The Developmentof Higher Psychological Processes.Harvard University Press,Cambridge,MA, 1978.
Vygotsky, L. S. Thought and Language.
Brown, C.hK Human-computer inferface design gzid&nes.
Private Speech: From Social Interaction to Self-Regulation Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Hi&dale, NJ, 1992.
Drum, A. Noobie: The Animal Design Playstation.
Designing Multimedia Environments for Children John Wiiey and Sons,NY, 1992,176-191.
Forys, S.K.S., and McCune-Nicolich, L. Shared pretend Sociodmmaticplay at 3 years of age.
Effects of Sibling Coviewing on Children's Interpretations of Television Progrzlms.Journal of Broadcasting and Electronic Media, 31,2 , 153-68.
Big World Small Screen: ne Role of Television in American Society.
University of NebraskaPress,Lincoln, NE, 1992.
Jones,M K.. Human-ComputerInteraction: A Design Guide.
Educational Technology Publications, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 19SS.
McCarthy, D. Manual for the McCarthy Scales of ChilrBren'sAbilities.
The Psychological Corporation, Cleveland, OH, 1972.
