ABSTRACT An experiment was conductedto systematically investigate combined effectsof controller, cursor and target size on multidimensional object manipulation in a virtual environment.
It was found that it was the relative size of controller, cursor and target that significantly affe&d object transportation and orientation processes.
There were significant interactions between controller size and cursor size as well as between cursor size and target size on the total task completion time, transportation time, orientation time and spatial errors.
The same size of controller and cursor improved object manipulation speed, and the same size of cursor and target generally facilitated object manipulation accuracy, regardless of their absolute sizes.
Implications of these findings for human-computer interaction design are discussed.
KEYWORDS Size effect, human performance, virtual reality, user interfaces, input device, graphic design, 3D, docking, controls and displays, Fitts' law.
INTRODUCTION Object manipulation tasks in human-computer interaction  generally involve three elements: a controller, a cursor and a target.
A controller is an input device such as a mouse manipulated by the human hand.
A cursor is a graphic object on a display driven by and spatially mapped to the controller's movement.
A target is a graphic such as an icon on the display that defines an object manipulation task.
In a typical object manipulation scenario, a user controls an input device to move a cursor to a target.
Object manipulation is the essential operation for direct manipulation interfaces, e.g., graphic user interfaces.
To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists.
Previous research Effectsof target size in HCI have been extensively studied in light of Fitts' law and fmdings have been successfully implemented in human-computer interface design   .
It is generally concluded that movement time increases with decreases in the target size in a pointing task.
Most previous studies on target size used the same input device and a cursor of constant size and were limited to two dimensional pointing tasks .
Kabbash and Buxton conducted a study to compare the use of an area cursor with a typical "point" cursor for a two dimensional selection task .
In their experiment, the area cursor was a large rectangular area and the point cursor was a small circular dot.
Their results showed the area cursor had et%& that generally reversed target size effects on task performance.Since the size and shape of the cursor and target changedtogether for experimental conditions, it was not clear whether their results were due to the compound effectof cursor size and shape or the effectof cursor size alone.
The role of the interplay of controller, cursor and target size in object manipulation has not beenaddressed.
Modern computer systems such as virtual reality usually require multidimensional object manipulation, e.g., graphic object docking and tracking.
Relatively few studies on human performance have been conducted in multidimensional environments.
Some studies found that it was rather difficult to control all dimensions simultaneously, depending on the specific task and interface systems  .
In the Virtual Hand Laboratory, Wang et al.
Papers perceivedby the subject as if it was below the mirror, on the table surface.
The subject was wearing CrystalEYES Goggles to obtain a stereoscopicview of an image.
Three infrared markers were fucedto the side name of the goggles and their positions were monitored with an OPTOTRAK motion analysis system  with 0.2 mm accuracy to provide a head-coupledview in a 3D space.The subject held a plastic cube on the table surface.Three IREDs were placed on the top of the plastic cube, IRED 1 at the center, IRED 2 and IRED 3 diagonally away from IRED 1.
The plastic cube served as the six degreesof freedom  controller in this system.
The cursor was a six DOF wireframe graphic cube driven by the three IREDs on the top of controller cube.
The cursor cube was drawn to be superimposedon the bottom center of the controller cube.
The target was a wireliame graphic cube that appearedon the table surface to the subject.
The stereoscopic,head-coupled,graphic display was updated at 60 Hz with 1 frame lag of OPTOTRAK coordinates.Data from the OPTOTRAK were sampledand recorded at 60 Hz by a Silicon Graphics Indigo Extreme computer workstation.
A thin physical L-tiame  was usedto locate the starting position of the plastic cube, at the beginning of each trial.
The experiment was conductedin a semi-dark room.
The subject saw the target cube and the cursor cube presentedon the mirror, but was unable to seethe controller cube and the hand.
The Virtual Hand Laboratory setup provided a high fidelity system where display spacewas superimposedon the controller's workspace.
They suggestedthat the size and shapeof input devices should be designed to allow better performancethrough finger manipulation.
We are unaware of any study that examined the combined effectsof the size of controllers, cursors and targets on object manipulation in virtual environments.
This warrants further investigation into the effects of object size on human performance, providing implications for HCI design.
We first hypothesize that it is the interplay of controller size, cursor size and target size that affects human performancerather than controller size, cursor size, or target size alone.
Most previous studies only examined target size while keeping controller size, cursor size, or both constant.
Fitts' results in 1954 suggest to us that it is the relative size that matters .
We predict that there will be strong interactions among controller size, cursor size and target size.
Specifically, when the sizes of a controller, a cursor and a target are the same, the haptic feedbackinformation on the controller size is consistent with the visual feedback information on the cursor or target size.
The consistency between haptic and visual feedback information should facilitate human object manipulation.
It is expected that human performancewill be better, in terms of the faster completion time and less spatial errors, when the sizes of a controller, a cursor and a target are the same.
We call this hypothesis the samesize hypothesis.
A virtual environment was set up for this study in The Virtual Hand Laboratory, as shown in Figure 1.
A Silicon Graphics Indigo RGB monitor was set upside down on the top of a cart.
A mirror was placed parallel to the computer screenand the table surface.A stereoscopic,head-coupled graphical display was presented on the screen and was reflected by the mirror.
Target size was randomized over trials.
The target cube was located 100 mm or 200 mm away from the starting position in the midline of the subject's body.
The target cube was presentedto the subject either 0 or 30 degreesclockwise.
Target distanceand angle were randomly generatedover trials, In each experimental condition, 10 trials were repeated.
In summary, we had a balanced experimental design with repeatedmeasures: 2 controller sizes * 2 cursor sizes * 2 target sizes * 2 target distances * 2 target angles.
Sevendependentvariables were derived from OPTOTRAK 3-D position data collected from two IREDs on the top of the controller cube.
Data from the IRED on the top center of the controller cube were used for object transportation measures,and two IREDs on the top of the controller cube were used to calculate the angular value for object orientation measures.
Time measures were: total task completion time , object transportation time , object orientation time .
Spatial error measureswere: constant distance errors , constant angle errors , variable distanceerrors , variable angle errors .
A trial was rejected if the program failed.
ANOVAs were performed on the balanced design of 2 controller sizes * 2 cursor sizes * 2 target sizes * 2 target distanceswith repeatedmeasureson all four factors.
Only data with a 30 degreetarget angle are reported here so that a complete set of object orientation time measures can be presented; trials with zero target angle enabled randomization of the target angle, thus avoiding subject anticipation of the target angle during the experiment.
In each experiment session,individual subject eye positions were calibrated relative to the IREDs on the goggles to provide a better stereoscopic,head-coupledview.
The table surfaceand the cursor cube position relative to the controller cube were also calibrated.
The subject was comfortably seatedat a table, with forearm at approximately the same height as the table surface.
The subject held the plastic cube with the right hand, with the thumb and index finger in pad opposition on the center of opposing cube faceswhich were parallel to the frontal plane of the body.
The task was to match the location and angle of the cursor cube to that of the target cube as fast and accurately as possible.
When the cursor size was different from the target size, the subject was askedto align the cursor cube and target cube at the bottom center so that the controller cube could fmish on the table surfacein all experimental conditions.
To start a trial, a target cubeappearedat one of two distances and two angles .
Then, the subject moved the cursor to match the target's location and angle as quickly and accurately as possible.
When the subject was satisfied with the match, he/sheheld the controller still and said "OK" to end that trial.
At the beginning of eachblock of trials, subjects were given 20 trials for practice.
In general, object manipulation first started with the transportation processalone.
After an averageof 69 ms, the orientation processjoined the transportation process.
Both object transportation and orientation processesproceeded simultaneously until the orientation processfinished.
At the last phaseof object manipulation, the transportation process continued alone for an averageof 188 ms.
Completion time  and Transportation time  Average task completion time  over all conditions was 909 ms. CT was dominantly determined by the transportation time .
Results of CT analysis were similar to those of TT data.
For brevity, only results on TT data are presentedhere.
It took 886 ms on averagefor a subject to complete object translation.
There was a significant interaction betweenthe controller size and cursor size  = 5.75, p < .048, shown in Figure 2.
The average TT was 862 ms when both controller and cursor were small, similar to the average value of 866 when both controller and cursor `were large.
When the controller was large and the cursor `was small, TT increasedto 896 ms. A small controller and a large cursor resulted in the greatestaverageTT of 921 ms.
The controller size and cursor size also significantly interacted with the target distance  = 19.28, p <: .003.
It appearedthat TT was much slower at the target distance of 200 mm with a small controller and large cursor.
However, at both distances, data had a similar pattern as shown in Figure 2.
Theseresults demonstrate that it was the relative size between the controller and cursor that significantly a&ted TT, as predicted in our relative size hypothesis.
The same size hypothesis is also supported by the data in that when the controller size and cursor size were the same, the transportation time  was significantly faster.
A significant interaction was also found betweenthe cursor size and the target size  = 61.85, p <: .OOl, as shown in Figure 3.
Data were filtered with a 7 Hz low-pass second-orderbidirectional Butterworth digital filter to remove digital sampling artifacts, vibrations of the markers, and tremor from the hand movement.
Original IRED 3D position data were interpolated and filtered only once, and then were used for the following data manipulation including angular data generation.
A computer program determining the start and end of a pointing movement was used for the transportation and orientation processes separately, based on criterion velocities .
Interaction betweencontroller size and cursor size on transportation time.
It took a longer transportation time when the cursor and target had the same size than when they were different.
When both cursor and target were small, TT was 946 ms, and when both were large, TT was 961 ms.
It was much fasterwhen the cursor and the target had different sizes, 825 ms with a large cursor and a small target and 813 ms with a small cursor and a large target.
These results seem to be counterintuitive.
Actually, the subjects took advantageof the strong visual feedbackpresented when the cursor and target had the same size to achieve higher accuracy.We will refer to this point when we examinethe spatial errors later.
No other main effectswere found.
Neither controller size, cursor size, nor target size alone had significant effectson the transportation time.
This clearly demonstratesthat human performance in object transportation was influenced by the relative sizes among the controller, cursor and target rather than their absolute size.
Note, however, no significant interaction was found betweenthe controller size and the target size.
Interaction between cursor size and the target size on transportation time.
There was a three-way interaction among the cursor size, target size and target distance, F = 6.20, p < .043, shown in Figure 5A and 5B.
At the target distance of 100 mm, OT showed a similar cursor by target pattern as TT .
At 100 mm, with the same sized cursor and target, it took longer to complete the object orientation  than when the cursor size and the target size were different .
These results may be due to subjects' effotts to obtain a more accuratematch by using the strong visual feedbackwhen both cursor and target size were the same.In contrast, at the target distance of 200 mm, when both cursor and target are large, OT  was significantly longer than the other three cursor by target conditions , as shown in Figure 5B.
It appearedthat when the target was small and far away, ,mevisual feedback presented by the cursor and target was not strong enough to make a differenceon OT.
The averageorientation time  was 630 ms, 71% of the task completion time , much shorter than the 97.5% for transportation time .
Overall statistics on OT data were similar to those on TT data, but there were some differencesin detail.
With both large controller and cursor, the orientation was fastestwith a time of 564 ms.
However, when both controller and cursor were small, the averageOT was 656 ms, greaterthan the averagevalue of 592 ms where the controller was larger than the cursor.
The slowest OT occurred when a large cursor was driven by a small controller .
Interaction betweenthe cursor size and the target size on orientation time at target distance 100 mm Target distance had a significant main effect on OT , F = 35.90, p <: .OOl.
Target distance can be considered as an input to the object transportationprocess,and thereforeshould have an effect on TT.
OT, on the other hand, can be considered as an output of the object orientation process.
The main effect of target distance on OT indicated that this input for the transportation process significantly aflkcted the output of orientation process.
This result confirms previous findings by Wang et al.
There were no other main effects on OT.
It was the relative size that all&ted the object orientation process.
Similar to TT, again, there was no interaction between controller size and target size on OT.
Spatial errors were measured at the end point of a trial.
Constanterrors were defined as the mean dif%erence between the target distance and the distance made on each trial.
The constant errors are generally attributed to system features such as the quality of graphics, and individual subject bias .
Variable errors were the standard deviation of errors in each experimental condition.
It is believed that variable error measures reflect human performanceconsistencyunder a certain interfacesystem.
Lnteractionbetween cursor size and target size with small controller on variable distanceerrors .
CED was 2.1 mm with a small target, reducedto 0.6 mm with a large target.No other main effect or interaction was significant.
It appeared that the visual display  had significant impact on CED.
On average,constantangle error  was 1.1 degree under-rotated, but this was not significant.
Interaction between cursor size and target size with large controller on variable distanceerrors .
VED was particularly large for a large controller, a large cursor and a small target, with a value of 3.5 mm compared to the averageVED of 2.1 mm.
This was the only time we found a three-way interaction among the controller, cursor and target sizes.
No other interactions were found between the controller size and the target size in this study.
The overall averageVED was 2.1 mm.
As shown in Figure 6A, when the controller and cursor were both small, VED was smallest at 100 mm target distance.
In contrast, Figure 6B shows, at 200 mm target distance, VED was largest when both controller and cursor size were large.
Combined with transportation time results, it appeared that object transportation was fastestand yet most accuratewhen both controller and cursor were the samesmall size.
There was a significant interaction betweenthe cursor size and the target size, F = 55.76, p < .OOl.
VED was smaller when the cursor and target had the same size than when they were different.
This shows that subjects indeed took advantageof the visual feedback information where the cursor and target sizes were the same to achieve high accuracy.However, there was also a three-way interaction among controller size, cursor size and target size, F = 7.34, p < .03.
The interaction of cursor size and target size was more pronounced for the large controller than small controller, as shown in Figure 7A and 7B.
The averageVEA was 2.1 degreesacross all conditions.
As shown in Figure 8, VEA was less with the same sized cursor and target than with the different sized cursor and target.
VEA was the smallestwhen both the cursor and the target were large, 1.9 degrees,comparedto 2.2 degreeswhen both of them were small.
When the cursor and target had different sizes, VEA was the same2.3 degreesno matter which one was larger.
Results f?om this study supported the relative size hypothesis.
As predicted, interactions among the controller size, cursor size and target size were found on all dependent measures.
In the temporal domain, there were significant interactions between the controller size and cursor size as well as between the cursor size and target size on the total task completion time , transportation time  and orientation time .
However, there were no interactions between controller size and target size.
At the same time, neither controller size, cursor size, nor target size alone had significant effects on CT, TT or OT.
The results did demonstratethat it was the relative size that mattered,rather than the absolute size of controller, cursor or target fiK temporal measures presentedhere.
In the spatial domain, the relative size of controller and cursor as well as cursor and target significant affected variable distanceerrors .
A three-way interaction was also found among controller size, cursor size and target size in VED data.
It appearedthat the interaction between the cursor size and target size was more pronounced with a large controller.
This was the only instance in which controller size interacted with target size.
For variable angle errors , the relative size betweena cursor and a target showedsignificant effects.In conclusion, the relative size of controller, cursor, and target were important for spatial errors of object manipulation.
In turn, however, it took extra time of TT and OT to reduce VED and VEA for taking advantageof strong visual feedback presentedby the same sized cursor and target.
It also was noted that human performanceappearedparticularly better with the same small sized controller and cursor for object transportation, and with the same large sized controller and cursor for object orientation.
Theseresults support our same size hypothesisin the senseof speed-accuracy tradeoff.
It is interesting to note that results of this study do not fit Fitts' law .
In general, the task completion tirne did not increaseas the target size decreased; this dependedon cursor size.
Actually, the target size alone showed no significant effectson either the task completion time, transportation time or orientation time.
This demonstrates that multidimensional docking or matching tasks are not Fitts' tasks per se.
This finther suggeststhat human information processing for multidimensional object transportation and orientation may be very different from that for pointing.
The interplay of controller, cursor and target sizes aff&s object manipulation, as illustrated in Figure 9.
There is a strong interaction between the controller and c:ursor, and also between the cursor and target, but not between the controller and target.
The matched sizes of controller and cursor facilitate object manipulation speed,while the same sizes of cursor and target improve accuracy.
The relative size between the controller and target generally has no significant effectson object manipulation performance.
We expected human performanceto be better when the controller size, cursor size and target size were the same.
We found that transportation times  were faster when the controller and cursor both had either small or large sizes.
However, TT was slower when the cursor and target size were the same,either both small or large.
In the case12 the orientation time , OT was fastest when both controller and cursor were large.
However, OT with both the small controller and small cursor was not as fast as that with the large controller and the small cursor.
For the interaction betweenthe cursor size and target size, the same size resulted in slower OT.
For spatial errors, VED was smaller when the controller and cursor were both small.
VED was also smaller when the cursor and target were the same size, small or large.
VEA had the smallest value when the controller size and cursor size or the cursor size and target size were both large.
In general,the above results indicated that the same size of controller and cursor facilitated object transportation and orientation processes in terms of faster TT and OT.
Interplay of controller, cursor and target size.
These findings provide insight into the underlying mechanismof human performancein HCI.
Cursor and target are objects in the display domain, while a controller is in the control or hand domain.
The cursor is the key which interacts with both controller and target.
The intrinsic properties of a cursor such as size and shapeare presentedin the display domain.
At the same time, a cursor can be consideredas a visual representationof the controller.
In contrast, both intrinsic and extrinsic properties of a target are in the display domain, while both intrinsic and extrinsic properties of a controller are in the control domain.
We suggest that it is the nature of domain separationbetweenthe intrinsic and extrinsic properties of a cursor that makesit unique: bridging betweenthe controller and the target.
Neither controller nor target have properties acrossanother domain besidesits own.
There may be different reasons for human performance improvement in speed and accuracy in the same size conditions.
The fast object transportation and orientation processes of the samesize controller and cursor may be due to the consistency between haptic information of the controller and visual information of the cursor, that is, what subjectsfeel is consistent with what they see.
As discussed previously, the performanceimprovement in accuracymay be due to processing of visual feedbackinformation when the cursor and target are exactly the samesize.
Applications HCI design should consider the relative size of controller, cursor and target altogether, rather than isolate each element.
Particular attention should be paid to cursor properties in relation to the controller and the target.
Any moving graphic object driven by an input device can be considered as a cursor.
Therefore, the interaction of a controller with a cursor or other graphic is expectedto occur in general graphic interaction applications such as animation and gaming.
The size effect of a cursor has conventionally been ignored in either,,mputdevice design or graphic design.
As shown in this study, an appropriately sized cursor may significantly improve human performance in HCI.
The relative size of objects should be determined in the context of task requirements.
If speedis the main concern, attention should be paid to the controller and cursor size; if accuracyis the main goal, emphasis should be directed to the cursor and target size.
Small controller and cursor sizes may benefit object translation tasks, while larger ones may facilitate object rotation tasks.
A tradeoff may be achieved by closely examining the size effect to meet the specific task requirements.
The size effectof controller, cursor and target should be taken into account in the experimental design in HCI research.For example, in previous input device comparison studies, the size of different input devices usually was not controlled or not reported in publications.
The size of input devices may actually have a compound effect with other factorssuch as cursor sizes, and even target sizes.
Thus, caution is specially neededto interpret results of studies on multidimensional object manipulation in virtual environments.
Proceedingsof the Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems CHI `96 /ACM, 292-299.
The "prince" technique: Fitts' law and selection using areacursors.
In Proceedingsof the Conferenceon Human Factors in Computing SystemsCHI `95/ACM, 273-279.
Fitts' Law as a researchand design tool in human-computer interaction.
Object manipulation in virtual environments: human bias, consistency and individual differences.
In Extended Abstracts of the Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems CHI `97/ACM, 349350.
The structure of object transportation and orientation in human-computer interaction.
Proceedings of the Conferenceon Human Factors in Computing SystemsCHI `98/ACM, 3 12-319.
Using hand position for virtual object placement.
Anisotropic human performance in six degree-of-freedomtracking: An evaluation of three-dimensional display and control interfaces.IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics-Part A: Systems and Humans, 27, 51%
