Social support, those processes "through which social relationships might promote health and wellbeing" , is increasingly leveraged via computer-mediated communication .
Social interaction does not simply remain valuable in a mediated context , but mediated social support has its own set of advantages  and in specific cases may obviate the need for face-to-face counseling .
Much research has explored and described social support over CMC , but the overwhelming majority of these mediating channels are bulletin boards, online forums, rich email threads, and other net-based interfaces accessed via the desktop.
As people increasingly engage with each other via mobile CMC in pervasive social awareness streams  , the nature of the social interaction changes, as do the ways in which social support is provided and received.
Inspired by the notion of staccato attention, an effective multitasking behavior characterized by attend to off-task content in many short bursts , we are therefore interested in the health applications of staccato social support : the particular style of social support enacted in mobile environments designed for brief, rapid social sharing and interaction.
Social support plays an important role in health systems.
While significant work has explored the role of social support in CMC environments, less analysis has considered social support in mobile health systems.
This paper describes socially supportive messages in VERA, a mobile application for sharing health decisions and behaviors.
The short and bursty interactions in social awareness streams  afford a particular style of social support, for which we offer the label staccato social support.
Results indicate that, in comparison to previous work, staccato social support is characterized by a greater prevalence of esteem support, which builds respect and confidence.
We further note the presence of `following up', a positive behavior that contributes to supportive interactions, likely via social pressure and accountability .
These findings suggest design recommendations to developers of mobile social support systems and contribute to understanding technologically mediated social support for health.
Supporting health and wellbeing has long interested the CHI and CSCW communities , but the question as to how technology might best aid wellbeing remains relatively open.
As a community, we monitor and assess diet and exercise ; deliver prompts, reminders, and interventions throughout the day ; build intelligent systems that quietly classify and record our activities ; and develop novel tools for measuring our momentary stress and affect .
When we allow users to leverage others' assistance, designed interactions commonly imitate intimate in-person dialog , are competitive1 , or are intended specifically to aid in health crises .
Social support is verbal and nonverbal communication that helps reduce an individual's uncertainty, lack of perceived personal control, or stress, and, "whether directly or indirectly, communicate to an individual that she or he is valued and cared for by others" .
Furthering and broadening our understanding, Cohen describes social support as "any process through which social relationships might promote health and wellbeing" , and can be leveraged in two ways.
First, as an exchange of resources, emotional or informational, in response to a perception of another in need.
Second, as "benefits accrued from participation in distinct social groups that influence cognition, emotion, behavior, and biological responses beneficial to health and well-being through interactions not explicitly intended to help or support" .
Online venues  that afford socially supportive communication have existed since at least the mid-1980s .
Illuminating the effectiveness of social support for health via CMC, much previous work reports participants valuing a reduction in geographic barriers, the availability of rapid response and `just in time' support, and the online open discussion of health concerns .
Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
The most commonly cited goal for interacting with others around health is receiving and providing emotional support, and users value their membership in OHCs particularly for the access to similar others who provide encouraging, positive, and rapid responses .
While there is a growing trend of doctorpatient engagement in online communities, it is important to recognize that the support offered by non-professional peers is different from that provided by clinicians, often more personal and experiential, and a valuable domain of health expertise in its own right .
To understand types of social support, Cutrona and Suhr  developed a five-category social support behavior code , which provides a rich typology of socially supportive behaviors.
Designed from a survey of existing social support literature, as well as a series of questionnaire studies, this behavior code is a non-exhaustive list of 23 mutually exclusive socially supportive behaviors organized into five major categories: information support, tangible assistance, esteem support, network support, and emotional support.
Although originally used to describe face-to-face behaviors supportive of stress management, these categories have subsequently been used in assessing social support in other contexts online, including living with disabilities , managing long-term disease , diabetes , or HIV/AIDS , eating disorders , and communication in marriage .
Information and emotion are the most frequently reported social support types in these studies.
Maitland and Chalmers report on multiple forms of peer involvement specific to socially supporting weightloss: obstructive , inductive , proactive , supportive , and co-operative  .
These forms are valuable to consider, although are less inclusive than Cutrona and Suhr's as well as being less well established.
Work on Twitter suggests motivations for use of such a system include daily chatter and seeking and sharing information , while Marwick and boyd indicate that such interactions do afford self-presentation and strategic commodification .
Another way to frame the rapid sharing and consumption of short messages is to draw on staccato attention .
Exploring the relationship of multitasking and  performance, Hembrooke and Gay report that "sustained distraction, regardless of content relevance, appears to be the nemesis of the multitasker."
Instead, many shorter bursts of attention given to non-primary task content more effectively facilitates multitask .
Staccato attention describes the interactions on the modern web particularly well, with users interleaving bursts of short mediated behaviors, such as skimming the Facebook newsfeed, sending a tweet, or checking in on Foursquare, into their work day and social events.
Further, staccato attention is exactly the attention desired in ecological momentary assessment  self-report measures, designed to capture data in frequent, quick, and unobtrusive bursts that neither interrupt nor disturb subjects' daily lives.
In this paper, we draw on that previous work to suggest that staccato social support  may be a useful label in describing the ways social support is enacted in social awareness streams.
To date, little work has attended to the style of social support afforded in mobile technologies for health .
Most commonly, mobile social support services attempt to replicate the more traditional CMC social support experience for the mobile space.
Indeed, such technologies do and should retain many of the advantages of CMC social support described by Walther and Boyd , such as drawing on weak ties, access to remote expertise, anonymity, and hyperpersonal aspects.
For example, Houston, step counts  are shared with other Houston users; drawing on others may well encourage meeting health goals through social support or social pressure .
In another example, EatWell  enables users to access a community via their cell phones, both to share and to hear voice memories describing healthy eating attempts in their local neighborhood.
EatWell facilitated a sense of being heard, and generated feelings of hope of community empowerment around healthier eating behaviors.
Increasingly, though, mHealth apps leverage affordances unique to the mobile device, such as location information and the ability to intervene at the moment of decision .
Compared to more traditional modes of online communication such as online fora, blogs, bulletin boards, and list-servs, CMC interaction today is increasingly characterized by the rapid  public sharing of short messages and just-captured media whose consumption is often driven by articulated online contact networks.
The growing popularity of Facebook status updates and tweets, and the corresponding quick-response style interaction, are evidence of this trend - indeed, almost 1 in 10 online U.S. adults now use Twitter on a typical day, up fourfold since late 2010 .
Multiple explanations account for various aspects of this shift.
75% of the tweets were informational in nature  while esteem support accounted for less than 7% .
Virtual Environments for Raised Awareness  is a mobile phone application that encourages users to record their health decisions and to share them with other users.
When making a health-related decision, a user opens the VERA application and makes a status update.
This begins by taking a photograph documenting the decision .
The user then also records a subjective healthiness rating from -3  to +3 ; a binary variable indicating whether they performed the depicted action ; an optional free-text caption; and how s/he feels about the health decision using PAM  .
PAM, a validated image-based measure of affective state, is intended for frequent in-situ delivery via mobile phones.
In this study, we discuss system use in two VERA deployments at a large northeastern university in the US.
In both deployments, the features of the VERA system were demonstrated to the participants individually, each of whom were asked to make five status updates daily.
While participants were shown how to engage socially within the VERA system, reviewing others' activities and posting comments were not a required part of the study protocol.
Participants were not directed to focus the recording of their activity in any one area of health, as the VERA platform draws on the mobile health design principles of open-ended social awareness .
Participants who owned an Android or iOS device installed VERA on it; others were loaned an Android-based 3G MyTouch Slide for the study.
Deployment 1  Participants were recruited via university departmental and student listservs and physical fliers for participation in a mobile phone-based research study examining healthy decision-making processes.
Recruitment resulted in two deployment conditions: 17 participants in a social condition in which all were strangers, and 17 participants in an individual condition for a total of 34.
As we are concerned with social support, we restrict our discussion with respect to deployment 1 to the 17 participants in the social condition.
Participants used VERA for two weeks, completed both preand post-test surveys, and were compensated with $20 for their participation.
Deployment 2  Participants were recruited from a wellness program for faculty and staff, via two mailing lists: a general mailing list for all members of the program , and a list for those individuals focusing on weightloss .
Recruitment resulted in 44 interested participants; for several reasons some participants dropped out, leaving 17 participants in the general group  and 8 in the weightloss group  for a total of 25.
The groups were enrolled into VERA separately, such that those in a given group only see the status updates of others in their group.
Two dyads were previously acquainted, but most were strangers.
All participants used VERA for four weeks, completed both pre- and post-study surveys, and all but two general group members participated in an interview during the third or fourth week.
Each participant was compensated with $20 and entered into a drawing for a $250 Amazon.com gift card.
Upon completing a status update submission, the user is shown a newsfeed view displaying photos recently shared by others in their deployment condition .
Similar views allowed the browsing of posts by individual user; both showed posts in reverse-chronological order.
Selecting one of these photos shows which user shared this photo, when, whether they performed the action or not, and their optional note.
At this point, a viewing user can also send a message about the status update to the status' author, and review any discussion s/he has had with the author about this status.
All messages in this version of VERA are visible only to the messages' author and recipient, and are essentially private messages associated with a single status update.
Users can also communicate via a group chat feature that worked like a simple IRC channel.
This version of the VERA platform runs on both Android and iOS devices.
5 A previously published paper  also reports on data collected in two of the deployments described in this work, but drew exclusively on qualitative interview data.
Here, we analyze social messages from within the system, employing anecdotes from the interviews to help contextualize and interpret our findings.
We include descriptions of both the system and the deployments for clarity.
The analysis of the messages participants sent to one another was informed both by iterative, inductive coding and by comparison to previous work on mediated social support.
Analysis began with a grounded approach rather than simply using an existing taxonomy because we were exploring social support enacted in mobile health applications, a medium affording a different interaction style from those in previous work on mediated social support work.
The codes emerging from this analysis were then mapped to previously reported social support categories, and the relative distributions compared.
Finally, as described above, interviews were also conducted with the participants.
These interview data are used below as occasional anecdotes, but the primary analysis and results pertain to the message content.
The analysis began with substantive coding, with one author reading iteratively through the messages in the context of the status to which they refer to identify themes in the messages, focusing in particular on social support.
Organization of these themes resulted in a first codebook for SSS.
Following standard qualitative coding practice, the codebook was then iteratively refined during the training of two research assistants as coders.
After establishing satisfactory intercoder reliability on a reliability sample , the assistants each independently coded half the remaining messages.
Because many messages only made sense in the context of the original private message thread, coders were shown the original status image as well as each message in the thread; codes were then applied to the message as the unit of analysis.
Providing context was essential in affording meaningful resolution to coder differences, in contrast to  where such context was unavailable and inter-rater agreement was therefore impossible to achieve.
Due to the brevity of the messages the need for tie-breaking was relatively rare; when necessary, tie-breaking was a two-step process: first, subjectively considering relative emphasis, and then by position .
The resulting codebook, which is available upon request, contains 13 socially supportive codes, which are displayed with their counts in Table 2.
To better understand SSS, we drew on previous work on mediated social support, particularly Braithwaite et al., who describe the typology of social support in an online forum for people with disabilities , and Coursaris and Liu who similarly describe the support typology in online HIV/AIDS selfhelp groups .
These studies both use Cutrona and Suhr's  five-category social support behavior code , mentioned above, as an organizing framework.
The five categories are  information support, providing information about stress itself or how to deal with it;  tangible assistance, providing or offering to provide goods or services needed in the stressful situation;  esteem support, communicating respect and confidence in abilities;  network support, communicating belonging to a group of people with similar interests and concerns; and  emotional support, communicating love or caring.
The mapping of our 13 social support codes to these five categories can be seen in Table 1; we further describe these categories and the codes mapped to them next.
A common theme from interviews regarding status creation was keeping the practice of healthful behaviors engaging and fun - healthy habits can start to feel repetitive.
Interviews suggest this motivation drove the majority of `variation suggestion' messages which perhaps most closely parallel Cutrona and Suhr's teachable moment subcategory.
Lots of birdwatching walk opportunities!
Advice-giving messages can be straightforward in the vein of `eat this not that' as in a thread on coffee, not evil!
Not uncommonly, these messages can offer a cognitive reframing .
Advice giving sometimes includes an element of humor, especially when the advice comes in the form of a friendly telling-off, as in Looks good but not a good food pick huh?
Cutrona and Suhr's information support category includes messages that convey instructions, including advice, referrals to experts, situation appraisal, and teaching.
Three of our generated codes obviously map into information support : `more information', `variation suggestion', and `advice'.
As VERA participants are interested in daily wellbeing and weightloss, many of the messages in this category offer guidance around exercise and nutrition.
Tangible assistance involves a reference to or commitment toward taking physical action in support of the recipient.
Our generated code `perform a direct task' maps well here.
The two messages labeled with this code are in response to a dog owner posting a picture of a walk with her golden retriever: a commenter expresses delight and promises to share as a status a picture of her own dog, and the original poster says they will keep an eye out for the upcoming status.
Interestingly, among the few messages posted to the real-time chat were multiple suggestions and seconding requests to meet up in person to continue conversations begun in VERA.
Our codes `like button' and its food-specific subcode `yummy!'
They may also apply specifically to the poster her/himself, as with Nice smile!.
Short messages such as Neato!
Also mapping well to esteem support is the code `I'm inspired', which labels messages expressing something close to envy or an explicit intent to imitate, as in humm, now thinking i should dice an apple and toss that in MY morning oatmeal?
A number of identified themes did not directly align with the SSBC.
As in previous literature, including Cutrona and Suhr's  original presentation of the SSBC, we noted requests for social support, here around temptation from late-night snacking behaviors: trying to stay away from it tonite...wish me luck!.
In studies such as these, there are rarely more than a few exemplars  so they are commonly not given their own category.
Messages coded `expressing thanks' acknowledge and appreciate others' support.
At some times this is as simple as a quick thnx; at others the thank you is more directed, for example Thanks for the reminder!
Thanking and acknowledging was sometimes associated with further opening up, as when the original poster of a status about putting down a long-lived pet cat responded to a series of sympathetic messages: Thanks.
It was a good long life.
She lived in 5 houses, 3 states and with 5 different dogs at different times.
These messages convey sense that someone is paying attention and taking an interest.
For example, in following up with a participant who struggled with late-night snack food temptations one user left the message How did you do?
I only caved in to a single sugar cookie craving last night .
Or, after a post about walking in the snow, another observed Hope you wore your boots today!.
I hope it did not disappoint... upon observing a fellow group member trying Greek yogurt as recommended.
This type of message is not accounted for in the traditional support literature; we discuss similar messages in other mHealth systems below.
While previous work describes network support interactions as those that create structural connections ; in this VERA deployment we do not see examples of network support.
In fact, in later social support studies  Cutrona and Suhr themselves dropped network support from the coding scheme due to low inter-rater reliability and "questionable relevance to dyadic interactions".
Emotional support communicates love and caring.
Coursaris and Liu list 7 subcategories: relationship, physical affection, confidentiality, sympathy, understanding, encouragement, and prayer.
We map the generated codes `sympathy', `me too!
They also express solidarity in pain bummer!
I know how much I hate it when I am injured!
Messages more explicitly demonstrating solidarity and similarity were labeled `me too!'.
Sometimes the status reminded the messager to return to a `me too' behavior, as in i use to keep gum in my desk for just that reason!
I should probably get some more!
The code `cheerleading' was difficult to cleanly map into Cutrona and Suhr's five categories.
Our codebook applies it to messages that are encouraging and complimentary, which suggests that `cheerleading' may sit across emotional support  and esteem support .
In this section, we first describe the messaging patterns in each of the three social groups over the two deployments, to provide a greater sense of messaging in VERA.
We then report the distribution of social support observed in VERA, and contrast SSS to the distribution of support types reported in both Braithwaite et al.
Of these messages, 575 contained supportive content.
There was a long-tail distribution of messages over statuses, with 1559 updates not provoking any response and 61 instances of a status being associated with at least three messages.
There are several reasons this may have occurred.
First, several participants used VERA much more as a personal diary than as a social interaction tool, therefore leaving less messages and not intentionally crafting statuses with an eye to presentation and performance.
Second, while participants could page through the newsfeed , many status updates appeared around common meal and workout times, meaning that some were very quickly relegated beyond the first newsfeed page.
Third, as many health behaviors require habitual performance to be effective, not a few posts are thematic `duplicates' of previously shared health decisions.
Those statuses that received more messages contained more unusual content, were perceived to be particularly impressive, or tapped into a positive `me too' experience.
For example, a status picturing a horse and captioned Equine-derived mental health moment prompted 7 varied responses from So envious!
Did you get to ride?
The length of conversational threads tended short.
Of the 368 unique conversational threads, 221 contained only one message and 95 two messages.
No thread was longer than four messages and only 8 conversations reached this length.
As we had hoped, interviews with participants shed further light on system use.
For example, we learned that participants tried to keep their posts creative and fun, both for reasons of self presentation and to maintain or even elevate the interest for, and value to, others in their group.
A common sentiment was that the newsfeed view `should be kept interesting'.
We saw this in both the variety and range of health decisions and activities shared, and in the ways common activities would be photographically represented - for example, different angles of views of feet and running shoes in an effort to keep the sharing of a repetitive activity engaging.
Multiple participants reported crafting such creative statuses not simply for others' interest, but expressly to provoke supportive feedback.
Of course, a few users ended up using the same or very similar images over and over to record repeated activities; this was noted by other participants, and sometimes interpreted as demonstrating a lack of effort in participation.
To keep posts interesting, participants also commonly employed humor, particularly laced with sarcasm.
Participants at times gently called attention to less healthy decisions - for example, in response to a picture of a giant ice cream sandwich, one participant joked plus three, right?, referencing VERA's subjective healthiness scale of -3...+3.
Similarly, commenters might underscore the original poster's recognition and admission of such less healthy updates: pizza isn't good for you?!?!
Status creation was also a way to more subtly provide social support, an aspect not captured by this analysis.
One example is the trend of reporting healthy walks with one's dog that originated with one dog-loving participant; subsequent imitative posts both validate and express commonality with the first poster's behaviors.
The 17 users in deployment one generated 582 statuses  and 111 messages were sent  and received ; two users did not send messages and all but one message contained supportive content.
The 8 users in deployment 2b created 303 statuses  and 117 messages were sent  and received ; one user neither sent nor received a message and all but 3 messages contained supportive content.
Anticipated by the means and medians above, several communicative users in each deployment sent large numbers of messages to the others in their groups.
Accordingly, most other users received a few more messages than they sent.
A network analysis  shows reasonably uniform receipt of messages, but that one pair and one triad in deployment 2a sent and received messages particularly to each other .
Consistently in the literature on mediated social support, information and emotional support are the categories most frequently observed.
SSS affords a greater frequency of esteem support than support mediated by traditional online forums , and in  information-giving dwarfs all other categories.
In both short-message studies there is a noticeable absence of network support.
Members of many online support fora , as well as those of in-person support structures, begin as strangers.
This is by necessity but also by design: research shows that anonymity is a recognized benefit of mediated  social support.
While contrasts in support type frequencies across this work, Cutrona and Suhr's dyadbased studies , and Turner-McGrivey and Tate's broadcast model  do not lead us to believe that group makeup and sharing models alone explain the differences we report, this opens up interesting avenues for future work in exploring SSS along both connectedness and group size dimensions.
In addition to group makeup, the media through which support is communicated may directly impact support type.
As users grow accustomed to the increasing prevalence of social awareness streams , they are trained to `like' others' statuses and offer short and peppy responses that often validate and compliment their friends.
It may be that esteem support is the most natural and effective mapping to the  SAS medium - but this does not explain the differences in relative support type frequencies from .
It is clear from both the current analysis and from Turner-McGrievy and Tate's work on Twitter that support enacted within SAS has a different typology than that in more traditional CMC spaces such as online fora.
Further, both  and the current deployments involved participants not previously well acquainted who were all targeting daily wellbeing goals like weightloss.
Why then does the current analysis demonstrate such a prevalence of esteem support while  does not?
First, the Twitter participants were not in a closed network as in an OHC and in VERA, thereby impacting users' privacy and sharing as discussed above, as well as their self-presentation concerns .
Second, it is likely that 's focus on education and information-giving, which yielded large numbers of `listening' responses , limited the presence of other message types.
Future work should explore the impact of system framing, or study instructions, on support types.
While `following up' messages do not map well into categories from the CMC social support literature discussed above, there is definitely social influence at work throughout these messages.
Addressing this type of message in Houston, Consolvo et al.
It appears that in SAS affording frequent and quick `checking back in,' lightweight social pressure and accountability manifest as staccato support.
Future work should determine if `following up' is more broadly applicable in CMC social support, or if it pertains specifically to mHealth contexts.
The above results demonstrate differences in the relative frequencies of the types of social support observed in this paper and those in previous work .
More important, though, is considering why these differences may occur.
One potential explanation comes from Cutrona and Suhr's optimal matching model in which the type of support given is that perceived to be the most beneficial .
Specifically, supportive behaviors promoting action are beneficial around circumstances under the recipient's control, while those promoting comfort and healing fit better when a scenario is outside the control of the recipient.
This well explains why advice and suggestions were salient in studies of stress management in marriage , while emotional support was most salient in online support groups for those dealing with disabilities and health problems .
For the data reported here, the model correctly predicts the presence of informational support as the health decisions shared by our participants are largely nutritional and exercise based, activities almost completely under their control.
The salience of esteem support in VERA through this lens also makes sense, as participants compliment and validate each others' healthful decisions.
A second consideration is that social support is likely sensitive to network composition.
Taylor  reports cultural differences in the impact of social support on psychological and biological responses, while Toscos  finds network composition very important for certain age-groups.
McLean  reports that in weightloss, adolescents fair best when treated alone, children improve best with parental support, and adults lose most effectively with spousal support.
With homophily, jargon also plays a role; for example, status notes in the VERA weight-loss group contained slang such as `reefy,' meaning `refeeding,' the practice of calorie overloading on non-diet days to keep the body's metabolism high.
Relatedly, social support in mHealth systems is increasingly provided by connecting to popular social networks, meaning that at least some support can be provided by intimates, and that social support can be visible to  groups.
VERA does not do this, for two reasons.
First, privacy: Newman et al.
While potentially beneficial, there are styles of interaction that SSS may preclude.
For instance,  indicates that detailed and personal `war-stories' are an important component of peer support in health support communities, but none of the current studies nor 's Twitter-based study show evidence of more intimate, longer narrative.
It could therefore be that SSS does not afford this type of sharing ; it may also be that within the confines of short studies participants did not have the opportunity to reach necessary levels of mutual comfort and familiarity.
While VERA does not support explicit user profiles to hasten selfpresentation and connectedness, Twitter does and  also reports low levels of emotional support.
Lastly, the domains of general wellbeing and more casual weightloss may not yield personal and intimate war-stories in the same way as those such as terminal disease.
Another contrast in distributions observed is the complete absence of network support in the VERA deployments.
Network support is about creating structural connections and making introductions.
It is possible that such connection-making did not occur in VERA deployments because there was less perceived need for introductions to medical professionals or because the longest deployment was only four weeks.
It seems unlikely that introductions cannot be made in SAS, but this possible should be considered.
This initial work on SSS does not explore the potential for negative impact through either negative short messages or non-participation.
While in VERA we see no evidence of such negative feedback cycles, future work should be aware that negative staccato interactions could be detrimental to participant wellbeing.
Further, we do not offer insights regarding staccato social support as experienced by lurkers.
Preece finds there are many reasons people lurk in CMC , and within social support, Mickelson reports that online lurkers "can obtain comparison information or vicarious support without having to disclose anything about themselves...  obtain validation for their feelings of stigma without having to communicate those feelings to others"  .
Future work should investigate if staccato social support affords a similar `vicarious support', and further, how increased trust may motivate lurkers to begin contributing support themselves, as suggested in .
A recent update to VERA allows for such investigation via rich activity logs.
Here we consider how SSS systems may be designed to further facilitate SSS.
SSS need not be text-only, but could be represented by a button similar to the Facebook `like' or thumbs-up, Instagram's heart or the Google+ `+1'.
An explicit `like' button not only affords positive ambiguity, but also allows for support without demanding a response.
A like button allows for easier, even more rapid response than a short text-based note.
Secondly, more than 10% of VERA messages contained an emoticon, most commonly smiley or winkey faces.
On a touchscreen device, the on-screen keyboard can be modified to present buttons that will insert one of several emoticons in a single keystroke.
We suggest that affording these even more lightweight modes of support will boost the valuable engagement of participants with more resources in their daily lives who typically engage less in OHCs than those with more need for support , while still providing meaningful, attention support for `like' recipients, as with the audible `cheer' in Path's Nike+ integration.6 Enabling users to label responses as particularly supportive or helpful both affords real-time feedback to other users in the system regarding their communication, as well as a growing source of tagged messages that could be used to train automated assistance to some users in some situations.
Using geocoding and reverse geocoding, messages can be visually annotated with location information or displayed directly on a map.
One concern with affording non-text based communication and providing responses to location-based information queries would be short-circuiting the back-and-forth interaction SSS affords: by designing maps into the system, we obviate the need for interpersonal dialog and attention-giving used in VERA to pass along location information.
Future work should attend to this tension.
An element common to all types of social support including `following up' is the awareness and appreciation of others' attention.
Mobile applications commonly invite attentiongiving by providing notifications.
In VERA, we can imagine alerts such as, `Dave just left you a message on your status'.
Indeed, several participants requested either notifications or daily summaries of others' activities, particularly for received messages.
However, it is not yet clear if such interruptive notifications would be effective paired with SSS.
Staccato attention in  is valuable when individuals attend in short, bursty ways to new content not via interrupts, but freely, by choice.
This unobtrusiveness matches 's call for behavior change technologies that integrate into daily life, as well as the design requirements of EMA .
This paper's examination of SSS in VERA , a mobile phone application that allows users to share photos documenting daily health decisions, finds high levels of information support, in the form of advice-giving, and esteem support, i.e., complements and short validations.
This analysis enables two core contributions.
First, by using a common typology  to compare these results with analyses of social support in other CMC, we find esteem support far more prevalent in VERA.
This difference advances our understanding of how social support for health plays out in different media.
Second, to existing typologies of social support we contribute 'following up.'
This positive behavior, which was not previously reported in work on mediated social support, leverages social pressure  and social accountability  to support health behaviors.
In sum, this paper furthers our understanding of the role that technologically mediated social support plays in wellbeing.
While our results pertain directly to mobile health communication, they also carry broader implications.
As described in our paper, staccato-style interaction is increasingly common in many areas of HCI, raising important questions about the differences in the social interactions facilitated by such media.
These findings, and our comparisons with previous work, help address such questions, thus contributing to our general understanding of how different communication media afford different styles of social interaction.
A., Whittaker, S., and Bradner, E. Interaction and outeraction: instant messaging in action.
Newman, M., Lauterbach, D., Munson, S., Resnick, P., and Morris, M. It's not that I don't have problems, I'm just not putting them on facebook: challenges and opportunities in using online social networks for health.
Pollak, J. P., Adams, P., and Gay, G. Pam: a photographic affect meter for frequent, in situ measurement of affect.
Preece, J., Nonnecke, B., and Andrews, D. The top five reasons for lurking: improving community experiences for everyone.
Purpura, S., Schwanda, V., Williams, K., Stubler, W., and Sengers, P. Fit4life: the design of a persuasive technology promoting healthy behavior and ideal weight.
Psychological Barriers: Lurker and Poster Motivation and Behavior in Online Communities.
Sapp, A., and TrenthamDietz, A.
Social networks and quality of life among female longterm colorectal cancer survivors.
Effects of supportiveexpressive group therapy on survival of patients with metastatic breast cancer.
Stone, A., and Shiffman, S. Capturing momentary, self-report data: a proposal for reporting guidelines.
Taylor, S., Welch, W., Kim, H., and Sherman, D. Cultural differences in the impact of social support on psychological and biological response.
Encouraging physical activity in teens Can technology help reduce barriers to physical activity in adolescent girls?
Pervasive Computing Tech for Healthcare .
Turner-McGrievy, G., and Tate, D. Weight loss social support in 140 characters or less: use of an online social network in a remotely delivered weight loss intervention.
Walther, J., and Boyd, S. Attraction to computer-mediated social support.
In Communication technology and society: Audience adoption and uses, C. Lin and D. Atkin, Eds., Hampton Press .
The analysis of an electronic support group for individuals with eating disorders.
