Global Positioning System  navigation systems were amongst the top selling consumer technologies in 2008 and research has indicated that such technologies could affect driving behaviour.
In this paper, we study how different output configurations  of a GPS system affect driving behaviour and performance.
We conducted field experiments in real traffic with 30 subjects.
Our results illustrated that visual output not only causes a substantial amount of eye glances, but also led to a decrease in driving performance.
Adding audio output decreased the number of eye glances, but we found no significant effects on driving performance.
Although the audio configuration implied much fewer eye glances and improved driving performance, several participants expressed preference for the audio/visual output.
Also, in-vehicle systems have become increasingly sophisticated due to the integration of advance functionalities, novel interaction techniques, and emerging wireless network infrastructures.
This progression may present the driver with tasks that are unrelated to the driving task , which in hand may require high attentive interaction.
Global Positioning System  navigation systems were amongst the top selling consumer technologies in 2008.
In the recent years the GPS has become a subject of research.
Current research on GPS systems has shed light on the way in which the utilization of these navigation systems may alter driving practices and affect the way people understand the environment in which they navigate .
Studies have also addressed important usability aspects by evaluating the learn ability and memorability of a GPS system in order to identify problems associated with first-time and infrequent use .
Furthermore, additional research studies focus on how navigational information should be presented in order to enhance user comprehension or satisfaction .
However, we still have a rather limited understanding of GPS navigation systems on their effect on driver attention and driving behaviour .
The inherent challenge of dividing attention of the driver between road information and GPS navigation directions calls for further experiments and studies how to design such GPS systems.
Particularly we need to understand how navigational outputs influence driving performance  and especially if we consider how secondary task performance can lead to various kinds of accidents .
Thus, we need research that investigates how such systems are used in natural contexts, i.e.
In this paper, we investigate different output modalities of a GPS navigation guide on their effects on driving behaviour and performance by comparing three output configurations; audio, visual and audio-visual.
The paper is structured as follows.
First, we present previous research on in-vehicle systems research.
Secondly, we outline our experiment with the adapted measures used to investigate driver behaviour and driving performance.
Next, we present results from the experiment and finally, we discuss the results.
The market of in-vehicle systems has grown exponentially over the last three decades - a proliferation, which was set in motion by a reduction in hardware costs as well as innovation in communication and information technology .
In-vehicle systems serve a variety of purposes, e.g.
The development of in-vehicle systems has initiated debates and inspired research on road and driving safety.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
The literature on in-vehicle systems research is particularly concerned with effects of such systems on driver attention, driver distraction, and driving behaviour .
Research studies separate between different types of driver distraction where withdrawal of attention from the driving scene is the most commonly used.
According to Brown , withdrawal of attention can either be general or selective.
The general withdrawal of attention  refers to the insufficient  perception of the driving information, e.g.
Selective withdrawal of attention  is a more subtle type of distraction as it involves e.g.
Drivers are required to have their eyes on the road in order to ensure safe driving; hence secondary tasks involving visual attention can induce safety risks.
Research studies have attempted to reduce driver distraction through novel means of interaction to support secondary tasks.
Their findings showed that the use of the tactile interface entailed higher task completion times and lower recognition performance.
However, the gesture-based interface enabled the drivers to perform secondary tasks more accurately, and they further perceived the gesture-based interface to be less distracting.
The interaction techniques were compared in two complementary experiments.
The findings showed an inclination towards the gesture-based interface.
The touch interface allowed drivers to complete secondary tasks with significantly fewer eye glances in comparison to the tactile and touch interfaces.
The tactile interface lacked intuitiveness; the system demanded perceptual resources in order to be operated and hereby diverting attention from the primary task.
The touch interface introduced a lower task completion time and fewer interaction errors, in comparison to the other two interfaces.
While novel input techniques are important contributions to the field of in-vehicle systems research, it is also essential to consider potential opportunities and limitations of output modalities .
The aim of the study was to clarify how much attention the systems required and how the participants perceived the use of the systems.
The participants watched a video recording of a driver's view and received route guidance information.
The study showed that the auditory configuration required less attention and gave the lowest driver reaction time when compared to the visual configuration.
When supplementing the audio and visual configurations with information on landmarks no penalties to driver attention incurred.
The participants predominantly favoured configurations that included landmarks as opposed to the ones without landmarks.
They generally expressed a slight inclination towards visual output.
A recent empirical study by Moldenhauer and McCrickard  partly confirms the results by Green et al.
They investigated trade-offs involving information conveyance by evaluating four information modalities - audio, audio with overhead map, visual and visual with overhead map - in a driving simulator.
Their results showed that the visual modality with an overhead map resulted in the highest number of driving errors and highest reaction time, whereas participants expressed that the information provided by the audio-based modalities were more difficult to comprehend.
They acknowledged that a more immersive setting could provide further validation of the results.
While the above studies provide insights into the potential opportunities and limitations of different output modalities of in-vehicle systems, we still need further investigations on such modalities and especially we need studies conducted in real traffic driving and not only driving simulators.
Especially, we need studies on GPS navigation guides focusing on output modalities, as these systems are highly output-oriented towards the driver and less input-oriented.
While their study provides design implications, the focus is on content of GPS guides rather than interaction and output modalities.
Inspired by previous research we evaluated the navigational output provided by a GPS system.
As stated above, the majority of in-vehicle systems research has been conducted in controlled and simulated settings .
We chose to conduct the experiment in the field  due to the inadequacy of immersive settings within the area of in-vehicle research.
The purpose of our experiment was to study how different output modalities of a GPS navigation guide affect drivers and driving performance during real traffic driving.
We included three output modalities namely audio, visual, and audio-visual.
In the following, we outline the experiment, the participants, GPS system, procedure, and data analysis.
All participants  carried valid driver licenses and had between 3 and 19 years of driving experience .
On the basis of self-assessment - 9 participants indicated that they had poor knowledge of Aalborg and its surroundings, 15 indicated basic knowledge, and finally 6 claimed that they had good knowledge of Aalborg.
The average amount of kilometres driven per year was equalled out between the three participant groups.
Each participant group indicated equal acquaintance with the greater Aalborg area.
This screen consists of a 3D map showing the current part of the route.
The selected route is marked with red line, manoeuvres are illustrated with green icons and the current position of the vehicle is shown with a blue arrow.
The bottom part of the screen shows navigation instructions including distance, estimated arrival time, signal strength among others.
We utilized a between-subject experimental design using output modality configurations  as independent variables and dependent variables included primary driving task performance , secondary driving task performance  and eye glance behaviour .
The GPS navigation guide used in the experiment was a TOMTOM GO 930, which at the time of the experiment was a state-of-the-art model that had received favourable reviews .
The GPS came pre-installed with maps and a POI  covering Europe.
The main input interface is a 4.3" touch screen with a 480 x 272 pixel resolution for visual output and an internal speaker for audio output.
With participants having Danish as their native language, we selected the language setting to match this for both visual and audio output.
The three test configurations  consisted of different combinations of output modalities.
The audio configuration consisted exclusively of the system's audio output, while the visual configuration consisted exclusively of the system's visual output.
The configuration on audiovisual comprised both output modalities.
Audio output consists of navigational instructions presented through pre-recorded speech  using a female voice.
Each instruction included an estimated distance and a direction - for example `after 200 meters, turn left' - followed by a repetition of the direction.
If there was a need to perform a sequence of turns  this would be included in the instructions - for example `after 200 meters, turn right and then turn left'.
On longer stretches of road  the system would add an additional reminder.
The GPS navigation guide was placed at the lower centre of the windscreen  for all configurations .
This ensured that participants using visual output unobstructed view of the visual output.
For the sessions involving audio output, the internal speaker volume was set to 75%.
None of the participants found it necessary to adjust the volume during the experiment.
Furthermore, the GPS guide was slanted in a manner, which ensured that the participants were only able to receive auditory output.
The experiment comprised four scenario-driven tasks - the tasks involved driving to predetermined locations and collecting associates of the University - for example "Collect Lisa Nielsen who lives on Poseidonvej 15, 9210".
By applying scenario-driven tasks, we sought to promote a natural setting for the field trials.
The GPS system served as an optional component allowing participants to approach a given task unassisted.
We conducted our experiment as a field experiment in real traffic.
All participants drove vehicles  equipped with manual transmissions.
The field trials were conducted during daytime and in good weather conditions.
As such, we strived for consistency between the sessions and to minimize safety hazards.
We conducted two pilot tests to test and adjust the equipment.
The participants were classified as one of the following user types - GPS system users or non-users - the decisive factor for this classification process was based on whether or not the participants had used GPS systems previously.
We ensured that each group had at least one female participant .
We collected demographic data of the participants through an interview.
Before the driving sessions, participants were introduced to the experiment.
First, we introduced the GPS system and the car and we stressed the fact that they had to adhere to the general traffic rules.
Participants were told that they were supposed to drive around the greater Aalborg area to pick up different people.
They were given oral instructions of addresses to visit and had to type in these addresses in the GPS system.
Secondly, participants were allowed to take a test drive to familiarize them with the car.
Also, we stressed that we were testing different configurations of the GPS system and not their performance and they were told that they could pull over at any time while driving if they needed a break.
Finally, participants were asked to sign an information and consent form.
We refrained from asking questions during the field trials.
Dialogues only took place when participants initiated a conversation.
The test manager was sitting next to the participant and a logger was sitting at the back seat.
The test manager ensured that the experiment proceeded as intended while the logger collected qualitative data, e.g.
The participants were debriefed as a concluding segment of the experiment.
We conducted a semi-structured interview where participants were asked about subjective matters.
Inspired by previous research studies , we integrated several measures for understanding driving behaviour and driving performance.
We analyzed the 30 video recordings  both individually and collaboratively.
One recording was omitted  due to incomplete data collection caused by a technical error in the camera.
The data analysis was done in three steps.
First, we initially analyzed three randomly chosen video recordings collaboratively in order to establish guidelines and metrics for the subsequent individual video analysis.
Secondly, two authors analyzed 16 video recordings individually reporting incidents on the selected measures.
We randomly selected ten of the recordings for analysis of both authors to ensure procedural consistency.
The produced incident lists of these ten recordings were compared and an inter-rate reliability test  gave =0.75 corresponding to a substantial agreement according to Fleiss et al.
Thirdly, we compared and merged all incident lists into one combined list.
If disagreeing, the authors would analyze the recordings once more to determine whether the concerned incident was valid or not.
In the following, we outline the included measures in more detail.
We integrated longitudinal and lateral control errors, traffic lights crossing and directional indicator violations.
Longitudinal control errors were defined as speeding violations in three different categories  namely speeding level 1, 2, and 3.
All field trials started at the Computer Science Department at Aalborg University.
The participants were not given tasks during driving - each task was presented prior to the associated driving segment.
The estimated length of the entire route was 16 kilometres - the segments comprised both rural and densely populated areas in order to expose the participants to varied traffic environments and areas of Aalborg, which they may either be familiar or unacquainted with.
The permitted speed limit ranged from 30 - 80 kilometres per hour in the four driving segments - we avoided motorways due to safety concerns.
All field trials were filmed using two camcorders - one of the camcorders was mounted on the dashboard in order to capture eye glances.
Lateral control errors denote loss of lateral vehicle control, i.e.
We also recorded incidents where participants did not adhere to the stop signals assigned by traffic lights and incidents where participants failed to activate the directional indicator as required by Danish traffic regulations.
We also recorded the completion times for each of the four tasks.
We adapted the coding of Bach et al.
Our coding involved counting recorded video frames where category one  corresponds to less than 14 frames, category 2  corresponds to 14 - 50 frames, and category 3  is more than 50 frames.
A Tukey HSD post hoc test showed that audio-visual had significantly more speeding violations than audio  and audio had significant fewer violations than visual .
A comparison between the visual and audio-visual configurations showed no significant difference.
When looking at speeding level 2 violations , we found a similar pattern as with speeding 1 violations.
Audio-visual participants had more than 6 times as many speeding 2 violations than audio participants.
The audio configuration had on average 0.6 violations while visual participants had 2.2 and participants in the audio-visual configuration had 3.3 violations, F = 5.78, p < 0.01.
Not surprisingly, a post-hoc test confirmed that audio-visual participants had significantly more violations than audio participants .
On the other hand, while visual participants had more than 3 times as many eye glances as the audio participants this difference was not significant.
Finally, we found no statistically significant differences between the visual and audio-visual configurations.
We identified only one speeding level 3 violation incident  in the visual configuration.
Thus, no significant or key differences were found for this speeding violation.
In this section we present the results from the experiment.
First, we will present primary driving task performance including longitudinal and lateral control errors, next we present secondary driving task performance and finally eye glance behaviour.
The results were subjected to one-way independent-samples ANOVA tests and Tukey HSD post hoc tests.
The results are presented in tables 1, 2, 3, and 4.
We integrated metrics for measuring primary driving task performance primarily longitudinal control errors  but also lateral control errors , directional indicators, and traffic light violations.
In total, we identified 647 violations concerning primary driving task performance across all configurations .
Of the 647 primary driving task violations, 522 are classified as longitudinal control errors .
When assessing speeding violations we identified some major differences between the three configurations.
Audio participants had significantly fewer speeding level 1 violations  than both visual and audio-visual participants.
The three speeding violation levels showed key differences between the three configurations of the GPS navigation guide and hence, this is also illustrated in the total number of speeding violations.
First, we saw that participants using the audio configuration had fewer speeding violations in total in comparison to participants using the visual and audio-visual configurations.
This may not come as a major surprise when the results from the experiment show that the visual  and audiovisual configurations  both have more than twice the speeding violations in comparison to the audio configuration .
Our participants using the audio configuration had an average of 9.4 speeding incidents, participants using the visual configuration had 20.2, while finally the participants using the audio-visual had 22.6, F = 8.09, p < 0.01.
A Tukey HSD post hoc test showed significant difference at the 5% level between audio and visual participants as well as strong significant difference at the 1% level between audio and audio-visual participants.
When re-assessing the incidents related to longitudinal control we see that there are no significant differences between the audio-visual and visual configurations - both these configurations constitute almost an equal number of speeding violations.
When assessing secondary driving task performance, we used the following measurement variables; task completion time and navigational errors.
Our results revealed that the three configurations were relatively alike and participants were rather alike within each configuration especially for task completion time .
The results do not reveal any significant differences when compared across the three configurations.
Besides speeding violations, we further analyzed additional primary driving task performance measures including lateral control errors , directional indicator errors, and traffic light crossing violations .
In total, we identified 77 lateral control errors.
When comparing the lateral control errors, we see a difference as participants in the visual and audio-visual configurations collectively constituted 95% of all errors.
Participants in the audio configuration accounted for only two errors.
Our experiment showed that participants using the audio configuration on average had 0.4 lateral control errors, participants using the visual configuration had 4.3, while participants using audio-visual had 3.0, F = 4.92, p < 0.05.
Using a post-hoc test we found that this difference lies between the audio and visual configurations where the participants using the visual configuration constitute a total of 43 lateral control errors, which is significantly more than the number of lateral control errors committed by audio participants .
Somewhat surprisingly there is no significant difference between audio and audio-visual despite the fact that the audio-visual participants had more than seven times as many incidents.
We further compared the results on violations related to traffic light  and the directional indicators .
Eye glances were categorized into three categories based on previous research .
These include category one glances , category two glances  and category 3 glances .
Due to technical problems during the trails, the audio-visual configuration included one participant where eye glances could not be identified.
Our results revealed that participants in both the visual and audio-visual configurations had many more eye glances than audio participants .
While this is not surprising in itself, the rather high number of glances for visual and audio-visual is surprising.
We identified a total of 3977 glances within all the field trials.
For the category one glances , our experiment showed that participants on average had 6.6 in the audio configuration, 45.4 in visual and 51.67 glances in audio-visual.
Subjecting these results to a Tukey HSD post hoc test showed that participants using the audio configuration have significantly less category one glances than participants in the visual and audio-visual configurations, p < 0.01.
This may not come as a surprise when the results show that audio participants only account for 7% of the recorded glances in the category one variable.
The post-hoc test showed that the visual configuration - which accounted for 58% of all the glances - has a significantly higher number of glances compared to the audio configuration, which only accounted for 2.3% of the glances .
When comparing the audio and audiovisual configurations, we found that the audio configuration has a significantly lower number of glances than audiovisual .
Further, the difference between the visual and audio-visual configurations showed significance at the 5% level.
Audio-visual participants accounted for 39.7% of all glances - nonetheless, participants in the visual configurations accounted for significantly more.
When looking at category two glances , our experiment revealed a surprising total of 2905 glances  and we can see that participants in both the visual and audio-visual configurations had an extremely high number of glances.
A post-hoc test showed significant differences at the 1% level between the visual configuration and the two other configurations.
This is also reflected in the results where participants using the visual configuration accounted for 73% of all category two glances, whereas audio participants accounted for less than 1%.
The post-hoc test also revealed a significant difference between audio and audio-visual, where the audio configuration  has nearly none compared to audio-visual , p < 0.01.
When assessing category three glances , we found a total of 87 glances , where audio-visual participants on average had 2.33, participants using visual had 6.7 and audio had 0.0.
The visual configuration participants accounted for 76% of all category three glances.
A post-hoc test showed that participants using visual have significantly more category three glances than participants in the audio configuration .
A comparison of the visual and audio-visual configurations reveals a significant difference, where participants using visual have more category three glances than audio-visual .
Interestingly, we saw approximately the same glance ratio between the visual and the audio-visual configurations as for category two glances, participants using the visual configuration again accounted for three times as many glances as audio-visual participants.
Not surprisingly, we identified large differences on total number of glances between the three configurations.
From the total of 3977 glances, 94 glances occurred in the audio configuration, 2304 in visual and 1579 in audio-visual.
We divided the participants between the configurations according to whether they had previous experiences with GPS navigation guides.
Each configuration had five GPS users and five non-GPS users.
We identified no significant differences between GPS and non-GPS users.
However, we did find that GPS participants on average had fewer eye glances than non-GPS participants on all three categories 140.33 against 124.80, but this difference was not significant.
However, GPS users had a higher number of speeding violations and driving errors.
Previous research indicates that the use of GPS systems can result in decreased driving performance.
We set out to evaluate three configurations of output modalities in order to shed light on how drivers are affected by such a highly output oriented device.
Through our evaluation we also sought to identify potential design implications.
We will initiate the discussion by focusing on eye glance behaviour, since eyes-off-the-road time is known to affect primary driving task performance .
Not surprisingly, our results showed a correlation between GPS visual output and eye glance frequency.
Although we expected visual output to stimulate eye glances, we were surprised to see how often participants diverted their visual attention from the driving scene to the GPS system.
Green found in a comparable field study a glance frequency of one glance every 8.5 seconds for a satellite navigation system .
This corresponds well with our results as our audiovisual configuration participants had an average glance frequency of one glance every 7.8 seconds while visual participants glanced at the GPS system every 5.9 seconds on average.
Thus, adding audio output seems to decrease eye glance frequency.
However, if we consider that all participants in the experiment were equally successful in completing the navigational tasks, a frequency of one eye glance every 7.8 seconds is still extremely high.
Visual output only seemed to make participants take their eyes of the road perhaps due to the fact that found driving tedious and felt entertained by the visual output.
Since driving performance usually decreases when visual demand increases , such high eye glance frequencies are problematic for off-the-shelves GPS navigation systems.
But the high glance frequency in our experiment could be explained by the fact that several of our participants belong to a relatively young age group.
Similar studies indicate that younger and older drivers differ in driving behaviour  and Green et al.
Finally, the eye glance frequency did not appear to be influenced by the context.
Participants repeatedly looked at the system in both densely populated areas as well as on longer rural segments.
This behavioural pattern only occurred in two field trials, which involved the audio-visual configuration.
This could be explained by the difference in how visual and audio information is provided.
Visual information is readily available allowing users to retrieve information whenever they deem it necessary while the audio configuration only provides information in selected situations.
Since GPS navigation guides serve as navigators within unfamiliar environments, drivers using only visual output need to confirm their manoeuvres and driving while the addition of audio output seems to alleviate this need.
We found no significant differences on driving performance for the visual and audio-visual configurations even though eye glance frequency differed significantly between the two configurations.
In spite of these consequences and previous research findings , our study did not seem to confirm these.
This is quite surprisingly as lack of visual attention usually decreases primary driving task performance .
While glance frequency did not seem to affect participants driving performance - the presence of visual output did.
Our results showed that audio only participants performed better in relation to primary driving task performance than the other participants.
Other research studies confirm that audio configurations would be most ideal in terms of road safety .
Nonetheless, it is also important to consider that driving performance differences between the configurations could be explained by the difference in how visual and audio information is acquired.
Cautious driving could be a result of participants relying on the GPS system to guide them and not being in control of when and where they receive instructions.
This level of uncertainty and alertness could cause an increased cognitive workload of drivers.
This matter is further emphasized by a behavioural pattern seen in all audio participants, where they drastically decrease speed when presented with auditory instructions.
Studies on voice instructions reveal that a decrease in speed is one of the most significant indicators of increased cognitive workload .
The lack of attention on the driving activity resulted in participants missing turns when attempting to relate the map provided by the GPS to their surroundings.
Two of the participants became so engulfed by the system that the vehicle nearly came to a standstill while traversing a roundabout.
One of the known challenges or limitations of GPS guides is precision and accuracy of the guidance, e.g.
One visual configuration participant intentionally diverted from the route assigned by the GPS system.
This was motivated by the fact that the participant knew a better route.
The participant defined a better route as involving less turns and traffic lights, while permitting a higher speed level.
The tendency to ignore GPS instructions while driving in familiar areas is also identified in a study by Leshed et al.
This study describes how users would still utilize the system in order to feel in control by locating and orienting themselves on the map.
We also observed this pattern as the participant repeatedly looked at the system in order to see if his chosen route was shorter than the one recommended by the GPS system.
GPS navigation guides comprise just one class of in-vehicle systems that are going to compete for the driver attention in the future.
Other research studies have investigated how we can minimize driver distraction through different interaction techniques .
Possibly, one should understand the use of GPS navigation guides in the context of other systems used in the car, e.g.
When considering the measurement variables, our results showed an inclination towards the audio configuration.
To shed light on this matter we assessed the data collected through the post-task questionnaire in order to evaluate the participants' opinions of the audio configuration.
When asked to assess the system instructions and output modality, the audio configuration was rated highest  compared to visual and audiovisual .
The outcome of the questionnaire indicates an overall satisfaction amongst the audio participants.
The responses given in the interview contradict these findings.
Over half the participants expressed that they would prefer the presence of visual output .
Interestingly, half of the visual participants expressed the desire to have both visual and audio output , while half of the audio-visual participants would have preferred visual output only.
This seems to indicate that the audio-visual configuration would result in the highest user satisfaction, even though results indicated that it is less safe.
With the improvement of technologies and prize reduction, GPS navigation systems have become popular consumer technologies over the past years .
Most current GPS systems utilize touch-screen interfaces and rely extensively on visual interaction.
Our findings suggest that producers should consider output modalities for future GPS systems.
Previous research studies have found that car drivers prefer navigation instructions in terms of e.g.
Several of our participants with audio output experienced problems relating such information to their surroundings and requested use of more landmarks and descriptive details in the instructions.
We believe that this additional descriptive information would not only support drivers, but also alleviate confusion caused by technical limitations in GPS systems.
More than half of our participants experienced problems with inconsistency in the GPS system's distance estimates - for example, delayed updates of visual maps or instructions due to unstable satellite signals or loss hereof.
Areas, which had several navigational options, caused confusion amongst the drivers, which consequently led to navigational errors.
Utilizing landmarks and additional descriptive information would further enable drivers to relate visual maps and instructions to their surroundings.
The audio participants also expected more guidance before they were to traverse a complex intersection or roundabout.
Allowing the user to retrieve information whenever they deem it necessary could be a potential solution as it also maintains an auditory interface.
On the other hand, designers should also consider how to restrict or omit visual output when the car is in motion.
During the audio configuration field trials, we observed that participants looked at the system during travel, even though no visual output was provided.
Since most GPS systems are sold as independent consumer technologies, they have the disadvantage of giving the user a visual focal point that may attract their attention when presented with instructions.
We believe that by integrating GPS systems into vehicles and utilizing the car stereo for audio output could eliminate the visual focal point.
This concept is similar to many handsfree phone systems.
We conducted an experiment with the aim to compare three output configurations of a GPS guide on drivers and driving performance.
Our results indicated that visual output not only causes a substantial amount of eye glances, but also leads to a considerable decrease in driving performance.
While the introduction of audio output in combination with visual output reduced the frequency of glances, the effects on driving performance were minimal.
This could indicate that the presence of audio output may induce additional cognitive workload, nonetheless audio output is beneficial when considering eye glance behaviour and glance tendencies.
A direction to be pursued is to design an audio output based navigation system, which accedes to user preferences, as our results already indicate that audio output is an adequate output modality in terms of road safety.
Moreover, further studies are needed to fully understand the behavioural patterns emerging when using GPS systems.
Although we strived to approximate a natural setting, we cannot eliminate the possibility that participant behaviour was affected by the fact that they were being observed.
During the interview, two participants expressed that they chose to follow the provided route despite disagreements with the given instructions, as they believed that a linear approach was necessary in order to complete the tasks.
We also acknowledge that there is an imbalance between the visual and audio configurations in relation to the way the navigational information was provided.
Participants in the visual output configurations had additional information e.g.
Finally, the setup of our experimental study could be problematic as drivers often fit the involvement of in-vehicle systems with the driving activity as pointed out by Esbjornsson et al.
This could also be the case for GPS navigation guides.
Australasian College of Road Safety.
Human Factors and Ergonomics Society, Vol.
Broy, M.  Challenges in Automotive Software Engineering in ICSE, ACM Press.
Burnett, G.  Turn Right at the Traffic Lights - The Requirement for Landmarks in Vehicle Navigation Systems.
The Journal of Navigation, Vol.
Esbjornsson, M., Juhlin, O., and Weilenmann, A.
International Journal of Human-Computer Interaction, Vol.
Statistical Methods for Rates and Proportions, 3rd ed., John Wiley, New York 11.
Geiger, M., Zobl, M., Bengler, K., Lang, M.  Intermodal Differences in Distraction Effects while Controlling Automotive User Interfaces.
In Proceedings Usability Evaluation and Interface Design, HCI 2001.
The Use of Speech Recognition Technology in Automotive Applications.
Faculty of the Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State 13.
Green, P.  Customer Needs, New Technology, Human Factors, and Driver Science Research for Future Automobiles in Journal of the Society of Mechanical Engineers, University of Michigan Transportation Research Institute.
Green, P.  Visual and Task Demands of Driver Information Systems, The University of Michigan Transportation Research Institute.
Variations in Task Performance Between Younger and Older Drivers: UMTRI Research on Telematics.
Association for the Advancement of Automotive Medicine Conference on Aging and Driving, Southfield, Michigan 16.
Green, P., Hoekstra, E., Williams, M., Wen, C., and George, K.  Examination of a Videotape-based Method to Evaluate the Usability of Route Guidance and Traffic Information Systems, UMTRI-93-31.
Accident Analysis and Prevention, Vol.
Vehicle Route Guidance Systems on Driver Workload and Choice of Vehicle Speed: Findings From a Driving Simulator Experiment.
Ergonomics and safety of intelligent driver interfaces, pp.
Keith, O., and Burnett, G.  Learning-oriented Vehicle Navigation Systems: A Preliminary Investigation in a Driving Simulator.
Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on Human Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services, pp.
Distraction from Multiple In-Vehicle Secondary Tasks: Vehicle Performance and Mental Workload Implications in Ergonomics, Vol.
Taylor & Francis Group, pp.
Lee, D., Caven, B., Haake, S., Brown, T.  Speechbased Interaction with In-vehicle Computers: The Effect of Speech-based E-mail on Drivers' Attention to the Roadway, University of Iowa.
Leshed, G., Velden, T., Rieger, O., Kot, B., Sengers, P.  In-Car GPS Navigation: Engagement with and Disengagement from the Environment.
Proceedings of ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM Press pp.
Moldenhauer, D. and McCrickard, S.  Effect of Information Modality on Geographic Cognition in Car Navigation Systems.
Center for HCI and Department of Computer Science, Virginia Tech.
Nixon, C., Anderson, T., Morris, L., McCavitt, A., McKinley, R., Yeager, D., and McDaniel, M.  Female Voice Communications in High Level Aircraft Cockpit Noises part II: Vocoder and Automatic Speech Recognition Systems.
Aviation, Space and Environmental Medicine, Vol.
Spare Visual Capacity in Driving - Revisited: New Empirical Results for an Old Idea in Gale, A.G., et al.
Visual Demand of Driving and the Execution of Display-Intensive, InVehicle Tasks in Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society 45th Annual Meeting, pp.
Address Entry While Driving: Speech Recognition Versus a Touch-Screen Keyboard.
Human Factors and Ergonomics Society, Vol.
Uchiyama, Y., Kojima, S., Hongo, T., Terashima, R. and Wakita, T.  Voice Information System Adapted to Driver's Mental Workload.
Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society, pp.
