Media owner and editor SCHUHFRIED GmbH Place of publication Moedling, Austria Publisher Paul Gerin Druckerei, Wolkersdorf Editor-in-chief Doreen Kallweit Responsible in law Gerald Schuhfried Graphics Johanna Kurz, Vienna, www.johannakurz.com, Marlies Locker Photos SCHUHFRIED GmbH, shutterstock: p.7  Ilike, istock: p.9  Mlenny Photography, p.10  tempurasLightbulb, fotolia: cover/p.
27  Yuri Arcurs Copyright  SCHUHFRIED GmbH, Moedling.
In the innovative SCHUHFRIED biofeedback system the readings are transmitted wirelessly  technology.
The compact, lightweight radio modules are worn directly on the body.
The absence of cables ensures a pleasant setting.
The trainee is able to move freely, and the training situation more closely resembles real life.
In addition, the wireless technology opens up new uses.
T he system can be used in the workplace to reduce muscular tension by correcting physical posture.
A thletes can train on equipment while monitoring takes place.
M ore effective exercises can be used in ergotherapy, for example in sensomotor/perceptive or motor/functional treatment.
The user interface of Biofeedback 2000 x-pert is clearly laid out and easy to understand.
With just a few mouse clicks training can begin.
The evaluation is well structured and designed with clarity in mind.
All the sensors are easy to use.
Color-coded jack plugs and quick-connect components make the system quick and easy to set up.
The sensors can be used with all standard disposable electrodes.
The sensors are ultra-sensitive and precise - while also being highly stable against artefacts.
Biofeedback 2000x-pert meets the requirements of the German Medical Products Act and is registered with the FDA.
The SCHUHFRIED Company has ISO 9001 certification.
Biofeedback experts pass on their know-how and expertise in a wide range of workshops and seminars.
An extensive library of background pictures and music enables training sessions to be adapted to the individual user.
You can even add and use your own picture and music files.
The features of the training session that are displayed on the screen are also variable: with just a mouse click the readings of individual modules can be shown or removed.
Biofeedback 2000 x-pert is the all-in-one package for meeting all the requirements that biofeedback trainers and therapists encounter in their everyday work.
All relevant physiological parameters can be measured and displayed, including respiration, skin conductance, temperature, heart rate variability, pulse, muscle tension and motility.
The success of SCHUHFRIED products is built on the unique interplay between the three strands of psychology, hardware and software.
All its products are developed in-house, closely coordinated and continuously improved.
The importance of product development at SCHUHFRIED is reflected in its expenditure on research and development, which accounts for more than 25 percent of its annual turnover.
The company received ISO 9001 certification in 2003 and has been awarded the Austrian coat of arms.
This is the highest award granted in Austria and is only awarded to businesses that can demonstrate a high level of exports, a first-class credit rating, innovative ability, good quality management and significant investment in research and development.
Using new technology can be a daunting prospect.
Why not carry on using the old familiar methods, such as paper-and-pencil tests?
SCHUHFRIED makes new ventures simple.
Its systems are easy to use and have many advantages.
So the results of tests and training programs are generated automatically, available immediately and guaranteed to be accurate.
SCHUHFRIED goes the extra mile for its clients.
The sales team is the first point of contact and can turn many questions asked into questions answered.
The Help Desk assists with technical queries.
Psychologists are available to answer questions on psychological matters.
This is appreciated by many businesses and organizations, including:
SCHUHFRIED works with experienced experts in every relevant field - scientists, computer specialists and marketing gurus.
At congresses, symposiums and specialist events SCHUHFRIED networks with the other major players in the sector, so that it is always in touch with the latest trends.
Or setting the trend itself.
For the treatment of migraine, tension headache, cervical syndrome and back pain, painkillers are often not a long-term solution.
In this field biofeedback has proved to be a particularly successful new therapy.
This is confirmed by the German Society for Biofeedback: "A medical association, the German Migraine and Headache Society , has for the first time acknowledged in its guidelines on the treatment of migraine that biofeedback therapy is just as effective as treatment with drugs.
In particular for patients who suffer frequent migraine attacks the society recommends biofeedback therapy.
In introducing the new guidelines on the treatment of migraine, the society stressed that prevention plays a key part in treatment.
This is particularly important for patients who suffer frequent migraines: people who experience a migraine attack more than three times per month or whose attacks last longer than 72 hours, and those or do not respond well to drug therapy for acute migraine, can significantly reduce the frequency of attacks through preventive measures.
Strategies such as biofeedback that are based on behaviour therapy are recommended for such patients.
The DMKG emphasized that, as a number of studies have shown, biofeedback is just as effective as a drug-based therapy.
Biofeedback is a scientifically recognized therapy whose effectiveness has been proved in many major studies.
Significant improvement in other symptoms such as tinnitus, chronic pain, incontinence and ADHS can also be achieved with biofeedback."
In the context of psychotherapy Biofeedback 2000 x-pert can be used to record psychological parameters while a discussion is taking place.
From the changes in the parameters - in particular the skin conductance readings - conclusions can be drawn about the personal significance of the matter under discussion.
Biofeedback can also be used very successfully for anxiety disorders .
Through biofeedback athletes learn how to consciously control physical functions such as respiration and muscle tension.
Biofeedback is thus useful in optimizing technique, reducing competition anxiety, achieving the optimum activation state during a competition or promoting recovery after illness.
The areas in which Biofeedback 2000x-pert can be used in sport include:  Assessing the individual's psychophysiological reaction and behaviour pattern, for example in a "competitionlike" stress situation.
Reducing competition anxiety through the use of relaxation techniques, thereby boosting competition performance.
Regulation of arousal  to enable the "optimum functioning zone" to be attained more readily both during and outside competitions.
Optimizing recovery by supporting both active and passive regeneration measures.
Supporting rehabilitation after injury - the use of biofeedback helps athletes to regain control of their musculature, to direct their use of energy appropriately or to develop equal muscle tension on both sides of his body.
Biofeedback can also help to reduce any fear of repeated injury.
Fine-tuning technique - biofeedback training helps athletes identify undesirable tension and uneconomic movements and to change these in the required direction.
As an "early warning system" - regular biofeedback sessions help to highlight the relationship between strain and recovery.
As a scientifically based training method biofeedback can be used to treat neuromuscular disorders such as dystonia , partial paralysis and incontinence.
An Austrian hospital, the Schwerpunktkrankenhaus Wiener Neustadt, reports on its success as follows: "The principal indications for treatment are bowel and bladder incontinence of the urge and stress type in women and urinary incontinence following prostatectomy in men; less frequently, bowel incontinence in men and functional disorders of micturition require treatment.
Patients are referred to us after appropriate medical investigations by gynaecologists, urologists and proctologists.
Symptoms disappear completely for around 10% of women and 10-20% of men.
Training sessions last for 20 minutes with each patient.
Investigations are carried out separately and do not take up any of the training time."
The sensors are used to record the signals from the surface of the skin.
The readings are processed by the radio modules and transmitted to the computer via a wireless Bluetooth link.
Construct your own threshold training program with two or more parameters, e.g.
If both readings change in the direction that indicates greater relaxation , relaxation music starts to play.
In this training clients learn to relax by observing their breathing.
The breathing pattern is represented on the screen by a bar or a picture segment which expands or contracts with the depth of respiration.
In addition to the information on relaxation ability, the respiration pattern, respiration frequency and respiration depth are also shown.
This training program can be adapted by varying the background pictures and music.
The trainee has attempted to relax by increasing his hand temperature.
Training should preferably be carried out using only one parameter, so that your client can concentrate on the changes produced.
You can measure other parameters that are not visible to the client at the same time.
At the end of the session these are displayed in the chart.
The extract from the chart shows that the trainee was successful in raising the temperature of his hand .
At the same time skin conductance  decreased.
Breathing  was slow and regular, leading to the development of a respiratory sinus arrhythmia - identifiable by the change in pulse volume amplitude  and pulse frequency .
As with lines feedback, you can use this function to display all recordable parameters in line-graph form.
In addition, the trainer/therapist defines a threshold.
If the client succeeds in reaching this threshold , positive feedback is given.
Sounds or music are used as a reward, or fairy stories or audio books in the case of children.
Audio warning signals can also be set to sound if the readings move in the wrong direction.
Feedback is provided using a circular image which represents the blood flow in the temporal artery.
Training consists in attempting to make the size of the displayed circle as small as possible.
By stabilizing the arterial tone the client reduces the number and/or severity of migraine attacks.
This treatment is particularly recommended for children or when drugs are or become insufficiently effective.
All recordable parameters can be trained using audio feedback.
The program reports changes acoustically, by varying the pitch of a sound.
The client trains either with a background picture or without any visual display that is with a black screen.
Acoustic feedback is particularly appropriate to the regulation of breathing, skin conductance and muscle tension.
This chart shows that breathing  has changed to fit the displayed ideal respiration curve.
The rise in hand temperature  and the fall in skin conductance  demonstrate the relaxing effect of the breathing exercises.
Another good indicator of relaxation is the extent of the link between heart rate and breathing .
RSA involves the pulse rate  increasing during inhalation and decreasing during exhalation.
The program first analyses the client's breathing pattern.
It uses this to calculate an ideal respiration curve, allocating 30% of the time to inhalation, 60% to exhalation and 10% to a pause in breathing.
Heart rate, blood pressure and muscle tone increase during inhalation and decrease during exhalation.
When the exhalation phase is emphasized, as it is in the ideal curve, there is a reduction in the effect of the sympathetic nervous system and hence in the general level of activity.
The client attempts to match his breathing to the curve.
To improve the effectiveness of training the properties of the curve can be modified, for example with regard to frequency, steepness and the percentage contributions of inhalation and exhalation.
After at the most five training sessions the client is usu ally able to reproduce the more beneficial breathing pat tern, even without feedback.
With the aid of feedback on skin conductivity the client learns to consciously control the habitual level of arousal and the level of sympathetic nervous system activity.
Internal tension results in increased activity of the sweat glands and hence in a higher skin conductance level .
When the arousal level changes, the skin conductance reaction occurs almost immediately .
It is therefore an excellent indicator of the relationship between physical and emotional processes.
In EDA relaxation exercises you can choose between the following types of feedback:
The skin conductance chart  shows that the client has achieved the direct training goal.
The skin conductance level has fallen substantially; the general level of activity has been reduced.
The training has also had an indirect effect on physical relaxation - identifiable from the increase in finger temperature .
In addition, the pulse volume amplitude  has increased, indicating relaxation of the cardiovascular system.
The system automatically shows a picture sequence that induces anxiety or arousal.
Clients learn to influence the reaction of the autonomic nervous system, thus controlling their anxiety.
Because of its responsiveness, the skin conductance level  is a suitable indicator of anxiety or internal tension.
However, as the various vegetative systems 
Systematic desensitization can be achieved by ordering the pictures according to the strength of the anxiety or arousal response which they induce.
There is a wide selection of different pictures to choose from.
You can also create your own picture sequences and add them to the program.
The example shows how at the start of the session the client's skin conductance level rises as each picture is displayed.
As training progresses the readings level off, while by the end of the session skin conductance is falling again.
The vertical grey bars act as markers and indicate a change of picture.
Confrontation training with video functions in the same way as confrontation training with pictures  but uses video clips instead of picture sequences.
The client is therefore Read more more realistically immersed in the ... about BFKON.
Each video lasts for 30 seconds and can be played in an endless loop.
For longer video sequences please contact Psycho-Vision GmbH direct: www.psycho-vision.de.
The voice and video recorder can be used during a therapeutic conversation to record the conversation itself at the same time as physiological parameters.
The video recorder function is new: this enables the discussion to be recorded as a video .
In the review after the session, conspicuous physiological parameters can be matched precisely to the point in the conversation at which they occurred.
To avoid undesirable feedback reactions, the monitor should be positioned where the client cannot see it.
Signals from up to seven radio modules  can be transmitted simultaneously.
This enables the physiological parameters of a number of people to be monitored in a group setting if required.
During rehabilitation the client trains specific muscle groups with the aid of a target graph.
The aim is to increase the degree of control over muscle tension and to gradually develop the strength of the muscles involved.
The client tenses and relaxes the particular muscle group at regular intervals while attempting to follow the course of a graph shown on the screen.
The graph displayed is based on the client's readings as measured by the program in the calibration phase.
So that training can be maintained for a longer period, the program calls for only 75% of the maximum reading obtained in the calibration phase.
Seven sensitivity settings and four different filters are available.
It is thus possible to ensure that the client receives encouraging feedback even if only weak muscle signals are obtained.
The contraction phases, the number of repetitions and the pauses can be adjusted individually to make training easier in the initial stages.
The client attempts to deliberately relax tense muscles.
Either line feedback or threshold training can be used.
For cervical syndrome and back pain readings can be taken from the left and right sides of the back simultaneously.
The program displays the readings on the same axis so that the two muscle tensions can be directly compared.
Four different frequency ranges  and seven different measurement ranges  enable optimally adapted training to be provided in any situation.
Training takes place in successive phases, for example: Phase 1 - reduce theta Phase 2 - reduce theta, increase SMR Phase 3 - reduce theta, increase SMR, increase beta ii Dependency disorders   The aim of training is to increase alpha and theta activity.
Like all other forms of training, EEG training can also be carried out with two monitors.
For example, the raw EEG can be displayed on the therapist's screen.
During the session the trainer/therapist can adjust the threshold and make notes.
On the patient's monitor the video is played as feedback for success.
The feedback in this form of training enables the client to consciously influence brain activity in various frequency ranges.
Pre-set therapy forms, which are ready for immediate use, are available for the most important EEG applications.
In this type of training threshold values are used to control a video that is shown to the client as a reward.
Heart rate variability  refers to an organism's ability to continuously adapt the interval between heartbeats to situational requirements.
Physical strain or mental stress result in a quickening of the heart rate, which falls again during relaxation and recovery.
Heart rate variability is a good indicator of health status, stress tolerance, resilience and biological age.
Restricted heart rate variability is a sign of labile health, burnout, depressiveness and a biological age that is higher than actual age.
Paral- a RESP radio module in addition to lel feedback of the pulse rate the EXG module.
Read more on ii page 29 supports development of the respiratory sinus arrhythmia.
The training aims to achieve coherence of breathing, pulse and blood pressure.
Three training forms are provided for this purpose.
The aim is to gradually synchronise breathing and pulse rate.
In this type of training the client increases the blood flow to the hands through relaxation.
Changes in peripheral blood supply are controlled by the blood vessel mechanism - that is, by sympathetic arousal of the vasoconstrictor fibres.
As a person relaxes, the blood vessels widen and blood flow increases.
Feedback is provided via the temperature sensor.
This function can only be used in combination with the Read more special training program "Confron... about confrontation training tation training with picture sequen- with picture sequences .
This test identifies the vegetative systems 
Practical tip der vier Phasen sollten Sie moglichst alle Wahrend des Ablaufs During the four phases you should record as many of physiologischen Parameter des Klienten aufzeichnen.
Mitthe den client's physiological possible.
For those that auffalligen Parametern parameters fuhren Sie as dann Trainingssitzungen mit den entsprechenden Trainingsprogrammen show the most marked response you can durch.
The aim of the program is to identify how the client reacts in an active stress situation.
Using clicks of the mouse the client assesses the shape, colour and accompanying acoustic signal of a geometric figure that moves about the screen.
The computer continuously adapts the speed of presentation to the client's performance.
This subjects the client to the optimum level of persistent stress.
The statistical module enables data obtained with Biofeedback 2000 x-pert to be prepared for further statistical analysis in standard statistics programs.
This enables comparisons to be made for study purposes between sessions or individuals or within a session.
The following settings are available ii Intervals You define the intervals that are of interest.
You can choose from several selection methods: automatically defined by markers, relative to a session and absolutely positioned.
If the Biofeedback is used in health care facilities the use of the following devices may be mandatory: ii Isolating transformer for medical equipment according to  EN 60601 ii Galvanic  network isolation according to EN 60601   Please inquire with your company's safety representative.
Products of the Schuhfried Company are developed and in accordance with the requirements of the European Union guideline 93/42/EWG.
The CE mark proves that safety-relevant regulations, EMC Standards for Medical Devices , Biocompatibility Evaluation of Medical Devices , product specific regulations and the underlying quality management system are adhered to.
2GOhm reference potential: driven right leg electronic channels: 2  Input impedance: min.
Biofeedback 2000 x-pert and the Vienna Test System, the SCHUHFRIED program for psychological assessment, can be combined.
While a psychological test is being administered for assessment purposes by the Vienna Test System , physiological data can be recorded and evaluated at the same time with Biofeedback 2000 x-pert.
This makes it possible to measure a client's physiological reactions in a test situation - for example when the client is under time pressure, is concentrating on a task or is making mistakes.
Developed by prominent scientists 2.
Based on a deficit-oriented intervention  approach 3.
Embedded in a context of scientific theory 4.
Realistic and motivating design 5.
Adapts automatically to the client's ability 6.
Training at all ability levels 7.
Recommended by respected institutions You too can profit from a state-of-the-art program that covers all areas of cognitive training and comes with user-friendly management software.
