We describe a qualitative study investigating the acceptability of the Google Glass eyewear computer to people with Parkinson's disease .
We held a workshop with 5 PD patients and 2 carers exploring perceptions of Glass.
This was followed by 5-day field trials of Glass with 4 PD patients, where participants wore the device during everyday activities at home and in public.
We report generally positive responses to Glass as a device to instil confidence and safety for this potentially vulnerable group.
We also raise concerns related to the potential for Glass to reaffirm dependency on others and stigmatise wearers.
One of the major recent wearable computing breakthroughs is Google's new `eyewear computer', expected to be commercially available in 2014, referred to as Glass .
Eyewear computers are claimed to be the next evolution beyond smartphones.
Glass is designed to resemble, as much as possible, normal off-the-shelf spectacles.
Yet it is equipped with a miniature computer, a micro-display and contains many sensors: an inertial measurement unit  to measure head movements, a microphone for ambient sound pickup, a capacitive touch sensor on the main housing and a front-facing camera.
Interaction with Glass is through touch gestures on the side of the frame and spoken commands.
Additionally, Glass can provide audio and visual information to a wearer through a bone conducting speaker and the translucent display filling a small region of the field of view.
Glass opens a new space for exploring the design and development of wearable context-aware systems.
As a commercial device it might avoid the stigma associated with devices designed specifically for people with a condition .
However, given the novelty of Glass, the expectations and possible acceptance of such devices are not yet known.
We fill this void by presenting a qualitative study based on workshop discussions and an initial field trial of the Glass device with people with PD from the United Kingdom.
Parkinson's disease  is a progressive neurological condition affecting up to 10 million people worldwide, with onset generally in those over 50 .
PD manifests itself in motor symptoms including rigidity, tremor and bradykinesia, or slowness of movement .
These affect balance, gait, arm and facial movements.
Motor blocks  most commonly affect an individual's legs during walking and is generally referred to as freezing of gait.
Speech and voice are also typically affected in terms of volume and clarity.
People with PD can also be prone to transient and unpredictable "ON/OFF" cycles, wherein medication becomes less effective at treating symptoms, giving periods of effectively controlled symptoms  and periods of severe symptoms .
Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Publication rights licensed to ACM.
First, we undertook a `Hands on the Glass' workshop with 5 people with PD, representing a diverse range of typical symptoms, and 2 carers.
Participants were aged between 46-70 and all were supportive of research and interested in the idea of Glass.
The workshop gathered qualitative insights about how participants currently use technology both socially and in managing their condition and to gather initial reactions to the Google Glass technology.
The workshop and interviews were audio recorded, which were transcribed and anonymised for later analysis.
We conducted an inductive thematic analysis  on transcribed data by coding it at the sentence to paragraph level and drawing out themes across the data set.
Participant comments are denoted in the text as per; being Parkinson's or carer , gender  and participant number .
However, voice command was not without its issues.
Many people with PD experience severe problems with their speech and voice which can change with ON/OFF periods.
PM3 in particular had marked difficulty producing intelligible speech, which often caused him to avoid certain situations or social interactions: "This  is not right...
This led to concerns from PM3 and other participants that the spoken commands would not work unless highly personalised to specific vocal gestures.
Following the `trying on the Glass' activity, however, there was a high level of success experienced by the participants using the voice activation, including PM3, which incited a sense of encouragement.
The `Hands on the Glass' workshop lasted approximately 2 and a half hours.
All 5 of the participants with PD who took part owned mobile phones and used the internet at home, with 3 using specific applications to manage their condition.
One participant owned and used a Wii.
The workshop began with open discussion about how participants used technology to support daily routines, social activities, and manage their PD.
This revealed how many of the participants felt privileged by being able to leave their home and be independent.
It was also clear that, while all the participants used mobile phones, they became deeply frustrated by an inability to manipulate them due to hand tremors.
Following this discussion, a promotional video of Glass was played, highlighting the video calling, photo sharing, social media, street directions, and information searching features of the device.
Following this a researcher gave a demonstration of Glass.
Each participant was then given the opportunity to wear and use Glass for a short period of time.
Group discussions were facilitated throughout, with the purpose of gathering views on what Glass could do `out of the box' and encouraging participants to express ideas of alternative uses for the device.
The thematic analysis of the workshop revealed 4 themes, discussed in the following.
Participants discussed issues they experienced with existing technologies at length.
There were particular problems with smartphones specifically related to PD.
Tremor and a loss of fine motor ability were identified as symptoms causing great difficulty with using touchscreens and a major source of frustration .
This linked into discussion around needing to place the phone on a stable surface in order to use it .
Participants therefore felt that having a voice activation system would be a huge benefit for them .
All PD participants explained how they had lost confidence as a result of the sudden physical changes associated with unpredictable OFF stages, e.g.
PM2 experienced severe and frequent difficulties with freezing, causing him anxiety in crowds or when out alone.
This would lead to situations where they were liable to fall or be unable to get required help from the public .
Glass was immediately seen as something that could instil confidence for participants by providing a feeling of safety.
I would be more independent because I'm not allowed to be independent much at the moment.
Supporting increased confidence and safety would be two-way between patient and carer.
Carers would also benefit from knowing their family member could be contacted as and when needed .
However, there was also the consideration of burdens for the carer, who may not want to be looking over the person at all times .
Feelings around security differed from those directed to mobile phones, which could be hidden and need not be on public display .
All of the participants used Glass daily at home as well as in outdoor settings, such as the shopping mall , when meeting with friends , while out driving  and during a hospital appointment .
PF5 wore Glass to a busy shopping mall and reported receiving a lot of fleeting attention: "most people would kind of look and then, out of politeness or whatever, would not pursue it".
She invited conversation from several service staff and was surprised to hear that they had perceived her as having a visual impairment: "I went into the bank and the coffee shop, the person serving me  kept looking.
This did not however make her feel uncomfortable and she felt the attention was not excessive.
PM1 took a different approach while shopping.
He attempted to provoke a reaction from others but found they "took no notice" of him.
PM3 had a very different experience however, as he removed his Glass while shopping because he: "felt people were looking at me.
I found it quite hostile, it was almost like `you're up to something'".
This contrasted with the experiences of his wife , who had worn Glass while out for lunch with a friend and felt that "no one noticed".
PM3 stated "it's different for you because your hair hides it" indicating that he did not want Glass to draw undue attention to him.
This possibly related to a lack of confidence PM3 feels in his daily life due to his poor speech, which sees him often avoid social interactions with people he does not know.
He associated the unwanted attraction with a feeling of disability: "people peer at you, it's almost like the blue  badge on the car - they peer inside to look at you as if to say `what's wrong with you?'
For PM3 the visibility of the device on his head was a source of stigma.
Similar concerns were raised by PM2, who wore a light blue Glass during the trial: "They should be black so people don't notice it".
3 out of 4 of the participants also reported that they would not wear Glass in particular settings due to concerns over their safety.
There was apprehension that video linking could be abused by overly concerned relatives, who might think they are helping but are instead using the device as a way to control family members with a medical condition.
Concerns were also raised over "always being available", in the sense that relatives would expect Glass to be easily accessible at all times.
This was contrasted with a mobile phone where excuses could be made about why it was not answered .
The second phase of the study was a series of field trials wherein 4 participants were provided with an operational Glass to use in their own time for 5 days.
All participants had PD and had participated in the earlier workshop.
PM1 and PM3 wore a black Glass while PM2 and PF5 wore blue.
For the trials we provided participants with a boxed Glass, a Google Nexus 4 phone to tether it to, a basic instruction booklet on how to operate Glass, and cables for charging .
At the start of the trial a researcher demonstrated and explained how to use the device.
Participants were informed that they could use Glass as much as they wished.
However, in an attempt to encourage interactions with the device we provided a pack of 5 prompt cards with activities for participants to perform each day.
This included: requesting and following directions, taking photos, creating videos, checking the calendar, and making to do lists.
Each evening a researcher phoned the participants for a brief interview.
These interviews identified any significant problems in using the device and also gauged general usage of the device.
At the end of the trial each participant took part in an exit interview.
These interviews focused on; where they wore the device, what they enjoyed using it for, where they felt it could be improved and to identify whether perceptions towards Glass had altered since the workshop.
Each device was then wiped of all content.
We describe the themes from the field-trial in the following.
All of the participants experienced usability issues with Glass.
The voice recognition caused frustration amongst everyone .
For PM2 and PM3, who already have marked difficulties with their speech through PD, this proved deeply disheartening .
It was noted that, for PM1, "the voice application is going to have to be re-engineered and made a bit easier" in order for it to be usable for someone with PD.
The navigation gestures, namely tapping on the side of the device, were also problematic in everyday use.
There was more success when using the swiping gesture to navigate menus however .
PM2 also found this to be a difficult gesture to master "scrolling backwards and forwards wasn't too good at times, sometimes you went too far and it was hard to get back".
Cueing for Self-Management: Cueing for freezing has been shown to be successful for people with PD .
A person who is seemingly unable to move can be cued into initiation through having a simple visual cue in the form of someone's foot, a laser spot or a walking stick which they are then able to step over.
Using a visual overlay displayed on Glass to provide a cue for people experiencing freezing episodes was suggested by several participants .
The cueing theme was extended with further ideas around situated cueing for posture correction, swallowing, blinking and speech .
There were a number of successes experienced when using the preinstalled apps on Glass both at home and outdoors.
The SatNav system in particular was appreciated: .
When working correctly participants were struck by the speed at which searches could be performed: .
With Parkinson's you can't text because you can't hit the buttons.
Our study of Glass was with a small sample of PD patients and over a short trial period.
However, initial impressions were very promising.
Our findings show that there is worth in exploring the technical feasibility of applications for PD supporting reminding and prompting, in-sight task support and self-management cues.
Future work will also need to address several of the basic functions of Glass, such as the voice recognition and navigation gestures, to ensure it can accommodate for usability issues caused by PD symptoms.
Across the workshop and deployment phases of our study reactions to Glass were, on the whole, positive.
Some of this was down to the novelty of the technology, particularly for PM1, but there was also a genuine appreciation that the device could transform the lives of those with PD.
Our aim with this study was to elicit rich initial impressions of Glass based upon the existing, rather limited, selection of apps and functions the device provides.
Based on our findings and participant comments, however, Glass also has alternative applications that could potentially help someone with PD self-manage their symptoms.
Contextual Reminders and Prompts: There is great potential to utilise the on-board sensors to detect, and respond to, oncoming OFF periods for someone with PD .
Clinical studies have already shown the potential of using sensors to detect ON/OFF motor fluctuations .
Context aware medication reminders and information logging capabilities could prove advantageous in the monitoring and management of medication use , providing both clinicians and the individual with PD an insight into how well their medications are working.
In-Sight Task Support: The sense of loss of ability, independence and self-confidence was palpable throughout the workshop, thus attempting to recover this in some small way could make a vast difference to the life of someone with PD.
Glass allows for instant feedback and support during tasks through the translucent display.
