Annette Adler `, Anuj Gujar `, Beverly L. Harrison `, Kenton O'Hara', Abigail Sellen *Xerox Palo Alto Research Center 3333 Coyote Hill Rd.
In this paper we describea diary study of how people read in the course of their daily working lives.
Fifteen people from a wide variety of professionswere asked to log their daily document activity for a period of 5 consecutive working days.
Using structured interviews, we analysed their reading activities in detail.
We examine the range of reading activities that our subjectscarried out, and then present findings relating to both common characteristicsand variation acrossthe sample.From thesefindings, we discuss someimplications for the designof digital readiig devices.
The purposeof the study reportedin this paperis to begin to answer these questions in a systematic, empirical way, within real work settings.While not discounting reading for leisure, this study focuses on work-related activities, whether they happen"at work" or in the home.
We deliberately chose a sample of people who have very different types of jobs, acrossa range of different vertical markets.
We did this becausewe were interested in exploring the range and diversity of work-related reading activities, as well as any commonalities that might nonethelessemerge despite this diversity.
Technological advancesin recent years have meant that digital display media are becoming more "paper-like".
Wireless, lightweight digital displays are now more mobile and portable than ever.
The quality and readability of the screensthemselvesare ,quickly approachingthe brightness, resolution and contrast of plain paper.
New techniquesfor stylus-basedentry are making possible more paper-like interactions, such as allowing richer and more flexible markup and manipulation of digital documents.
Suchadvanceshave sparkeda flurry of interest in developing digital devices for reading, as evidencedby a growing number of new projects using terms such as "portable document reader", "electronic book", "electronic encyclopaedis', " virtual paper", and "electronic paper".
However, developers of these devices are faced with some difficult decisions.If they are to designdevicesfor reading, what are the kinds of readingthey should aim to support,who are the people that they should support, and how should they best support these reading activities?
The fundamental problem is that the task of "reading" is far too general and ubiquitous: reading takeson a range of forms, is done for a variety of purposes, and is embeddedwithin and related to many other document-based activities.
Permission to make digital/hard copies of all or part of this material for personal or chssroom use is granted witbout fee provided that the copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage, the wpyri&t notice, the title of the publication and its date appear, and notice is giwn that copyright is by pamission oftbe AChI, Inc To copy otbenvise, to republish to post on servers or to redistribute to Iii requires specik permission and/or fee.
From this diary study comes a rich databaseof both descriptive materials as well as quantitative measures.In this paper, we present some selected findings addressing the following issues,which we feel have important implications for the designof digital devicesfor reading: A description and taxonomy of the range of reading activities and writing activities that occurred in the working lives of our sample.
A discussion of common findings across our sample, most notably the predominanceof reading in conjunction with writing, the predominanceof paper-based document activity, and the degree to which reading activities occurred acrossmultiple, independentreading surfaces.
A discussionof the ways in which thesepeople in different professionsvaried with respectto their reading activities.
Throughout these discussions we draw attention to what these findings mean in terms of design requirements for deviceswhich aim to supporton-line reading.
PAPERS to analysethe various activities of office workers , but such analysesdo not focus on reading activities, per se.
There is also a great deal of literature within psychology and human factors exploring the issue of how people read.
Collaboration: We selectedpeople who were different in the extent to which-their work habits involved synchronous collaboration.
Subjectsworked as part of a tightly organisedteam ,loosely organisedshifts , or groups .
In other cases,subjects were primarily independentworkers .
Thesecriteria were partly derived from previous marketing analysis for portable documentreading devices.
They also representedissuesthe co-authorsfelt to be of critical importanceto reading behaviour in this exploratory investigation.
Based on these criteria, our final subject pool comprised: a contract airline pilot, a general surgeon,an organ transplantward coordinator/nurse,two anaesthetists, a residential architect,a real estateagent,two lawyers ,a warden of a half-way house, an accountancy assistant,an optician, a marketing manager,an executive from a small start-up company, and a social worker.
In order to develop a taxonomy of reading activities and to refine our methodology,we first ran a pilot study using 10 membersof our respectivelaboratories,including ourselves, as "subjects".
The initial taxonomy of reading activities was developed using a search of the literature .
Pilot subjectslogged their documentactivities for 5 consecutive days .
We then applied our taxonomy to eachof theselogs.
All five co-authorsdiscussed the data and the categoriesassigned,to produceconsistencyin the application of our taxonomy and somedegreeof interjudge reliability.
Basedon thesedata,we refined the categorisation scheme,and developeda set of questionsto ask our subjectsin follow-up interviews.
As a result of this pilot study, we also found it important to developa taxonomy of writing activities in order to capturethe range and extent to which writing occurredin conjunction with reading.
Fifteen subjectswere askedto log their daily documentactivities during the courseof their working day, for five consecutive days.
It was explained that by "document" we meant any sort of document, whether it be paper-based documents ranging from booksto post-it notes,or electronic documentsranging from computer-based documentsto the use of pagersor palmtops.We focused on documentsthat requiredthe readingor writing of text.
We askedsubjectsto log any documentactivity, not just reading activities.
Further, we askedthem to estimatethe duration of eachactivity andto notethis down on their log forms.
At the end of each day, an interviewer used a structured form in order to expand on the description of each activity and to note down more details such as what types of documents were used, whether the activity was collaborative, where the activity occurred,and what additional tools were used.
Interviews typically took from l/2 hour to 3 hours, dependingupon the numberof activities listed for the day.
By the end of the study we had 72 days worth of data across subjects.
This study was intended to be exploratory and, as such, we wished to gather broad and rich information about diverse reading activities that people carried out related to their work, acrossa wide variety of professions,representinga range of vertical markets.'
In choosing subjects,we also took account of three factors for which we wanted a representativerange:
Mobility: We selectedpeople whosejobs were predictably mobile acrossseveral locations , unpredictablein terms of location , and generally centrally basedin one location .
Location: We selectedpeople from a variety of "activity locations" such as traditional offices, retail offtces, home offices , and other work sites .
The first step in the analysis was to apply our reading and writing taxonomiesto the data.
Classification of subjects' documentactivities into reading and writing categoriesrelied, as much as possible,on subjects' own descriptions of their activities.
However, in somecases, it was necessary to break down a single activity  into multiple sub-tasksif the activity noted was discovered to involve multiple, distinct reading and writing components.
As much aspossiblethis was done within the context of the interviews and through discussionwith the subjects.
Initial classification for both reading and writing activities was carried out by the interviewer of each subject.
However, this was done with all experimenters/interviewers present so that ambiguousor difficult classifications could be discussed and agreedupon.
As it stands,with the possibleexception of our cluster of medical professionals.
However, patternsacrossthe whole sampleare pzticularly suggestivegiven this diversity.
Reading for cross-referencing  Cross-referencingdocuments in order to integrate information.
Includes reading from multiple sourcesor reading from one source.
It can be for the purpose of writing, and may well include someediting activities.
Reading to edit or critically review text  Reading in order to monitor what has been written in terms of content, style, grammar, syntax, and/or overall presentation.Includes editing one's own text, seeing how one's own text fits into a collaborative document,or the review of the text of others.
Reading to support lllenlng  Readingin order to supportlistening to someoneelse talk .
Usually takes place in a synchronouscollaborative situation .
We found that the reading and writing taxonomies could be unambiguously applied to most activities, though in some casesmultiple categories neededto be applied to a single activity.
Generally, the five experimentersfelt that the categorisations were consistently applied, and any inconsistencies that did arise were "caught" and corrected in the course of the many subsequent analyseswe carried out.
In order to obtain quantitative data on what proportion of their time subjects spent carrying out dierent reading or writing activities, the times associatedwith each activity involving readingand/or writing were analysed.Early in the courseof the study we found it was difficult to obtain separate timing data for reading and writing within any given document-relatedactivity.
For example,a subject could tell us they spent SOminutes reading and annotating a document, but not just how much of that time was spentreading as opposed to writing within that activity.
Thus, we had little choice but to use the overall total duration of the document activity reported for each of the reading and writing sub-components.This means that the quantitative data we report will tend to overestimatethe actual reading and writing times that occurred.
However, the datareported ,do give an indication of the amount of time that people spent engagedin activities in which reading or writing activities either featured strongly, or acted in a supportive role.
Within subjects' document-related activities, reading occurred on averagein 70% of them, pointing to the importance and also ubiquity of this kind of documentactivity.
It is perhapsnot surprising, then, that reading takes on many different forms within our data.
The taxonomy of reading activities that we applied is describedin Figure l.* The percent of time spent on document activities in which thesereading activities occurredis shown in Figure 2, averaged acrossall 15 subjects.This includes activities where reading occurred by itself and where reading occurred in conjunction with writing.
As can be seen, the reading that occurred in our sample covers a broad spectrum of activity.
For example, they range from "lightweight" sorts of reading activities such as quick glancesto identify documents, skimming , and reading to remind , to more intensive sorts of reading such asreading to learn  or reading to edit text .
The reading activities reported also covered a range of dierent kinds of goals such as reading to search or answer questions  or reading to self-inform .
Sketching out this range of reading activities has a general messagefor designersof digital reading devices which is that it is vital to understandprecisely what is meant by supporting "reading".
As varied as these categories are, the requirementsfor supporting one type of reading as opposed to anothercan be quite different.
From Figure 2, we can see that for much of the work day, our subjectswere involved in rapid and goal directed types of reading such as skimming  and searchingto answerquestions.
This points to the need to consider digital reading devices that support fast and flexible search,manipulation and navigation.
2 While our original taxonomy derived from the literature containedadditional categories,the above list resulted from practical application to the worl-related activities produced by our subjects.
No doubt other categoriesmight be necessarywith a different sample of people, or in looking at reading for leisure, for example.
In general,if we assumea 40 hour work week for our subjects, we found that the document-related activity time they reportedaccountedfor an averageof approximately 82% of their working week, ranging from 23%  to 94% .
Such figures are comparable  to findings for knowledge workers in a "document-intensive" work setting .
Clearly, even in our diverse sample, document-relatedactivities played an integral and central role in people's work, regardlessof profession.
Reading in order to identify  Glaucingat a documentonly in order ro i&rmr which documentit is.
Sldmming Readingrapidly in orderto establisha roz& idea of what is written, and to decide whether anything is useful, or whether anything needsto be readin more detail latex &ding mm text to remind  Reading ~ecijicuZly in order to remind oneselfof what to do next, e.g., a To Do list, shoppinglist, Post-It note.
Reding to sem-ch/unswerqmstions  Reading to search for particular information: to answera question,for reference,or to obtain information necessaryto make a decision GonI-directed-rhe reader is sampling information in the text which sathfies the goal of the search.
Ranges from very simple goals to complex decision-makingor problem-solving tasks.
Reading to learn  Reading with the goal of being able to relate or apply information at a later date.
This can refer to reading to review the basic conceptsfor discussion,or it canbe much morereflective in nature.
Certainly this doesoccur , but the proportion of time spentin such activities is low by comparison.
Typically this type of skimming appearedto have no immediate goal in mind to further apply what wasbeing read .
Overall, no one kind of skimming dominatedthe data, with sorting occurring 38% of total time spent skimming, proofing occurring 31% of the time, browsing 28%, and "other" 3% of the time.
What this analysisdoesindicate, though, is that categorieswithin the reading taxonomy we have derived need to be examined more closely to understandthe implications for design.
For example,in order for digital reading devices to support a sorting activity, one would require rapid and simple ways of moving through a "pile" of items or documents,such as showing the size of the electronic pile, with the topmost item always visible, and the possible destinations where items can be dropped into categorisedpiles.
On the other hand,proofing typically occurswithin a document.Devices supporting proofing require fast and simple page-by-page turning mechanisms.They should also provide a meansof highlighting critical information in situ to preserve document context while giving the reader faster accessto summary impressionsof the documentcontent.
This is different from merely providing abstractsor summarisedinformation separate from the context.
Finally, the browsing subcategoryoccursboth within and acrossdocuments.Devices supporting this activity need to support both the rapid and simple pageturning required within a documentand a simple mechanismfor switching documents.Browsing could take advantageof technology that highlights featuresof the articles, highlights critical segments,and/or provides brief summarisation.Functions similar to news clipping services might be usedto provide overviews.
In summary,while the taxonomy that we applied to the data is useful in distinguishing amongstbroadly different kinds of reading tasks,in order to use this categorisationscheme to help specify design requirements, some further subcategorisationmay well be necessarywithin each reading `Vype".
Commonalities across Subjects Given the diversity of people, professions,and work settings represented in this study, and given the range of reading activities that emerged,it is instructive to ask whether thesereading activities exhibited any common characteristics, despitethe underlying variation, from which we might draw some general design implications.
Here we highlight three issuesin particular: the extent to which reading  was paper-based, the degreeto which reading took place in conjunction with writing, and the use of multiple "display" surfacesin the courseof readingand writing.
ReadingCategoryAnalysis However, one may quite reasonablyquestionthe granularity of the above breakdown,especially if we are interestedin specific design requirementsfor digital reading devices.
It may be that this level of description is too broad for these purposes.To explore this issue further, we looked in more detail at the threecategoriesof reading which occurredmost frequently across our sample: the "skimming" , "searching to answer questions" , and the crossreferencing categories.
Here, we will discussonly the first "sub-analysis" by way of illustration.
Within the skimming category , we identified three sub-categories:  Sorting refers to skimming which typically occurred when subjectssorted through mail to determine what further action was needed,if any .
This quick glancing to categorise documents also occurred when tidying up or filing away documents.
In order to examinethe extent to which reading and writing activities were paper-based as opposedto being carried out using on-line tools, we classified each reading or writing activity as falling into one of three categories:paper-based, on-line, or presentation-based.
Paper-based reading and writing included such items as drawings, blue prints, flight plans.
On-line reading and writing tended to be computer-
In this category we also included situations where subjectsmoved betweenon-line and papermedia.
Third, we separatedout presentation type media which included videos, 35mm slides, and overheads.
Analysis acrossall subjects showed that paper-based reading and writing accountedfor 85% of people's total activity time.
On-line reading and writing makeup about 13% of the total time, and presentationsonly 2%.
As shown in Table 1, writing includes far more than the creation or modification of stand-alone documents.It appearsthat a significant amount of time, at least in our sample, was spent form-filling while reading, or annotating documentswhile reading them, or taking notesin the course of reading.
Thus it appearsthat a digital reading device which does not support what is mostly pen-basedmarking either in conjunction with, or on top of documents, will have limited value if one is seekingto support a wide range of work-relatedreading activities.
Early on in our analysis,it soonbecameclear that, within a given document activity, reading frequently co-occurred with some kind of writing.
To assess the extent to which this occurred, we tabulated the total time for activities in Iv&h reading alone occurred , as against the total time in which reading occurred with writing.
We found that, while there is significant variation, reading was accompaniedby writing most of the time.
In fact, for 8 of the 15 subjects,reading occurred with writing over 75% of the time and up to 91% of the time.
For all but one subject, reading was more often accompanied by writing than not.
In order to better understandwhat kinds of writing were occurring in our sample,we applied the taxonomy shown in Figure 3.
Creation Writing to createa new documentor writing to modify an existing document Note-taking Writing in an abbreviated and anstmctmed way, usually in an interzxdiateor temporarypurposerather than m create a order m serve final document.
Armotation hlarking on top of an exisfing documentto relate the marks m their surroundingcontext Form-filling Filling in structuredforms or writing in a prescribed,stmctured way, such as filling in a register.
The final commonfinding that emergedthat we will discuss is the use of multiple documentsduring reading.
As is indicated by the dominance of the reading category "crossreferencing", it appearedthat subjectswere carrying out a great deal of their reading and writing activities using multiple documentsin parallel with eachother.
In order to examine this issue more closely, all of the subjects' reading and/or writing activities were categorisedas using a single surfacefor reading and/or writing or whether multiple display surfaces were in use concurrently for reading and/or writing activities.
In this analysis, a display surface was defined as an independent, tangible surface such as a computer screen or piece of paper.
In order for them to be classified as used concurrently, it had to be clear that the surfaceswere being used side-by-sidefor the same activity.
Here, flipping back and forth within a document was not counted as a case of parallel, concurrent usage.
Multiple windows on a computer were considereda special caseof page flipping and not concurrent usage.
When analysedon the basis of total document-relatedactivity time, we found that 52% of the time subjectsuseda single surfacefor reading, writing, or a combination of reading and writing, such as annotatinga documentwhile reading it.
This meansthat 48% of the time they usedat least two display su$aces concurrently.
To explore this cross-document activity in more detail, we further categorisedthese activities as follows:
Multiple Reading Displays: Activities in which no writing occurred but in which two or more displays were read with referenceto each other in parallel in the sameactivity.
The breakdown of this cross-document use for all 15 subjects is shown in Table 2.
As can be seen,the majority of cross-documentactivity involved reading in combination with writing, and the biggest portion of that involved the reading of more than one document.In thesecases,writing either occurredon a separatedocumentor occurredon one of the documentsalso being read.
Just why these sorts of activities were so frequent is best explained by looking in more detail at what subjectswere doing when reading and writing using multiple documents.
This can be summarised asfollows: Extracting information.
One reason separate notes or form-filling occurredwhile cross-referringwas to extract information from the documentbeing read - as a list of remindersfor themselves,to draw attention to some subset of the information in the documentbeing read, or to instruct others to do things.
Sometimes information was extractedin order to keep a separate record of it.
Extracting information could also involve some degreeof transformation of that information, such as using a separate piece of paper as a computationalworkspace,or for writing summaries, or plans of action.
Integrating information Another major reasonfor cross documentactivity was to integrateinformation from other sources.This could be in the service of constructing another document.Subjectsreferred acrossdocumentsboth for specific facts and figures, and also for general ideas and themes.Cross referencing was also done when updating one documentusing another,such as updatingfiguresin a database, incorporatingpaper-based changesinto an electronic version, or using old "To Do" lists to create new ones.
Finally, information integration acrossdocumentswas done to make decisions,by consideringinformation from multiple different sources.
A third reasonfor crossdocument activity was to ensurethat one documentwas consistent with another.This could involve checkingfor consistency amongstfacts and figures, or could involve checking for consistencyin languageor format.
Finally, cross document activity also took place when subjects had to critique, commentor refer to a documentin order to write another.
One clear implication from this is that the sorts of activities describedabove somehowneed to be supportedin digital reading devices if they are to satisfactorily replace current practice.
Either this needsto be accomplishedby providing at least two readable/ma&able display surfaces,or the ability to carry out thesevarious activities has to be supported in other ways.
Up to this point we have been focusing on commonalities that emergedacrossour subject sample, and some general design implication.
Of coursein such a varied collection of people,acrosssuch a wide range of professions,one would expect interesting differences in the ways in which they read, in the ways in which they combine reading with writing, and in other aspectsof where and how reading occurs.
These are especially important to understandif, as a designer, one wishes to target a specific set of "users" in a particular vertical market.Of course,one cannot make such generalisationsabout the needs of an entire profession or vertical market on the basis of our small sample, but it is nonethelessinteresting to look more closely at the intersubject variation that did occur to get some senseof how different people's needsmight be.
While we are forced to be brief in our discussionof these issues,we will concentrate on four aspects of that variation: the "top" reading and writing categoriesfor each subject, degreeof sharing, and mobility.
Table 3 shows,for eachsubject,which reading and writing categoriesfeaturedmost strongly.
Specifically, it considers which of the reading and writing categoriesconstituted the highest percentagesof total reading and writing activity time for eachsubject.
Table 3 also showsthe extent to which each subjecttended to engagein shareddocumentviewing.
We consideredthe sharedviewing of a document either to be a single document which two or more people gather around to see simultaneouslyor multiple copiesof a single documentwhich people read simultaneously as a reference.
Here, sharing involved either the joint reading of a document , the joint writing of a document , or combined reading and writing such as is typical of joint authorship situationswhere a documentis reviewed and annotatedin a collaborativesetting.
From this analysiswe found that subjectsfell into 3 different clusters: "high" sharerswere those where sharedviewing occurred for over 50% of their activities; "medium" caseswere those people in which sharedviewing occurred for about 50% of their activities; and "low" sharers were thosefor whom sharedviewing occurredfor less than 50%  of their activities.
The final dimension representedin Table 3 is that of "mobility".
Here, all reading activities were classified according to where they took place: in the subject's office ,within the site where the subject's office was located, or outside of the building or site.
We found that subjectscould then be grouped on the basis of the amount of time spent on reading activities falling into these three categories.Nine subjectsfell into the "non-mobile" group, meaningthat the largestpercentageof time spent in reading activities was done at the desk in the office; two subjectswere primarily "locally mobile" in that the largest percentage of their activities were within the office site but outside of their office; and two subjectswere mostly "remotely mobile" in carrying out most of their activities involving reading outside of the site containing their office.
Two further subjectswe classified as "combiiation" cases,where approximately half of their time was spent at their deskandhalf was spentbeing remotely mobile.
Having said that, they vary in their mobility, and engagein very different kinds of writing activities.
For example, the optician is mainly form-filling as a result of discussion with clients, while the social worker mainly took freehand notes.
The marketing managerrelied very heavily on the annotation of the documentsaround which the discussions were centred in order to record pertinent facts, or to write remindersfor herself.
The third "group" which emerges is what one might call the "cross-referencers".However, on closer inspection of their data, the nature of the cross-referencingthese subjectscarried out was actually quite different from subject to subject.
For example, the accountancy assistantspent most of her time cross-referencingto check for consistency amongst figures, the pilot was integrating and extracting from multiple documentsto plan routes and check flight information, the warden was mainly extracting information for formfilling, and the lawyer-associate was mostly crossreferencing to check language and format of documentsin the creation of new ones.While one might surmisethat such heavy use of multiple documentsis best suited to an office environmentwhere paperscan be spreadout in space,obviously remotely mobile workers engagein this sort of activity too, asthe caseof the pilot demonstrates.
The first implication of this overview of inter-subject differences is that one might conceptualisea range of different kinds of portable, digital reading devices.
For example, some might be specifically geared toward providing users with an armoury of diierent kinds of flexible search and navigation featuresfor people whose main reading task is that of quickly browsing through information, or finding and getting accessto specific kinds of information.
Digital devices obviously have the potential to confer many benefits here, especially in terms of increased accessto more information, and to more up-to-dateinformation.
At the risk of over-generalising, it appears that medical practitioners are one group of users who might benefit from this sort of device.
For example, in medical settings, paper documents are often problematic in that patient's notes are often out of date, information needsto come from many different departments,and forms get lost.
Digital reading devices specifically designedto allow quick, flexible accessto information-could-have an important impact here, especially if careful considerationis given to the ways in which medical practitionerscurrently searchthrough documents.
Another "kind" of digital reading device is one that is designed with collaborative use in mind.
This will affect both hardware and software requirements.
For example, the viewing angle of the screenwill be an issue here.
One can imagine exploring a range of possibilities for allowing multiple pen input, and for providing software which supports joint marking and editing.
Our data suggestthat such a device might be usedacrossa range of different job types.
The group of cross-referencers suggeststhat some people may be more heavily in need of multiple display surfaces than others in their work.
Thus a "two-screen" version of a device might well find its niche naturally within someprofessions.However,judging by the degreeto which multiple displays were used across our whole sample, we can surmise that at least two functionally interlinked screensmight 247 , / , iq I-
The first interesting feature of this analysis is to note the ,similarities amongstthe four medical personnelin our sample .
All can be characterised as form-fillers, whose main reading task is one of searchingthrough documentsfor facts, results, instructions, and other specific kinds of information, often in order to complete those forms.
This kind of document activity is something they do on their own .
Note, however, that these medical professionals differ in the degree to which they are basedin an office, with the anaesthetistsgenerally using public or shared spaces in which to carry out their documentwork A secondinteresting group of subjectsis thosewho spenda great deal of time reading in support of discussion.
As one might well expect, thesepeople are also in the `high" or "medium" sharedviewing catego-
As a final comment on inter-subject variation, the data on the amount of reading carried out away from the desk strengthensthe case for the need for truly mobile reading devices .
Even for the 9 "non-mobile" subjects,6 of these people spent from 13-4070of their time doing reading activities away from their home office.
Obviously there are a range of reasonswhy people are office-based,and we can only guess at the extent to which thesefigures would changeif they had technologiesavailable which enabled them remote accessto the document tools andresources currently only found in their offices.
We are grateful to all of our subjectsfor taking part in this study and allowing the intrusion into their daily working lives.
We also wish to thank Marge Eldridge for comments on this paperand assistance in setting up the study, Joe Sullivan and his group at FX-PAL for providing additional financial and moral support,and Tom Moran for comments on the paper,input on the study design,adviceand support.
We have shown how a diary study can allow the collection of both descriptive and quantitative data on reading activities within the context of people's working lives.
Further, we have used our analysis to draw out severaldifferent design implications for the designof new technologiesin sup port of reading.Thesecan be summarised asfollows:
The linear, continuous reading of single documentsby people on their own is an unrealistic characterisationof how people read in the courseof their daily work Reading takeson a variety of different forms, servesa rangeof different goals, and is carried out in many different ways, as the 10reading categorieswe have identified illustrate.
Looking in detail at the way reading is carried out within any one readingcategorycan offer guidancein specifying a rangeof designrequirements.
Reading occurs more frequently in conjunction with writing than it does in isolation.
Thus, it appearsthat writing  is an integral part of workrelated reading.
Designersneed to seriously consider the importance of developing reading devices which also support the marking or writing of documentsduring the readingprocess.
Almost half of all the documentactivities which involved reading involved the concurrent use of multiple "display surfaces" for reading, or reading in conjunction with writing.
This points to the need to consider how single display devices can support the range of cross-document activities people carry out.
It also emphasises the importance of considering the benefits of designing devices which are basedaround the use of multiple, digital displays.
Inter-subject variation suggeststhe potential for a range of kinds of digital reading devices.
Examples include a reading device specifically developedto support goal directedsearchingand browsing ,and a reading device designed for collaborative use.
Readingfrom paperversusscreens:A critical review of the empirical literature.
Agenda benders: Modelling the disruptions causedby technology failures in the workplace.
A ComparativeEmpirical Evaluation of Display Technologies for Reading.
Office Automation: A Social !md Organisational Perspective.
John Wiley and Sons, Chichester, New York.
Toward a model of text comprehensionand production.
