A solution to the problem of multiple user interfaces is to provide a home automation system consisting of a single user interface and the necessary hardware to control all the devices in the home using this interface.
The project company had a highly called Custom practical Command orientation Systems.
We also wanted to explore the use of high precision touchscreen capabilities.
Four interfaces including a dual 12-hour clock scheduler, a 24-hour dial scheduler, a 24-hour linear scheduler and a digital scheduler were compared on a feature by feature basis .
Because the advantages and disadvantages of the digital scheduler are known we implemented only the three remaining designs, which are demonstrated were collected during in the videotape.
Command specializes in the development and marketing of integrated entertainment, security, and automation systems for homes and commercial is on providing home owner to use.
The scheduling interface was identified as one feature that conference rooms.
It was decided to explore possible alternatives to the original interface which required a long and tedious process of incremental specification states through a deep menu structure.
The Microtouch or Elographic touchscreens that are used return a continuous flow of coordinates with a 1024x1024 resolution.
This allows the dragging of objects, the identification of sliding motion and the use of a lift-off strategy for selection.
This strategy reduces the error rates, allows the selection of small targets  and enables the design of interfaces that were not possible with earlier touchscreens .
The color, graphical screen displays are implemented under MS-DOS in EGA mode .
The "smooth manipulation of the clock's hands was widely appreciated but some subjects experienced difficulties when the 2 hands were close together .
Figure 3: the 24-hour line scheduler, as it is now implemented in Custom Command system.
This version ultimately was selected to be included .
This work also allowed to explore the use of the Figure 2: the 24-hour dial scheduler.
Subjects had no difficulties using this scheduler which has man y advantages: clear feedback about the duration of the event is visible on the line and the calendar, several events can be shown on the line and multiple other types of flags are possible to accommodate special needs of some devices.
No AM/PM confusion was observed and users made many comments about the information that could potentially displayed on the line .
Computer Interaction, VOI.3, Ablex PubI., NJ.
Plaisant, C., and Shneiderman, B.
Choosing to display a full 24-hour scale on the line limits the precision of the time selection.
