A common practice in work groups is to share links to interesting web pages.
Moreover, passages in these web pages are often cut-and-pasted, and used in various other contexts.
In this paper we report how we explore the idea of paragraph fingerprinting to achieve the goal of "annotate once, appear anywhere" in a social annotation system called SparTag.us.
This work was motivated by the prominence of redundant contents with different URLs on the Web and shared documents that are read and re-read within enterprises.
Our technique attaches users' annotations to the contents of paragraphs, enabling annotations to move along with the paragraphs within dynamic live pages and travel across page boundary to other pages as long as the paragraph contents remain intact.
We also describe how we use paragraph fingerprinting to facilitate the social sharing of information nuggets among our users.
A few of them also support other forms of annotation such as highlighting.
In a recent paper , we reported a GOMS-like analysis showing that all of these tools exhibit relatively high interaction costs.
Motivated by the result of our analysis, we have been working on a social annotation tool called SparTag.us.
Based on our study of del.icio.us data indicating that about 49% of tags appear in the textual contents of the tagged pages, we developed a Click2Tag interface, which provides a light-weight option for a user to tag or highlight paragraphs of interest while reading a web page.
Those paragraphs that have been annotated  are automatically extracted and inserted into a notebook created by SparTag.us.
In this paper we focus on another design aspect of SparTag.us, which is utilizing paragraph fingerprinting to achieve the goal of "annotate once, appear anywhere".
Specifically, for each paragraph that a user has encountered, we compute a fingerprint based on the textual content of the paragraph.
As the user tags or highlights a paragraph, we store its fingerprint as part of the annotation data.
This tight coupling guarantees that the annotation will re-appear whenever the user sees the same paragraph, even in a different URL from the one where the annotation was created.
It also facilitates the social sharing of information nuggets, enabling other users to benefit from the annotation work when the same paragraph appears in their browsers.
Information gathering and sharing are essential steps towards the goal of social sensemaking.
In the past few years, a variety of Web 2.0 tools have been introduced to support social information foraging and sensemaking.
These include some popular social bookmarking/tagging systems such as del.icio.us , MyWeb , Diigo , Clipmarks , Magnolia , Bluedot , and Google Notebook .
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
As argued by schraefel et al.
The Hunter Gatherer tool  allows a user to select sub-document components from a web page and add them into a collection.
Inspired by this approach of collecting useful tidbits, SparTag.us employs annotation as a means to collect paragraphs of interest.
It automatically adds those annotated paragraphs into the system-created notebook, along with the URLs of the source pages.
To deal with dynamic live pages whose contents change over time , both schraefel et al.
However, such a pointer-based mechanism fails to address two well-known occurrences on the Web:  Duplicate and near-duplicate pages.
According to Broder et al.
First, there are pages residing in multiple web servers in identical form .
Second, there are pages in almost identical forms .
Indeed, since Broder et al.
From the individual perspective, it is appealing to be able to "annotate once, appear anywhere".
For example, if a programmer annotates a paragraph while skimming a Java API page at java.sun.com, he should see his annotation appearing when he visits the same Java documentation installed at his institution.
In other words, it would be counter-productive to ask the programmer to annotate the same piece of content twice, even if it appears in two different URLs.
In SparTag.us, our paragraph fingerprints are solely based on the contents of the paragraphs and not the URLs where the paragraphs appear, allowing annotations to "travel" across page boundary to duplicate and near-duplicate pages.
In a recent study of 15 enterprise users , Tang et al.
Another study conducted by the IBM dogear team  shows that about 7~22% of URLs were bookmarked by more than one person working in three corporate organizations.
Our analysis of a recent del.icio.us crawl data  reveals that on average a user shares about 75.7% of his bookmarks with at least another user.
All these data indicate that within a community of common interest, there is a large overlap in the kind of contents that people browse and read.
From the social perspective, one may benefit from seeing the foraging artifacts of other people.
Indeed, this is the fundamental assumption of social search and social navigation .
In SparTag.us, a user can subscribe to another user's annotations by designating him as a friend.
As a result, the user will see his friend's annotations when viewing pages containing paragraphs annotated by his friend.
Note that those pages do not have to be the same ones that his friend annotated on.
In the rest of this paper, we first describe how we compute paragraph fingerprints.
In SparTag.us, when a user loads a web page in his browser, we traverse the Document Object Model  tree of the page in a top-down manner to extract paragraphs.
A DOM element is considered to be a paragraph if its HTML tag matches one of a predefined list .
For each paragraph, we remove the HTML tags from its textual content and compute a fingerprint from the remaining text.
Subsequently, the user can click on words in a paragraph to tag the paragraph, or highlight phrases and sentences with mouse click-anddrag.
Figure 1 shows a paragraph that has been tagged with keywords "CHI 2009 submission".
Two different parts of the paragraph have also been highlighted in yellow.
When the user annotates a paragraph, the tags or highlights, in conjunction with the paragraph fingerprint, are sent to our web server and stored in a database.
As the user visits a web page, we use the fingerprints of those paragraphs appearing on the page to query the database to see if some of those paragraphs have been annotated by the user or his friends.
If so, those annotations are fetched from our server and displayed with their associated paragraphs.
The first benefit of our paragraph fingerprinting is that we can handle dynamic web pages.
Figures 2a and 2b contain two snapshots of a blog site www.techcrunch.com captured at different times.
Figure 2a includes a paragraph which we annotated when it was placed at the top of the page .
A few hours later when the page was re-visited, the annotated paragraph moved down the page as indicated by the scroll bar because new stories had been added to the top and old stories had been removed from the bottom.
As can be seen in Figure 2b, our tags and highlights followed along with the paragraph.
Note that we will never encounter the problem of orphaning annotations  because our annotations are content-based.
In other words, when the annotated paragraphs are removed from the page, their annotations will disappear as well.
Although the guides of CHI2009 had been significantly revised from those of CHI2008, the annotated paragraph of Figure 3a was retained in Figure 3b.
Due to the matching of fingerprints, our annotations re-appear in Figure 3b.
Note that these two guides are located in two different URLs and we only annotated the paragraph once.
Finally, the third benefit is that annotations travel across users.
In SparTag.us, a user can subscribe to the annotations of a friend using a simple user interface .
A friend can be either an individual or a group of people sharing common interests .
In contrast to the design of Third Voice , our design allows the user to decide whose opinions to pay attention to.
Figure 4 shows a portion of a friend's notebook as viewed by user hong.
In Figure 4, the friend's highlights are displayed in light blue and his tags attached at the end of the paragraph.
If multiple friends highlighted the same paragraph, all the friends' highlights would have been aggregated.
His friend's annotations indicate what his friend felt was important about the paragraphs.
In fact, since the location of the paragraph does not matter, the user viewing the paragraph in the notebook can just annotate the paragraph in situ in the notebook.
If both the user and his friend highlight the same word, the personal highlight takes precedence .
This example illustrates how a user may benefit from the annotating artifacts of other users.
We have implemented the paragraph fingerprinting technique described above in SparTag.us.
In our current implementation, SparTag.us consists of two parts: a Firefox extension and a server.
The Firefox extension includes a GreaseMonkey  script and a browser toolbar .
The toolbar consists of a set of buttons, providing shortcuts to key functionalities such as turning on/off SparTag.us, editing the list of friends, and opening the notebook, etc.
SparTag.us server, which is an Apache Tomcat server running Java servlets and connecting to a MySQL database.
For each paragraph, the server computes a fingerprint using Secure Hash Algorithm .
Next, it queries the database with the fingerprint to retrieve those annotations created by the user and his friends for the paragraph.
Subsequently, the server returns the annotation data to the client.
Upon receiving the annotation data, the client modifies the DOM of the web page to display the annotations.
It also adds mouse event handlers to support the Click2Tag interface.
Depending on the length of the page, the annotations generally appear within seconds of loading the page.
When the user tags or highlights a paragraph, the tagging keywords or highlighting word positions, in conjunction with the fingerprint, are submitted to the server and subsequently stored in the database.
To understand the impact of annotation sharing enabled by paragraph fingerprinting, we have conducted a lab study .
In this study, subjects foraged on the web to learn about a new topic area under three conditions: no SparTag.us, SparTag.us with no friends, and SparTag.us with an expert friend.
Our result shows that people with access to social annotations obtained significant learning gains.
In addition, we have adopted an iterative design methodology to refine the design of SparTag.us with user studies.
In  we reported a usability study showing that users found SparTag.us intuitive and easy to use, and liked the combination of tagging and highlighting features.
We also described a smallscale field trial of SparTag.us and follow-up interviews aimed to understand how the tool works in people's daily practices.
Furthermore, in  we presented another study examining the comprehension and memory effects of the Click2Tag interface vs. the type-to-tag interface.
In this paper we propose to use paragraph fingerprinting to achieve the goal of "annotate once, appear anywhere" in SparTag.us.
Recognizing that there are a lot of redundant and shared contents on the Web, we tightly couple annotations with the fingerprints of paragraphs.
This enables annotations to travel from where they were created to other pages and other users.
Our technique not only eliminates the cost and annoyance of re-producing the annotations, but also encourages the social sharing of information nuggets.
We are working to release SparTag.us to the public via a living laboratory website.
The idea is to use the findings of our deployment to further refine the design of SparTag.us.
In addition, we are interested in exploring other fingerprinting techniques that only take into account of important words on the paragraphs.
Another thing that needs further investigation is whether paragraph is the right semantic unit for fingerprinting.
Finally, there are cases where it may be undesirable to show annotations captured in other contexts.
Currently, using the SparTag.us toolbar, one can turn off the tool or unsubscribe to a friend's annotations.
