We decided to investigate the different perspectives raised by these studies.
Interruptions during the course of the workday might be of the same context as the current task at-hand or they might be random, related to other topics.
If indeed interruptions as the same context as the task at-hand are beneficial, then this has important implications for system design.
For example, systems might be designed to help colleagues gear their interruptions to others so as match the context of their tasks.
We were interested in measuring the disruption cost of interruptions.
One type of a disruption cost is the additional time to reorient back to an interrupted task after the interruption is handled.
These previous studies introduce conflicting notions as to whether the interruption context is related to a disruption cost.
For example, one might be working on a paper and be interrupted by a completely different topic, such as a question about a budget.
If an interruption has a different context than the current task athand, this could introduce a disruption cost as it involves a cognitive shift of context to attend to the interruption, and then one must reorient back to attend to the interrupted task.
On the other hand, one might be interrupted by a question that concerns the same context as the paper one is working on.
This might be beneficial but if the context of the interruption and primary task are similar, this could lead to interference with the primary task  and in this way may introduce a disruption cost.
A third possibility is that the interruption context may not matter.
Perhaps any discontinuity in the task creates a disruption cost for work.
Disruption costs of interruptions can also involve other factors such as stress.
A second question that we asked is how interrupted work might change the state of a user; is interrupted work significantly more stressful or viewed as more effortful than noninterrupted work?
Though we might intuitively believe it does, it remains an open question.
Disruption costs might also be mitigated by personality factors.
We performed an empirical study to investigate whether the context of interruptions makes a difference.
We found that context does not make a difference but surprisingly, people completed interrupted tasks in less time with no difference in quality.
Our data suggests that people compensate for interruptions by working faster, but this comes at a price: experiencing more stress, higher frustration, time pressure and effort.
Individual differences exist in the management of interruptions: personality measures of openness to experience and need for personal structure predict disruption costs of interruptions.
We discuss implications for how system design can support interrupted work.
The role of interruptions in the workplace has begun to receive a lot of attention in HCI in the last few years.
Empirical studies have focused on identifying the extent of interruptions and how they affect tasks , the recovery of tasks after an interruption , and timing of interruptions, e.g.
Yet as more studies in multi-tasking and interruptions emerge, so do conflicting ideas on how interruptions might affect work.
Such individual differences could be used to design customization in a system to adapt to workplace preferences.
The goal of our experiment was to better understand how interruptions affect work: its patterns, user strategies, and disruption costs in order to inform system design to help people manage interrupted work.
A 3x2 factorial experimental design was used.
The withinsubject factor was interruption context with three levels: no interruption , same-context interruption , and different-context interruption .
The order of interruption context was fully counter-balanced.
Because interruptions can come through various sources, we checked whether media might affect the context of interruptions.
The between-subjects factor was media type: subjects were interrupted with telephone or IM.
81% of subjects were German university students with a mean age of 26; all had a German high school degree .
Fifteen were males and 33 were females.
All but one participant had been using email for at least two years.
Half of the subjects had been using IM for at least one year or longer; 29.2% had never used IM before.
Subjects were paid 12 Euros for their participation.
We simulated an office environment in the lab and chose an email task, common in information work.
Subjects read instructions that they were to play a role as a human resource manager at a medium-sized craft supply company.
They had just returned from vacation and were carefully instructed in all conditions  to answer all emails in their inbox as quickly, correctly and politely as possible.
Subjects were given a simple fact sheet to use in answering the emails, e.g.
For each interruption type condition, subjects had to answer 12 emails.
Based on pilot studies, the emails in the folders were equally distributed by topics.
We confirmed in the pilot study that the email questions in all conditions were equally demanding.
The content of the emails consisted of questions from various people, e.g.
Subjects first performed one trial email with the experimenter to familiarize them with the equipment and the task.
Subjects were told that their "supervisor"  would contact them periodically and ask questions.
No interruptions were given in the baseline condition .
These questions were of the same context as the primary email task, i.e.
In the D condition subjects were interrupted by the supervisor with questions about a different topic not related to the context of human resources.
These types of random interruptions were designed to simulate the types of interruptions one might expect in real office work.
Pilot studies confirmed that questions in the S and D conditions were judged by subjects to be same and different contexts, respectively, to the human resource scheme.
Subjects were instructed to attend to interruptions immediately, i.e.
Interruption frequency was set to two minutes, based on observations from  and the pilot experiments.
During the experiment, the experimenter adjusted the length of time for interruptions to try to make the times as equal as possible across conditions.
Dependent variables: Our primary variable of interest was the total time to perform the task.
The total time needed to complete each block of emails and the time spent on interruptions were manually recorded.
The time to perform the task was computed as .
If the time to perform the task was higher with an interruption, then this could indicate that extra time was needed to perform the task after an interruption.
We expected less politeness and more errors in email messages that were disrupted.
Subjective Workload was measured by a modified NASA Task Load Index  , used by .
We added a stress measure to the six given rating scales: mental and physical demands, performance, and temporal demand, which we changed to time pressure, effort, and frustration.
Subjects rated these factors on the standard NASA 20-point scale.
The experiment was conducted at a university lab and took about 1!
Subjects were randomly assigned to media type and to the interruption order .
Our first research question was whether the context of the interruption matters.
We performed repeated measures analyses with media type as a between-subjects factor.
Means are shown in Table 1.
There was no significant difference between S and D contexts.
As a control, we checked whether the actual time spent on interruptions was different in the same or different contexts as longer interruptions could introduce a higher disruption cost.
We next examined to what extent the measures of openness to experience, and need for personal structure are predictive of the amount of time one needs to complete a task that is constantly interrupted.
Our primary variable of interest was disruption cost and since there was no difference in time to complete the task between same/different interruption contexts, we combined the times for these conditions to form a single dependent measure .
There is an inverse relationship: the higher one scores on `openness to experience' and `need for personal structure', the quicker it takes to complete an interrupted task .
There was no significant difference of media type, i.e.
There was no significant interaction of media type and interruption type on time to perform task.
We found there was no significant difference in the number of errors that were made across interruption types =1.70, p<.19.
We compared our politeness metric and found no significant difference across conditions =.10, p<.91.
For both variables, we found no interaction with media type.
It was possible that the reason that it took longer to do the task in the uninterrupted condition is because people wrote more.
We examined the length of the email messages across conditions.
A repeated measures analysis on the average number of words per email  showed that there was a significant difference among conditions =3.34, p<.04.
There was no significant interaction of media type with number of words.
Our results showed that any interruption introduces a change in work pattern and is not related to context per se.
Our results differ from  who found similarity of cognitive processes of interruptions to a task were disruptive.
We looked instead at similarity of the content of interruptions and a task.
Also,  found that interruptions extremely consistent with the task were facilitating.
Our interruption context shared the same topic as the main  task but unlike  the operations and details differed.
Together, our study along with , who report participants' subjective views, show that interruptions that share a context with the main task may be perceived as being beneficial but the actual disruption cost is the same as with a different context.
Surprisingly our results show that interrupted work is performed faster.
When people are constantly interrupted, they develop a mode of working faster  to compensate for the time they know they will lose by being interrupted.
Yet working faster with interruptions has its cost: people in the interrupted conditions experienced a higher workload, more stress, higher frustration, more time pressure, and effort.
So interrupted work may be done faster, but at a price.
Our results suggest that interruptions lead people to change not only work rhythms but also strategies and mental states.
Another possibility is that interruptions do in fact lengthen the time to perform a task but that this extra time only occurs directly after the interruption when reorienting back to the task, and it can be compensated for by a faster and more stressful working style.
More sophisticated measurements of working speed directly after an interruption must be done to test this.
We found that the more open one is to experiences, the quicker one handled interrupted work and surprisingly, we found the same relation for those who score high on needing personal structure.
Perhaps those who need personal structure are better able to manage their time when interrupted.
While laboratory studies are always subject to criticism of ecological validity, our task design was based on real fieldwork.
We simulated office conditions using an email task, which is different from many laboratory studies of attention switching that use abstract tasks.
The lab environment enabled us to isolate variables of interest.
Our results have implications for system design.
A certain amount of interruptions may be tolerable because people can compensate with a higher working speed.
However, technology could be used to keep track of and control interruptions over a long period of time so as not to overload people .
After only 20 minutes of interrupted performance people reported significantly higher stress, frustration, workload, effort, and pressure.
Our results confirm experimentally the anecdotal reports of informants in field studies who describe high stress when interrupted in real work situations .
Our data also contributed to finding individual differences in interruptions.
Our personality measures suggest the need for customization for systems to fit people's preferred interruption tolerance.
We hope that our study will spark continued interest in this area.
