Designing collaborative interfaces for tabletops remains difficult because we do not fully understand how groups coordinate their actions when working collaboratively over tables.
We present two observational studies of pairs completing independent and shared tasks that investigate collaborative coupling, or the manner in which collaborators are involved and occupied with each other's work.
Our results indicate that individuals frequently and fluidly engage and disengage with group activity through several distinct, recognizable states with unique characteristics.
We describe these states and explore the consequences of these states for tabletop interface design.
While independent views of a shared workspace may support individual tasks, they may also negatively affect a group's ability to coordinate its activities and manage shared resources .
To complicate matters, we do not have a systematic understanding of mixed-focus collaboration beyond recognizing the end points: individual work and shared work.
Yet, individuals do not instantaneously shift between independent work and group work.
Instead, a group's collaborative coupling style , or the manner in which collaborators are involved and occupied with each other's work, frequently changes .
For instance, an individual might work on an idea alone before presenting it to the group, and then later work with the group to jointly manipulate the idea .
These kinds of transitions between independent and shared tasks have not been studied in depth.
Our goal is to understand coupling in the context of tabletop collaboration for the purpose of groupware design.
In the context of collaborative tasks on a shared visualization, we present two observational studies that examine how three viewing techniques, which offer different facilities for independent and group work, affect coupling:  lenses, which show information in spatially localized areas,  filters, which show information globally, and  ShadowBoxes, which allow spatially localized areas to be displaced .
As we will see, these different presentation techniques affect how groups manage and coordinate their use of the shared physical space.
Consequently, their coupling style, or the way in which they work together, differs with each tool.
We begin by describing how coupling relates to mixedfocus collaboration and awareness.
We show how related work in collaborative tabletop literature motivates our own observational work.
Our first study provides insight into how groups coordinate themselves over a spatially fixed visualization.
Our second study reveals six distinct styles of coupling and how they relate to factors such as task, physical location around a tabletop, and interference management.
These results motivate several design implications for the design of fluid, collaborative tabletop interfaces supporting both shared and independent work.
Many group activities, such as brainstorming, designing, and planning, involve mixed-focus collaboration, where individuals frequently transition between individual and shared tasks within a group .
Traditional  tabletops have been used for these activities for a long time .
Thus, understanding the nature of mixed-focus collaboration is crucial to designing useful collaborative interfaces for digital tables.
Mixed-focus collaboration presents many challenges for tabletop design because these interfaces must support both individual and group needs, which are often in opposition .
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Mixed-focus collaboration is used to describe certain tasks: those that require switching between independent and shared activity .
Considerable evidence suggests that in both collocated and distributed shared workspaces, group activities cannot be neatly dichotomized into "independent" and "shared" activity.
Very generally, coupling refers to the dependency of participants on one another--when participants cannot do much work before having to interact, the work is tightly coupled; conversely, when participants can work independently for long periods of time, the work is loosely coupled .
We use collaborative coupling to refer specifically to the manner in which collaborators are involved and occupied with each other's work.
Coupling is related to workspace awareness , but in co-located scenarios  where no awareness information is hidden, coupling is primarily a reflection of collaborators' need or desire to work closely or independently of one another, and in part depends on task semantics.
Collaborative coupling is a way of describing group activity.
As we will see, coupling is related to a wide variety of work practices on tabletops, such as physical arrangement, tool use, and fluidity of work.
When a pair's activity is highly coupled, their actions appear coordinated and fluid, likely because the goals and intentions of each individual are known to the other, thereby reducing interference.
This concept of coupling is used to describe the results of our observational studies of mixed-focus collaboration.
Coordination has been studied at a conceptual level to understand how cooperative, interdependent activities can be individually conducted .
We use coordination to refer to workspace coordination: the management of access to and transfer of shared resources .
Recent efforts in developing coordination mechanisms for tabletop interfaces have recognized the importance of existing work practices and social protocols .
For example, early work on interactive tabletop displays automatically rotated objects, but this protocol disrupted the fundamental role that subtle rotation variations play in coordinating collaboration, namely that the orientation of objects helps define working areas .
Researchers have not solved the problem of supporting coordination: we still frequently observe instances of interference .
For instance, commands that re-arrange all objects on a table are often disruptive , and individuals may sometimes attempt to manipulate singleuser objects simultaneously .
Another approach to supporting coordination is to understand and support the work practice of territoriality: how groups spatially partition a work surface to organize and coordinate activity .
This approach suggests that three kinds of territories are established organically through the placement and orientation of objects in the workspace : personal territories, in easy reach, are used for fine manipulation and reservation of resources; group territories provide context for the "group" task, and used to hold shared artifacts, finally, storage territories provide temporary areas for artifact placement.
This approach is compelling because it largely offloads coordination of workspace artifacts and table space to the group by providing mobile objects for interaction .
Yet, many tabletop activities do not involve small mobile objects.
Thus, it is not clear how tabletop coordination and territoriality are supported in the presence of fixed data objects.
For example, Tang's studies  of group activities on traditional tables provided key insights into work practices on tabletops, including the role of gestures, the mediation of work through space, the fluidity of work activity, and the role of tabletop orientation in structuring activities.
In some mixed-focus collaboration tasks, groups cannot delineate territories using objects, potentially requiring computational assistance in coordinating view and access to the space.
To understand collaborative mechanics in these contexts, we explored visualization tasks with spatially fixed data such as maps.
In such tasks, the visualized data set takes up the entire display and cannot be moved from its location, potentially introducing physical and visual interference issues when individuals need to work independently in the same area.
Figure 1 shows three techniques for exploring fixed spatial data that potentially support different working styles by providing view-based partitioning of the data: filters , lenses , and ShadowBoxes .
This global approach provides a single view of the workspace.
In our studies, filters could be displayed or hidden using a set of graphical buttons.
Lenses are mobile, resizable windows providing the same set of data visualizations as the filters, except in a localized view .
Several data layers can be shown simultaneously by overlapping multiple lenses.
Lenses facilitate local view changes without affecting the global space.
In our studies, lenses were created by using a set of graphical buttons, and were moved and resized by dragging their borders or corners, respectively.
ShadowBoxes allow users to select an area of the display and copy the underlying information to a moveable viewing window, similar to the DragMag visualization technique .
Interactions in the viewing window are "shadowed" in both regions, meaning that drawing and erasing activities in either location is immediately reflected in the other.
This displacement allows multiple individuals to work on the same part of the data simultaneously.
In our observational studies, we were interested in determining how these tools supported mixed-focus collaboration and coupling.
By providing a single view, filters were expected to ease communication by facilitating gestural and deictic references .
Independent work was expected to be disadvantaged because view changes were global.
Lenses were not expected to solve the problem of physical interference that might occur when two individuals want to work in the same physical space.
We believed ShadowBoxes would provide a solution to this problem by allowing individuals to work in the same part of the data in physically distinct locations.
We conducted two observational studies to better understand mixed-focus collaboration.
In the context of a collaborative visualization task, we wanted to understand how tools such as filters, lenses, and ShadowBoxes would be used for both the independent and shared work aspects of mixed-focus collaboration and how these affected coupling.
In our first study, participant groups created routes by connecting multiple end points on a fictitious city map using our three tools to reveal data on the underlying map.
This exploratory study was designed to understand how participants would use the tools to coordinate their activities over the workspace.
In our second study, participant groups created routes connecting multiple end points on a fully connected graph.
The purpose of this second study was to confirm the presence of certain coupling patterns observed in the first study and to characterize the role of coupling in these activities.
We included specific roles for individuals within a group, and created independent and shared tasks to tease out the transitions between individual and group work.
To explore how groups work over spatially fixed data sets, we designed a map-based route creation task requiring collaborative visualization.
Pairs created two separate bus routes in a map of a fictitious city .
Various data layers including the street map, "preferred streets," and locations of residential, industrial, and commercial zones were provided to groups to help them construct routes .
These data layers were accessible to participants via combinations of filters, lenses and ShadowBoxes, depending on the study condition they were completing .
Based on prior work, we expected groups to exhibit certain kinds of behaviour: * Divide-and-conquer.
We expected participants to prefer lenses and ShadowBoxes for individual work because these tools would allow individuals to work independently without disturbing the view of others.
We also expected filters to induce interference because one person's view of the space would affect the entire group's view.
We expected participants to prefer filters when engaged in group work because we believed the single view provided a shared context for discussion, and interference would not be an issue.
Eight paid participants  with normal or corrected-to-normal vision were recruited from the general university population.
Each participant group was made up of two people who knew each other well.
All participants reported being right handed.
Four had previous experience with large displays, two of those had experience with tabletop setups, and five had experience with Web-based mapping software.
Mean age of the participants was 29 years.
We used a large front-projected tabletop display  with high resolution  supporting simultaneous two-touch interaction via SMART Technologies' DViT.
Participants could interact with the table by directly touching the table with pens or their fingers, though most participants only used pens.
We placed two chairs within easy reach of the tabletop display and told participants that they could use them, but no participants chose to use the chairs in this study.
Our custom-build groupware application was built with C#, and Direct3D using the Trans2D library .
This software ran on a dual-Xenon 2.8 GHz Windows XP PC.
Dragging a pen or a finger over the tabletop display would draw routes on the custom-made map while dragging a digital eraser widget would erase drawn routes.
The application also provided widgets to control the display of additional data based on the study condition.
Because our tabletop display supported two touch interactions simultaneously, both participants in a group could draw, erase, or manipulate widgets on the tabletop at the same time.
Our exploratory study used a 2  x 2  within-subjects design.
The presentation order of the conditions was counterbalanced across groups using a balanced Latin square because pilot testing suggested presentation order affected work strategy.
Thus, every group participated in four different conditions:  filters with ShadowBoxes,  filters without ShadowBoxes,  lenses with ShadowBoxes, and  lenses without ShadowBoxes.
Every group received a unique presentation order of these conditions.
Participants first filled out a questionnaire to collect demographic information and to assess their experience with mapping applications.
They were then given a short tutorial on how to use the table display and general instructions on the task.
Participant groups generally felt comfortable about using the various tools with less than five minutes of practice before each condition.
During the conditions, we instructed the participants to use a "talk aloud" protocol, and videotaped their interactions with each other and the tabletop for later analysis.
On average, groups completed individual conditions in approximately 15 minutes.
Once all four conditions were complete, participants took part in a semi-structured feedback session, which allowed us to gain valuable insight into their impressions of the task, the different interaction techniques, and their own performance during the study.
Three observers were always present during study sessions with groups, though only one directly interacted with the participants; the remaining two were passive observers during conditions.
Observers collected field notes of group behaviours as they worked, which were later combined with the video recordings for a full analysis.
In addition to working together most of the time, pairs did not use the data widgets in the ways we had expected.
Most strikingly, participants overwhelmingly preferred global filters.
In lens conditions, users essentially mimicked the functionality of the filters  by creating table-sized global lenses, moving them in and out of the workspace to cover the working area.
ShadowBoxes were simply moved out of the way; widgets that affected the global space were preferred.
Participants reported that the lens widgets suffered from several usability problems.
First, they were somewhat cumbersome--resizing and moving the lenses required a switch from the route planning activity to a widget manipulation activity.
Finally, lenses could not meaningfully partition the space because each lens needed to be larger than half of the table to provide enough information to plan each route.
Since the task involved planning global routes, participants preferred global filters, which provided global rather than simply local information.
Collected field notes and video were analyzed using an open coding approach similar to that used in other research .
Field notes were used to inform initial coding categories, such as whether participants were working independently or together at a given point in time.
A video analysis was supplemented by a descriptive statistical analysis.
We present our most salient findings below.
Contrary to our expectations, pairs worked together across all conditions, visibly working independently for only 24% of the total time.
This was surprising because we had predicted that participants would prefer to work independently in the presence of lenses or ShadowBoxes.
In only 6 out of the total 16 study conditions  did pairs even attempt to divide up tasks.
Groups generally worked together to find one route before finding the other route.
Groups were highly mobile, with individuals frequently moving around the table to gain a shared perspective of the area of interest.
Groups also worked in tandem.
Often, one person would control the widget  while the other would draw the route on the display.
In some sense, this division of labour could be considered as divide-and-conquer; however, the pairs were working closely together on the same problem as opposed to working independently on different aspects of a problem.
Group 3 was a notable exception.
In the filter conditions, this pair worked in parallel on different routes.
To facilitate this parallel operation, they used the filters in a "time sharing" mode: when one needed to see a given data layer, he would tap and view his layer for as long as he needed while the other worked from memory.
Group 3's working style suggests that some groups may desire to work independently.
Pairs were mobile and non-territorial when working over the spatially fixed data.
For the most part, they moved together, worked together on the same route, and did not work independently.
From Study 1, we began to think about how to describe the group activity.
For instance, many groups spent time working very tightly coupled, but in different ways: at times, they would draw routes together, and at other times, they would simply point alternatives out where one individual was more active than the other.
Group 3 exhibited loose coupling, and often worked in parallel.
To understand this issue of coupling further, we expanded the scope of the task to explicitly include independent, individual activity in Study 2.
By imposing activity at the extremes of mixed-focus collaboration , we hoped to observe a range of group activity.
To induce instances of interference, one of these sub-problems slightly overlapped with the other two.
Study 1's sub-problems covered the entire space, so spatial interference may have precluded independent work.
Data layers in Study 1 overlapped only in certain regions, so participants could often work with all filters turned on.
In Study 2, we used completely occluding data layers to preclude this strategy, and to simulate situations where there are so many data layers that displaying all the information needed by one person will necessarily interfere with the other.
Based on Study 1 feedback, we redesigned the lens to include filter buttons that could selectively apply layers in a local space.
To focus our efforts on the effects of local and global views on independent and group tasks, we removed the ShadowBox condition.
Including a ShadowBox condition in this study would have prevented us from practically using a within-subjects design.
Pairs found routes in a fully connected graph  covering the entire workspace.
This task represented an abstract route planning task .
Two independent data overlays provided edge weight information , where the weights could be 1, 2 or 3.
Participants generated routes to connect four specific nodes on the graph.
Depending on the condition, each participant was responsible for generating one of two independent routes , or the pair was responsible for a single, group compromise route .
We also varied the visual tool pairs used: global filters, or the redesigned lenses.
We expected this to occur even when participants were working on a compromise route, since participants could use lenses to work on different areas of the route at the same time.
When working together on the same sub-problem, we expected groups to stand in close proximity to each other, thereby allowing groups to share the same perspective view of the problem space.
We recruited eight paid participants , different from those in Study 1, with normal or corrected-to-normal vision from the general university population.
Seven were right handed, two had previous experience with large displays, none had experience with tabletop setups, and six had experience with mapping software.
Mean age of the participants was 28 years.
Video was analyzed using a multi-pass, open coding approach similar to .
Field notes were used to inform initial coding categories, such as individuals' positions around the table and which sub-problem each was working on at a given point in time.
Subsequent coding passes were driven by iteratively refined coding schemes based on further study of the videos.
This methodology facilitates an intimate familiarity with the intricate, subtle mechanics occurring in the sessions, providing a very rich understanding of the underlying collaborative processes.
This study imposed a variety of activities ranging from independent to group tasks, allowing us to explore a range of collaborative behaviour.
Our analysis revealed six different types of collaborative coupling.
We begin by describing the six coupling styles we saw, and then describe other factors and how these related the coupling style.
We identified six coupling styles in Study 2; of these, we consider the first three  to be "working together."
Often, this is accompanied by conversation.
For instance, one may be showing a route to the other, or one may just be watching the other's actions very carefully.
In the latter case, the individual is watching closely enough to suggest corrections.
Conversation often accompanies this style.
For instance, participants may be evaluating alternate solutions of the same sub-problem.
This style is not accompanied by conversation.
Instead, conversation and gestures often transition groups to more tightly coupled work.
Each person's interactions with the workspace are not related to the other in any way.
In this style, participants often peeked at one another to maintain an awareness of the other's activities.
After coding each of the 16 sessions , we ran a set of statistical analyses to understand how coupling related to the study conditions.
Total time spent working in a particular coupling style was broken down by study condition.
These coupling styles were subjected to a two-way, within-subjects ANOVA with repeated measures .
The ANOVA revealed a borderline significant interaction between interaction technique  and route type  in the amount of time participants spent working on different problems  .
These effects collectively suggested that participants spent the most time working on different problems in the lens+individual route condition.
This indicated that participants spent more time working together on compromise routes than they did when working on individual routes.
This was unsurprising given the differences between the two task types.
In all groups, we observed that participants worked independently and loosely coupled on the two problems that could be spatially separated, and then transitioned into more tightly coupled work, working closely on the problem that overlapped in the lens+individual condition.
We were surprised by the activity in the lens+compromise condition, where we expected all participants to work in parallel on separate sub-problems.
Instead, we found that three groups worked together in this condition about 96% of the time.
Group 2 was an exception: they worked in a parallel, independent manner to generate the best individual routes, and later worked in a more tightly coupled manner to find the best compromise based on the individual solutions.
They only worked together about 51% of the time.
Conversely, we found that participants usually worked together when using global filters.
They worked together 79% of the time on individual routes and 94% of the time on compromise routes.
Consistent with our hypotheses, when creating compromise routes, pairs' were more tightly coupled than when creating individual routes.
They also worked more tightly with global filters than with lenses.
Figure 4 shows the mean proportion of time participants spent working in particular coupling styles as broken down by condition.
We suspected that with tighter coupling, participants stood physically closer to one another.
To examine this relationship, we first video coded participants' location changes, thereby providing arrangement information, and then cross-tabulated this data with coupling style.
Our coding scheme  considered the relative positions of participants and not their absolute positions.
As we expected, when collaborators worked more closely together, they stood physically closer, and when they worked independently, they stood further apart.
This can be seen as a dark diagonal trend from the top left to bottom right of Table 1.
Although this effect is complicated by the fact that participants were physically closer when working on the same sub-problem, it corresponds with results from our first study, which did not have spatially separated subproblems.
A notable exception to this observation is that Side by Side arrangements were physically closer than Straight Across, yet Straight Across was a very common arrangement for group work.
This result is likely the consequence of the particular collaborative ergonomics of our table: working Straight Across the table yielded a good position to work on the same problem while providing smooth face-to-face communication.
Similarly, when working independently, standing Side By Side rather than Straight Across may have reduced visual distraction.
Consistent with prior work , physical positioning appeared to be related to territorial behaviour.
Individuals tended to explicitly interact only with areas physically close to them, and avoided interacting with areas physically close to their partner .
Yet, these "territories" were transient.
As individuals moved, others were no longer restricted from operating in those areas.
Similarly, when a pair worked closely together on the same problem, we often observed one person taking on the other's perspective.
We also saw many instances of interference, where one collaborator either blocked another's view or ability to physically interact with the workspace .
When more tightly coupled, interference was less frequent, and was handled more gracefully, with one person moving out of the way just as another moved into the space.
When collaborators worked in a loosely coupled fashion, we saw more frequent instances of one participant waving the other away, and in some cases, physically pushing or grabbing each other.
Not all interference was detrimental.
While interference often interrupted independent work, interference  often signaled or aided groups to transition to more tightly coupled working styles.
The original observations we made in Study 1 were largely consistent with the results of Study 2.
Participants preferred tools that supported their particular working style.
Despite explicit independent and group tasks in Study 2, participants generally preferred to work together when they had joint responsibility for the outcome of the task, as was true when they were constructing compromise routes.
From Study 2, we identified six collaborative coupling styles to describe the workspace activity.
These styles were closely related to other factors such as physical arrangement, the task and tool being used, and the incidence of interference.
Groups move frequently and fluidly between many styles of coupling.
Each style is accompanied by different behavioural mechanics.
For example, in tight coupling, individuals work in close proximity even when the workspace has no implicit orientation.
Furthermore, different display techniques support different styles: independent views support individual work because they reduce interference, and global views support group work because they provide common ground.
Mixed-focus collaboration encompasses many coupling styles: even in our own studies, there was a wide variance in the approach groups took.
Since tabletop displays are dynamic, we can provide a variety of tools to support different coupling styles.
A promising future direction may be the convergence of physical and digital media on tables as an alternative means for providing individual and group views.
In studying participants as they work over tabletops, and in attempting to communicate those observations to a wider audience, we have come to appreciate that collaboration is a highly complex and multifaceted construct--even when we constrain the investigation to real-time tabletop collaboration within a task in a study.
The term "coupling," and associated terms "tightly coupled" , and "loosely coupled" , for example, have been used to describe one dimension of collaboration.
Yet we have found that there exist many points along the spectrum between the two endpoints, and suspect that the nature of collaboration may vary in other orthogonal dimensions.
We describe six collaborative coupling styles, though do not believe this is an exhaustive list.
The styles we observed were likely limited by the specific parameters of our study.
For instance, if we had limited ourselves to the methodology of Study 1, we would not have seen the extent of varied styles of independent work that we described above.
We expect that additional styles may be uncovered through studies with different user groups, tools, and tasks.
Although we attempted to order the coupling styles from tightest to loosest, the detailed ordering of all pairs is not necessarily obvious or finalized.
We are unsure whether these coupling styles even fall along a single dimension.
For instance, same-problem-same-area, view-engaged, and same-problem-different area appear to fall along a continuum of "degree of involvement in the other's task."
Supporting mixed-focus collaboration requires supporting the transitions between loosely coupled independent work and tightly coupled group work .
Providing only a single view of the workspace limits individuals' abilities to work independently , yet using separate copied workspaces may prevent many group collaborative dynamics, such as being able to see what others are doing, from emerging .
Our results do not suggest mitigating interference altogether since some forms of interference signal transitions between coupling styles and benefit group coordination.
Furthermore, the recognition of interference can be used as a means to fluidly transition between coupling styles.
For instance, the act of rotating an object toward a fellow collaborator temporarily signals the desire for attention : the system may also use this cue to transition the workspace to match the tighter coupling.
The interference we observed was a direct result of individuals' desired working areas overlapping.
Creating usable and useful personal territories could take several avenues, including a higher resolution workspace, or mobile regions of high resolution, or even using distinct displays for personal work .
Annotations help to generate and track independent work, and may be moved to be shared with the group .
In our studies, participants surprised us by frequently annotating the map space with both spatiallyrelevant and spatially-invariant annotations.
These annotations sometimes helped and other times hindered the other participant.
We recommend supporting the easy creation, mobility and modification of annotations.
We presented two observational studies of mixed-focus collaboration, exploring the transitions groups make in their coupling styles.
These coupling styles are descriptions of group activity and behaviour, allowing us to characterize the activity of groups.
The two studies have demonstrated that different coupling styles are related to other variables such as preferred tools, physical arrangement, and the incidence and handling of interference.
For example, groups use tighter coupling styles when working together closely, preferring common, global views.
By providing a preliminary characterization of these coupling styles, we have identified design opportunities for tabletop researchers to support collaborative work.
A flexible set of tools allowing fluid transitions between views is required to fully support the dynamics of mixed-focus collaboration.
