Small point lights  are used as indicators in a wide variety of devices today, from digital watches and toasters, to washing machines and desktop computers.
Although exceedingly simple in their output - varying light intensity over time - their design space can be rich.
Unfortunately, a survey of contemporary uses revealed that the vocabulary of lighting expression in popular use today is small, fairly unimaginative, and generally ambiguous in meaning.
In this paper, we work through a structured design process that points the way towards a much richer set of expressive forms and more effective communication for this very simple medium.
In this process, we make use of five different data gathering and evaluation components to leverage the knowledge, opinions and expertise of people outside our team.
Our work starts by considering what information is typically conveyed in this medium.
We go on to consider potential expressive forms - how information might be conveyed.
We iteratively refine and expand these sets, concluding with ideas gathered from a panel of designers.
Our final step was to make use of thousands of human judgments, gathered in a crowdsourced fashion , to measure the suitability of different expressive forms for conveying different information content.
This results in a set of recommended light behaviors that mobile devices, such as smartphones, could readily employ.
Since the advent of the electronic age, devices have incorporated small point lights for communication purposes.
This has afforded devices a simple, but reliable communication channel without the complication or expense of e.g., a screen.
For example, a simple light can let a user know their stove is on, a car door is ajar, the alarm system is active, or that a battery has finished charging.
The development of commercially viable light emitting diodes  in the 1970s greatly expanded their penetration and use.
Low cost, small size, durability, and remarkable power efficiency has enabled their integration into almost every class of electronic device .
For simplicity, we consider a point light source to be a small, single color light emitting element with an intensity that can be varied over time .
Although comparatively simple , with good design, point lights can be quite expressive.
With multiple lights and colors, the design space could be even richer.
However, cultural color connotations must be weighed, potentially reducing generality.
Context is also important to consider when users are interpreting iconic elements.
In this paper, we start with the most severe constraints to demonstrate the potential lower bound richness.
Unfortunately, very few products seem to take full advantage of the expressive capability simple lights can provide.
The most commonly encountered light behaviors  are quite simple: light on, light off, and light blinking.
This often means people have to learn by rote what each light behavior means on each device.
This is unwieldy given the multitude of devices we use today.
In this work, we hope to reignite people's imagination by demonstrating the impressive and largely unrealized richness of point lights, and their utility in ever-more capable modern electronic devices.
Armed with this knowledge, we hope that improved devices - that remain simple, but communicate better - can be built.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
We then turn to how both contemporary and future devices might express this information in a point light medium.
This results in a substantial set of potentially useful expressive forms - or light behaviors.
Finally, we use a crowd-sourced evaluation approach to measure the properties of a candidate set of 24 light behaviors with respect to a set of informational states that might be used in a mobile device .
Data from our 265 participants shows that light behaviors vary in their ability to induce consistent interpretations of a particular informational state.
Many behaviors perform strongly; of these, we found eight to be iconic, in the sense that they strongly and consistently induce a single interpretation .
Based on our exploration and evaluation, we recommend this set for use in mobile devices, such as smartphones.
Thus, they must either be remembered by the user or repeated.
This property is fundamentally different from typical  visual displays in graphical interfaces , where the user can randomly access persistent information as they see fit by looking at different parts of the display.
This sequential and non-persistent property is shared by a number of other media types, including audio, speech and most uses of haptics.
Because of this commonality, it is likely that some of the techniques originally designed in these domains, might eventually be found to be useful for light behaviors as well .
There is also considerable literature on ambient displays, which considers approaches intended to convey limited amounts of information in a lightweight fashion , for e.g., the purpose of reducing human attention demand.
Approaches are numerous and diverse.
Those most similar to our work are those that employ dynamic visual output as their communication channel.
For example, informationenriched art that could be hung on a wall , a LEDstudded bracelet that fosters social awareness , a water lamp that projects ripples as digital bits rain down , and shoes that glow or flash in response to social  or personal informatics .
In work more directly related to this paper, Pintus introduces the concept of light behaviors that we have adopted here.
In , it is introduced as " a concrete representation of the intangible and invisible events that are taking place ."
A small design exercise centered on wireless communication between two devices suggests two light behaviors - one for connection and one for file exchange.
Iconic forms have been used since the beginning of interfaces because, when successful, they can consistently convey a meaning to users.
This allows people to work more by recognition and less by recall.
There is a substantial body of work on icon design that we will not review here .
As recently considered by , this concept can also be expanded to include forms that geometrically manipulate visual icons and elements over time.
Single point lights are, by their nature, limited in their expressive power .
One reason for this is that point lights are both sequential and non-persistent .
In this paper, we work through a structured design process to uncover and then evaluate new and useful light behaviors.
In this process, we used five different data gathering and evaluation components, each tuned to a particular phase of the work.
This approach allowed us to leverage the knowledge, opinions and expertise of groups of people outside of our team, in a range of ways that were appropriate to the different phases of our investigation.
In the overall process, we first sought to identify contemporary uses of point lights - both where and how they are used.
We then iteratively refine our findings and produce a set of candidate designs.
Finally, we use human judgments gathered in a crowd-sourced fashion to measure the suitability of different expressive forms for conveying different information content.
To begin this work, we had to establish two fundamental lists.
The first is a list of what information various devices might want to communicate to users.
For example, that a mobile phone is low on batteries, that an oven has reached the desired temperature, or that an external drive is transferring data.
We call these informational states, or states for short.
The second list is how devices communicate these states to users using point lights.
A progression of illumination intensities over time is called a light behavior.
A sinusoidal fading in and out would be one example of a light behavior; another would be a blinking sequence using the SOS pattern.
Finally, we note that, for brevity, we use the term device.
However, this should be read to encompass a variety of electronic and computational objects, from something as small as a digital watch, all the way up to an automobile.
Next, we look at an Apple MacBook laptop , which incorporates a single white light on the front bezel.
Apple is widely credited with bringing the "breathing" light behavior  to popular use .
This occurs when the computer is in sleep mode.
In our informal investigation, this was a user's primary phone and loaded with popular applications.
In practice, it appears very few light behaviors are employed.
This is because the single integrated LED is reserved for alerting the user to notifications , which in turn, tend to use the OS-defined default 0.3Hz blinking light.
Of note, the Android API allows for applications to define their own notification light behavior.
There are three parameters: the color of the light, the on duration, and the off duration .
For example, the Facebook Android application uses the same 0.3Hz blinking light behavior for its notifications, but with a blue light instead of the default green.
While providing some level of programmatic control, the API actually precludes most of the rich light behaviors we introduce later - designers are limited to simple on/off blinking patterns, which are not particularly expressive or iconic .
The three examples we introduced here, while obviously a very small set of all possible devices, are indicative of current uses for point lights and their expressive behaviors .
In fact, of the dozens of devices we looked at, these three examples offered what we believed were some of the better light behavior sets.
Most other devices we surveyed were far less sophisticated in their design and use of point lights.
These experiences and devices were drawn from the small circle of the authors.
To put our data on firmer footing, we expanded our scope, reaching out to a wider audience, and more systematically gathering data about current uses of point light sources.
We now describe these stages of our investigation.
To help ground our earliest explorations and seed our own intuitions, we selected and informally studied a small set of commonplace devices that incorporated point lights with expressive behaviors .
To give a flavor of what we found, we describe three examples of current design practice.
The first of these is a Philips Sonicare electric toothbrush .
This features a single green light on the handle of the device.
The toothbrush exhibits four light behaviors.
To expand our understanding, we created an online survey, asking 27 participants  to "list up to 15 devices, appliances or objects  regularly encounter that feature one or more small lights."
Respondents provided 247 answers, yielding 77 unique devices.
Data is summarized in Figure 2.
Using the top ten responses from Study 1, we created a second online survey that sought to collect how point lights were used in commercial devices and what information users believed they were conveying.
Specifically, we asked 13 participants  to describe as many light behaviors they could view or recall for each of the ten devices .
Further, we asked them to explain what they believed each behavior was attempting to communicate.
For example, light fading in and out is communicating that the laptop is sleeping.
Survey results suggested most devices employed an extremely small number of light behaviors .
The most pervasive behaviors were light on , light dim, light off, light blinking, and light fading in and out.
Interestingly, few participants gave details on the types of blinking or fading - drawing no real distinctions between e.g., different frequencies, patterns or intensities.
Further, likely in response to the limited vocabulary of light behaviors, devices tended to convey an equally small number of informational states.
For example, a TV might have light off = TV off, light on = TV on, light blinks = TV received command from remote.
Mobile phones had the richest light behavior set  and informational states .
We found this disparity in number of behaviors and states intriguing - it seemed mobile phones could convey so much more if only they were equipped with a richer set of light behaviors.
In response, we decided to set mobile device as our proof-of-concept domain for later in-depth investigations.
After all the ideas had been read , they were tasked with organizing them into an affinity diagram.
The result was nine highlevel groupings: "don't be late", "informative", "something nearby", "resource availability", "device status", "response needed", "notification", and "biofeedback".
Next, we solicited help from a panel of ten designers .
We conducted an inperson Design Session lasting 60 minutes.
The session started by asking the designers to individually generate as many light behaviors as possible.
In hopes of stimulating new behavior designs, we imposed no constraints, beside the fact lights had to be a single color and point sources.
After five minutes, these were shared by going around the table.
In total, 34 unique light behaviors were enumerated.
We then asked the designers to individually brainstorm informational states a smartphone might want to communicate to a user.
After five minutes, they were asked to share their ideas.
Using data from Survey 2 and the Design Session, we formulated a prototype vocabulary of light behaviors.
There was no light behavior we encountered our Initial Exploration that was not represented in this final set.
This partially served as confirmation that Survey 2 and the Design Session were successful at enumerating new and existing designs.
We dropped designs that were ill-defined or challenging to recreate in point light form .
Also, designs that were very similar were combined .
In total, we created 24 light behaviors, illustrated in Figure 4 .
Additionally, we selected 12 informational states for our experimental set.
These had to be clearly defined and in popular use today .
While not exhaustive, it gave us a compact, high quality list we could use for study purposes:
Sparklines representing the illumination intensity over time for our 24 proof-of-concept light behaviors.
Intensity ranges from off  to high .
Asterisks imply the extra bright "flash" conditions shown in Figure 4D .
The device has low battery.
The device is thinking, computing, or processing.
The device is sleeping, suspended, or hibernating.
The device is turning on, booting, or warming up.
The device is transmitting or receiving data.
The device is unable to connect.
The device is unable to accept user input or commands.
The device is active, monitoring, running fine, or progressing.
These were exported as animated GIFs, which could be easily embedded into our web-based study.
Participants in our study were shown ten random light behaviors, one at a time, and asked to "rate how strongly  agree or disagree with each of the following interpretations about the state of the device".
A five-point Likert scale was provided next to each of the 11 states .
After the ten light behaviors had been rated with respect to each informational state, a brief demographics survey was administered.
During piloting, we found participants struggled with item 4 .
Think-alouds revealed people were generally unfamiliar the concept of geo-spatially-driven notifications .
In response, item 4 was dropped, leaving 11 states, which piloted well.
Our formative explorations yielded a list of 24 light behaviors and 11 informational states.
However, what was unknown was how these light behaviors mapped to informational states, if at all.
We now describe the study we used to establish and evaluate these mappings.
The results allow us to recommend a set of behaviors that strongly and iconically map to states, and could be immediately employed in today's mobile devices.
To make claims about the generality and iconic-ness of light behaviors, it was important to recruit a large and diverse set of study participants.
To achieve this, we used a crowd-sourced approach employing Amazon's Mechanical Turk  to recruit participants.
Table 1 provides a demographics breakdown.
Our study was limited to workers from the United States, who had submitted at least one unit of work on Mechanical Turk and had an approval rate of 80%.
This was to ensure our participants had basic English language proficiencies and to minimize low-quality workers.
302 participants  completed our study and were paid $1.50.
To ensure a high level of answer integrity, we instituted three reliability checks .
Second, participants who completed the study too quickly were also removed.
Finally, in two of the ten light behaviors, we duplicated one item rating .
If a participant's rating differed by more than one Likert point, their data was discarded.
In total, this process removed 37 participants, leaving data from 265 participants .
Following what has been reported by others recently , use of a crowd-sourced approach for this process is powerful.
Because this part of our investigation could be situated as a small and simple rating task, it was suitable for simple deployment to a crowd sourcing service.
This in turn allowed us to rapidly and inexpensively gather information from many more subjects than would have been practical using other approaches.
Finally, it is important to note that participants are likely heavily influenced by light behaviors they have already encountered, and may even see on daily basis.
There is no way to effectively control for this, and in fact, it would be ecologically invalid to do so.
The reality is users have integrated current design practice into their "device language" and future designs need to build on top of this knowledge, not ignore or disregard it.
These clustered in a conceptually logical way, suggesting five higher-level informational categories, described in Table 2.
For example, "device has an incoming call", "device has received a message", and "device is notifying the user about an event or scheduled item" were all highly correlated with one another.
These all have a similar notification connotation, and thus we place them under a notification informational category.
We use these high-level categories for the remaining analysis.
Figures 6 through 10 show the same data as Figure 5, but organized by informational category and sorted by average rating.
This analysis reveals an important design implication.
Specifically, it suggests our 24 light behaviors may not be  rich enough to convey a distinction between particular types of notification - for example, the difference between a call and text message.
However, our behaviors can clearly convey notifications as something different from e.g., turning on.
Light behaviors lie along a continuum of interpretation strength, without an innate threshold for what is a good or bad behavior .
For example, a light behavior that has both strong notification and active interpretations is less desirable because it is ambiguous .
To assess iconic-ness, we used a mixed model analysis of variance.
We divided our dataset into the aforementioned five categories of states.
For each category, participant's rating was the dependent variable and the light behaviors were the predictor variables.
Because each participant rated 10 random light behaviors, we also modeled light behaviorid nested within participant as a random effect.
The models were all significant, indicating that within each category, there were significant differences across ratings.
To determine which lighting behavior best represented each category, we conducted post-hoc tests using Tukey's HSD.
Eight light behaviors met both of our criteria - strong and iconic - and form our recommended light behavior vocabulary .
We now describe the best performing light behaviors in the context of our five informational categories.
Three light behaviors are iconic for notifications: Beacon, Bright Flash and On with Bright Flash; all other item interpretations are rated significantly lower .
These are also the top three highest rated behaviors in the notification category .
Beacon is particularly strong, significantly outperforming 22 other behaviors .
The commonality between these three behaviors is straightforward - they all feature sharp and rapid bursts of maximum intensity light.
SOS Blink and Transmission Random Brightness are both iconic in the active category .
These are the second  and fourth  highest rated behaviors in the active category .
Of note, the top rated behavior was Transmission Fixed Brightness , which has an identical temporal pattern to Transmission Random Brightness, but with a fixed level of brightness .
The fixed intensity version, however, simultaneously invoked strong notification connotations .
This serves an excellent example of how even subtle features of a light behavior can dramatically impact its interpretation, for example, altering its meaning or making it ambiguous.
Two behaviors are iconic in this category: Pulse Slow and Fast In Slow Out .
They are also the two highest rated, both with a mean Likert score of 3.4 .
These are conceptually very similar - long, drawn out fade sequences, similar to restful breathing.
This is the "sleeping" light behavior that has been popularized by Apple products.
We included two additional fading light behaviors, Pulse and Pulse Fast, in order to investigate how pulse frequency affects their connotation.
Interestingly, and somewhat expectedly, as pulse frequency increases, ratings for low power state decrease .
Inversely, average ratings for notification and active categories increase.
Put simply, it appears the more motion and activity there is in the light, the more energy it conveys, which is linked to e.g., notifications and processing more than e.g., running out of batteries or hibernating, which are conceptually linked with reduced energy.
No light behaviors we tested rate highly in the unable informational category .
The highest rated behavior, candle, has a mean of only 2.6.
While it is possible we simply did not include a light behavior that conveyed an unable connotation, and others may be able to find one, we believe the consistently low rating across all 24 behaviors is suggestive that unable-like states may just be difficult to convey with light alone, or is an ill-defined informational category.
There are many directions in which this work could be extended in the future.
Foremost, we narrowed in on mobile devices as our proof-of-concept domain.
However, there are many other classes of device that would benefit from tailored light behavior sets.
How groups of devices employing rich light behaviors function in concert is unknown.
It is possible a "light vocabulary" could emerge in a similar way as isotypes have become universal.
The process used in this work should provide a useful template for future evaluations.
There are undoubtedly light behavior designs that we did not evaluate that might provide strong and iconic indications of a particular informational state.
Additionally, the list of informational states of e.g., smartphones will continue to expand as their use matures.
It would be interesting to explore how many unique dimensions point lights could convey effectively.
Finally, it is easy to imagine expanding this work to encompass lights with varying color, size, directionality, diffuseness, and shape.
This would dramatically boost their expressive capability, though likely with a corresponding increase in design and evaluation complexity.
Moreover, users are influenced by context, potentially influencing the interpretation of an icon .
It remains to be seen how robust light behaviors are across cultures and use scenarios.
Based on our findings, we can recommend eight of the light behaviors that emerged from our multi-stage design process for mobile device use .
For providing a notification, we can recommend the Beacon, Bright Flash, and On with Bright Flash behaviors.
For the informational states matching the Active category, we can recommend Transmission Random Brightness and SOS Blink behaviors.
For an indication of a Low Energy State, we can recommend the Pulse Slow and Fast In Slow Out light behaviors.
Finally, for conveying that a device is turning on, we can recommend the Staircase Continuous behavior.
None of the light behaviors we developed and evaluated can be recommended for the Unable category of information states.
In regards to design, our experience with e.g., the difference between the Transmission Fixed Brightness and Transmission Random Brightness provides a note of caution.
As is often the case in display and interaction design, some seemingly small differences can have large and/or unexpected effects, while most remain simply small differences.
Telling these apart typically requires user testing and evaluation, one form of which we have illustrated in this work.
In this paper, we have considered how point lights found in a wide array of current devices might be made more expressive.
Contemporary uses are generally simple, and in many respects, unnecessarily limited.
We worked through a structured design process that involves multiple data gathering and evaluation steps, which allowed us to leverage the knowledge, opinions and expertise of people outside our team in a range of ways.
Our final design stage solicited interpretation ratings from 265 participants, representing a wide range of demographics.
From this process, we have been able to evaluate 24 different light behaviors, eight of which we recommend for use in a mobile device domain.
We should also note that while we believe the design and evaluation process presented here provides recommendations that are generally useful, the evaluations are clearly far from exhaustive in the factors that could be considered.
In particular, there are many contextual factors that are particular to specific devices and circumstances that have not been brought into consideration.
Further, the effectiveness of a light behavior can be heavily influenced by other displays found nearby, by learned conventions that users bring from other devices, and varying judgments of illumination magnitude due to dynamic environmental conditions, among many factors.
