Technologies can be used - or appropriated - in different ways by different users, but how do the use patterns evolve, and how can design facilitate such evolution?
This paper approaches these questions in light of a case study in which a group of 8 high school students used Comeks, a mobile comic strip creator that enables users to exchange rich, expressive multimedia messages.
A qualitative analysis of the use processes shows how users turned the functionalities embodied in Comeks into particular resources for communication during the 9-week trial period.
The paper discusses the relationship of functionalities of the artifact and the development of resources by presenting how functionalities can be designed to support three ways to appropriate communication technologies: increasing technical mastery, rechanneling existing communication into the new medium and inventing new communicative acts between users.
Supporting appropriation encourages innovative and unexpected uses, both of which are usually positive indicators of good design.
This paper describes and analyzes the appropriation of a multimedia messaging application called Comeks that enables users to create comic strips and send them through a multimedia messaging service  to other users - not only other users of the application but to anyone whose phone can receive multimedia messages.
Special attention is paid to analyzing appropriation as a process.
The findings will point out directions for supporting appropriation and promoting new uses in everyday technologies.
Previous studies have described appropriable technologies as configurational , equivocal , or user-tailorable .
These qualifiers emphasize the importance of openness for many use purposes and the active role of the user in finding the most suitable ways to use the different functionalities embodied in artifacts.
Along similar lines, based on a study of a document management system, Dourish has proposed the blurring of application boundaries to support multiple viewpoints on information .
Case studies in work settings have identified the importance of technology-use mediators who serve others by modifying features of the technology, providing support and promoting use practices .
Successful appropriation is also dependent on particular dialectical interactions with managers .
Appropriations tend to evolve in a step-wise manner during brief windows of opportunity , and early steps of appropriation are likely to constrain inventions of new use patterns at later stages .
Regarding home technology, appropriation has been studied not only as an emergence of new purposes of use but more generally as domestication in which artifacts gain significance through incorporation into routines of daily life .
This research has highlighted the importance of the transaction process through which a commodity becomes an object that has a particular significance to its users.
How do use patterns evolve in social interaction when it is mediated through technology?
This question pertains to an interactive process in which functionalities embodied in a communication artifact are explored and made sense of by users, and incorporated into daily activities.
If suitable purposes of use are found, e.g., the artifact brings about positive changes, the users are likely to increase their use of the artifact and invent uses that extend its original applicability.
The concept under which such an evolution and adaptation process is often discussed is called appropriation.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Home technology has also been studied as an evolutionary learning process.
They highlighted the complexity of interplay between users' expectations triggered by technology and suggest how technologies should support different levels of learning: operations, actions and activities.
In studies on interpersonal communication, appropriation has been implicitly present in almost any paper that describes results from a field trial.
This is because exploratory, open-ended trials are often reported by presenting emerging use patterns .
Studies on graphically augmented instant messaging  systems have presented different communicative functions of webcam pictures  and noticed the usefulness of animated avatars for expressing sympathy, emotions, attitudes and also fictional expressions such as pretension .
Closest to the study presented in this paper is the research on use practices in MMS communication.
Such exchanges of messages have also been analyzed as emergent genres of use, as socially recognized types of communicative action .
Interview-based studies supported with content analyses have provided a longitudinal and cultural historical perspective on how images are used.
The finding is that new technologies are aligned with existing social practices, sometimes through uneasy adaptation , and early adopters' expectations about new technology do not always match its usefulness in social settings .
The underlying argument in this framework is that users may transform the features and functionalities of an artifact into resources for action.
This happens through experiences gathered by having been in interaction with the artifact.
That resources develop through the accumulation of experience means that they must not be mistaken for technology affordances.
Affordances are properties of the world that enable certain actions and are independent of personal interpretation because "affordances per se are independent of perception" .
In contrast, resources are personal - they are learned as a result of interaction with the artifact and are unique to each person.
Then, when a user has learned a useful purpose for a functionality in some situation, the related resource for action is summoned anytime the user enters a similar situation in the future.
The recurrent appearances of resources mean that they are constantly in evolution and that their changes may be a result of gradual transformation, unexpected findings, conscious exploration, observing others or many other ways of learning.
With this interpretation, appropriation can be understood as a discovery process that makes new resources available to the user and changes the existing ones as the user faces new situations and settings.
This definition does not take a stance on the expected uses envisioned by a designer of the artifact.
The user may use the artifact in both expected or unexpected ways - both qualify as appropriations.
The analysis described in this paper has been inspired by an ethnomethodological conception of human interaction, particularly by its understanding of resources for action.
This article approaches the concept from the third viewpoint in a similar manner to Brown and Perry in their analysis of what rules for action have been designed into traditional landline phones and how users are orienting to those rules .
The main interest is in the resources enabled by a communication tool, the comic strip creator.
The purpose has been to explore how communicative acts, expressions and interaction patterns develop as the tool's functionalities become more familiar to users.
Not all kinds of resources for action are analyzed: the focus is on the issues that can be impacted by design.
Comeks is a MMS composer implemented with Symbian C++, running in Nokia Series 60 phones.1 It can be used to create more expressive, comic-style multimedia messages than is possible with the normal MMS editor.
Comeks is a front-end application: when a message is ready, Comeks gives the control to the native MMS editor, which shows the contact book and transmits the message.
Implementation on top of the MMS delivery protocol makes Comeks compatible with many phones: any MMS-enabled phone can receive its messages.
In a receiving phone, a Comeks message is a normal multi-part MMS message.
Functionalities of Comeks allow users to augment and annotate images with speech bubbles and other comic-related accessories, put images in a sequence , and tune the colors in many ways .
All the elements except plain text can be rotated, scaled, moved and stretched.
Figure 1 shows how a simple comic strip is created.
When started , Comeks shows an empty strip for which the user is asked to create the first frame.
Choosing "Add frame" opens a frame editing screen.
The user adds an image to the frame, either using the phone's camera or by accessing the phone's picture gallery.
When the image has been added , the user can annotate the image.
For instance, he or she may choose a speech bubble and write text See the webpages of Bulbon Ltd. , the company that developed Comeks, for more information.
After having finished creating the frame, the user returns to the main screen  and may start to create the next frame.
When multiple frames have been created, they are shown in a sequence .
All the frames remain editable throughout the creation process, and they can also be rearranged, deleted and duplicated.
The desired option can be chosen from the little vertical menus .
The ability to include pictures into a strip both with an integrated camera and through the phone's photo gallery increases the flexibility and immediacy of message creation.
Strips can also be saved for later use, allowing simultaneous preparation of multiple comic stories.
Some users were active web forum visitors, while others never visited them.
Everyone used a digital camera at least once a month but not more often than once a week.
The group was provided with pre-installed Nokia phones  in which they used their own SIM cards.
In this way substituting another phone for their own did not affect their personal availability or contacts.
The users' data and multimedia traffic expenses were covered for the entire duration of the trial.
When the trial finished, each user received a 20 EUR voucher as a gift for participation.
This was done as a surprise - before the final interviews the only incentives for participation that they knew of were the opportunity to use smart phones and Comeks as well as to send MMS messages and create other data traffic  without any cost.
The trial lasted 9 weeks, starting in mid-December 2005 and ending at the beginning of February 2006.
It contained one week of school before a two-week Christmas holiday and six weeks of school.
The inclusion of a holiday period was deliberately chosen to be a part of the research and was motivated by an interest in gathering data from an increased variety of different use settings.
Comeks is "open" technology in the sense that sending small artworks solving practical issues and sending greetings are all possible uses for it.
In addition, due to its informal orientation, its typical context of use is noninstitutional: no external force pushes the appropriation process towards a certain end.
Therefore, the open nature of Comeks and its context of use offered a good opportunity for studying a freely occurring appropriation process.
The trial was organized as an intervention study in which the technology  was introduced into a user group's naturally occurring everyday activities, and data about their messaging was collected both automatically and with tight rounds of interviewing.
A group of schoolmates was recruited from an urban high school in Helsinki, Finland.
The group consisted of 4 boys  and 4 girls .
The members already knew each other before the trial started, being friends with each other without any particular "core group."
Tina was the only person who clearly had a second important circle of friends.
The group members' everyday social interaction took place mostly face to face at school, occasionally in bars during the weekends, and through IM at home in the evenings.
IM was so dominant that the users rarely used text messages to communicate with each other .
The primary data collected in the study were the multimedia messages exchanged , and the answers to the cued-recall interview questions.
Multimedia traffic was collected unobtrusively by using ContextPhone .
ContextPhone is a program for Nokia phones that runs in the background and logs how the user interacts with the phone.
In this study, the logging covered all outgoing multimedia messages and incoming messages that came from the participants in this study.
In this way researchers could monitor the communication and prepare the interviews without disturbing the users.
Naturally, the users were aware of ContextPhone and that their MMS communication was being logged.
The cued-recall interviews were held separately with each user in three-week intervals to collect fresh memories about each message.
In total, the 8 users were interviewed 24 times.
In addition to logging and interviewing, the users filled in a background questionnaire that charted the group's social structure and the frequency of using other communication technologies .
Studying a freely occurring appropriation process poses special requirements for data collection.
Collecting users' accounts of their use is important, but interviewing should not cause reflection about actions since that can have an unpredictable effect on the subsequent appropriations.
To balance between observing natural activities and collecting accounts, the following steps were taken.
Two meetings were set up with the users before the actual study to tell about the research methods and Comeks itself.
The users heard about the procedures for preserving anonymity and confidentiality, including the point that the researcher was not going to leak information between the users.
To ensure the same starting point for appropriation across all the users, the only purpose of use expressed about Comeks was a vague description that it "is a program that you can use to create comics with a mobile phone."
The trial as a whole was expressed to the users as an experiment to see "how you guys communicate with this kind of stuff."
The questions posed in the interviews about the messages did not inquire about appropriations and interpretations per se, but gathered narratives about using Comeks.
Follow-up questions were also probed in indirect ways.
In the concluding interview, the whole purpose of the study was explained, and questions were asked directly.
The users were aware of the approximate length planned for the trial .
To avoid unnatural uses during the last weeks, the message that informed about the termination of the trial was sent with no advance notice to everyone simultaneously.
After this, the concluding interviews were arranged as quickly as possible.
After transcribing the interviews, the analysis was carried out qualitatively, taking each message and the related interview excerpts as the primary units of analysis.
These units were organized into temporal sequences about each user individually.
The sequences of the most active user  and the most critical user , were analyzed first to assess the maximum variation of different uses.
Attention was especially paid to appearances and the repetitions of using different functionalities , variations in narrative structures, situations of use, communicative purposes and the resulting interpretations as stated by the users.
After having analyzed the individual use processes of two other active users  as well, all the sequences were collapsed into a common timeline, and interdependencies between the processes were analyzed.
This was done by identifying the emergences of new uses  vis-a-vis the communication patterns of who was communicating with whom.
This was done to assess how much users were learning from others and if the individual processes showed any similarities.
The analytical concepts were constantly shaped during the analysis.
For instance, the analysis was initially focused on recurrent uses of individual features, but the level of abstraction was raised towards the end, paying more attention to the users' constructive processes.
The most informative pieces of data portrayed communicated content and Comeks' functionalities, the communicative purpose, and the recurrent use of the application's features.
The chart displayed in Figure 2 shows how the use of Comeks evolved quantitatively.
During the 9-week trial, 119 multimedia messages were sent, 90 of which were created with Comeks.
The most active user sent 34 messages with Comeks.
The graph shows a lot of weekly variation, pointing to the situated nature of the message exchange, which was affected by some notable events during the use period, most importantly Christmas and the start of the spring semester.
By describing the messaging behavior of the four most active users - Eeva, Asif, Oskari and Tina - we can cover 84%  of the cases in which a message was sent with Comeks.
The remaining 16%  were created by the remaining four users, of which 11 were sent during the first 5 weeks.
Because analyzing disappropriation is not the primary focus of the paper, these users are considered only when necessary in the following sections.
Appropriation processes developed quite individually because the underlying MMS protocol permits essentially only person-to-person communication and does not provide group awareness.
Users can neither know who the other recipients of incoming messages are nor how they are using the medium.
According to the interviews, the users did not discuss their use of Comeks through other channels either.
When they met face-to-face or in IM, they occasionally asked how many messages had been sent but did not inquire more specifically about particular ways of use, possible difficulties in using Comeks or who was messaging with whom.
Therefore, it is natural to start the analysis from individual appropriation processes.
His ideas for narratives often came from noticing suitable objects in the environment .
Figure 3A shows his skillful use of graphical functionalities in the second week.
Oskari liked to show his phone to friends and let them take pictures with it as well.
These pictures were sometimes used in his own messages.
This habit of letting others participate in message creation, together with his overall enthusiasm about the system, might have been the underlying reasons for why Eeva asked him to create messages with her after a quiet Christmas holiday.
Like Oskari's early messages, these collaborative messages  were also fictitious stories.
Oskari's interest in exploring the expressive capabilities of Comeks continued throughout the trial, albeit with a change in the way he created messages.
While the first weeks were characterized by the arduous creation of long narratives, in the last weeks Oskari used Comeks more casually, taking pictures with the phone's native camera regularly and editing them with Comeks in idle moments.
As a result, his messages became shorter towards the end of the trial and no longer had a narrative structure.
In the concluding interview he said that he had discovered that good messages need not be three or more frames long but that two frames is also a good length.
This reflects a change in the interpretation of what resource Comeks was able to provide Oskari: its early use was oriented to the idea of Comeks as a comic story creator, but over time, storytelling became less relevant, giving way to opportunities for experimenting and tinkering with expressive styles.
As an example of visual exploration, Figure 3C shows a collage of two images, portraying opposite facial expressions with opposite colors.
This message was created in the trial's 8th week.
Oskari sent 11 Comeks messages during the trial.
They were 3.5 frames long and had 1.3 recipients on average.
In return, Oskari received 17 messages from others.
He was very interested in exploring Comeks' different image processing capabilities to the extent that for him, exploration was more important than exchanging messages.
From the very beginning, his messages were artistic and fictitious rather than informational or practical.
With 34 messages sent using Comeks and with an average length of 1.9 frames and 1.9 recipients per message, Eeva was the most active user in the trial.
The initial conception of Comeks as a tool for creating comics was visible in Eeva's early messages: during the first two weeks she mostly created stories about everyday life situations that were turned into fictitious incidents.
For instance, the story of the banana  was a reply to Oskari's earlier story of the "fruit slayer" .
During the holiday, Eeva worked in a museum and did not see her friends much, but she used Comeks and IM to stay in touch with the rest of the group.
At this point Eeva's usage of Comeks started to become more varied in two respects.
Her messages to individuals started to contain elements that she shared with the recipient , and she started to create long messages that she shared with the whole group.
She also started to use the phone's internal camera to collect a stock of photos that she could later use as material for future messages.
After the holiday , Eeva started to complain in the interviews that she did not receive replies to her messages, even though she always tried to make the messages easy to answer.
This frustration was one of the reasons why Eeva and Oskari started to create messages together.
One example of these messages has already been presented in Figure 3B.
Figure 4B shows the most arduous of these joint messages, a spy movie trailer, for which content collection took over a week.
Some of the pictures were taken with Oskari's phone, sent by normal MMS to Eeva, and then included in the story.
While creating messages became more social in this way for Eeva, replies did not become more frequent.
For instance, only Oskari and Asif replied to the movie trailer message - and Asif only because he acted as the "No 1 enemy" in the message.
This enabled putting more text into the messages.
A bit later , Eeva noticed that multimedia messages can be sent to email addresses , and this expanded the circle of recipients and the ways of using Comeks for socializing.
In terms of content, the messages became shorter, consisting typically of on or two frames, being less narrative and fictitious.
They contained cheer-up greetings and expressions of moods and thoughts.
They did not require as much planning and could be created on the spot and sent right away.
For instance, Figure 4E was taken while watching TV.
It reused the group's old tradition of reminding each other of favorite TV series and contained an inside joke  that the female users in the group sometimes used in their communication.
Eeva's appropriation process contained an increasing integration of Comeks' functionalities with other systems: collecting a stock of pictures in the phone's memory, using content created with other user's phones , and sending messages by email.
The process also included a series of discoveries of how to use Comeks as a resource for maintaining social relationships.
Eeva started to personalize her messages for different recipients, create them together with another user, share feelings and thoughts with dedicated people, and communicate the group's old traditions in the new medium.
This process and the integration with other systems developed hand in hand: as each new way to integrate was found, more social uses became possible.
Compared to Eeva and Oskari, who were active explorers of Comeks' capabilities, Asif became critical of the program's usefulness.
As a result, after an initial peak he sent very few messages .
Excluding two Christmas greetings , there was always only one recipient for each message, and the number of frames was quite small .
However, he received reasonably many messages .
Asif's first tryouts with Comeks were exploratory .
He called these messages "bohemian," referring to their content, which did not serve any practical function.
In doing so, he noticed the difficulty in replying to others' messages because the messages always needed some kind of an idea of visual content.
Asif first remarked on this problem when describing his response to the message in Figure 4A.
Other negative perceptions followed later.
In an interview at the end of week 2, Asif expressed that he was not fond of being photographed, that message creation using Comeks was slow, that it was usually difficult to find space for text within each frame, that you did not often have anything particular to tell another person with comics, that everyday happenings were difficult to turn into comic stories, and that it was hard to find a way to reply to an incoming message and that this problem makes one feel unhappy.
While Eeva and Oskari found ways to cope with these problems, for Asif they were discouraging.
His use of Comeks dropped to almost zero after the second week  and therefore did not develop into a resource for action.
The reason for his decreasing use was not that Asif would have not known how to use Comeks to create visual effects.
The last message in Figure 5B, sent on week 8, shows the use of a boldface effect created placing two identical strings, one with a transparent background, horizontally one pixel apart.
Asif was familiar with image editing software on computers, but he found Comeks to be too limited and awkward compared to those programs.
Tina was an active user like Eeva and Oskari, but found different use purposes, sending messages mostly to other friends than the users in this trial.
In total, she sent 19 messages that were 1.8 frames long on average and had 1.3 recipients.
She received 12 messages, mostly from Eeva, who sent many of her messages to everyone in the group.
The differences in Tina's usage started to develop in the very first week.
Whereas other users started with the concept of comic strip creation in mind, Tina discussed the similarity of Comeks and normal MMS in the first interview.
The reason for this might be that she was the only user who had previous experience of MMS.
In the message content, the difference could be noticed in the absence of narrative.
In contrast, her messages were like the one in Figure 6A: greetings, replies and spontaneous thoughts.
Another difference was apparent in the visual composition of the frames.
This paper has approached appropriation through interpreting it as a development of resources for action.
Previous sections have described the emergence of such resources, the most general ones being exploring the mundane environment through Comeks' visual effects, using Comeks to maintain relationships, sending greetings, thanking for social occasions and arranging practicalities.
Comeks was successful in allowing users to appropriate it in different ways, as can be seen in how its use diverged from the original concept of a comic strip creator and how it allowed the emergence of different styles of expression.
Such findings were derived individually for each user, but the data also lends itself to identifying commonalities between users.
Table 1 summarizes some of the usages that were described in the previous sections.
As exemplified with an indicative classification in the last column, the appropriations in this study can be classified into three types across the individual users: increasing one's technical mastery of the functionalities, using Comeks as a new channel to mediate existing communications and inventing new communicative acts.
From the table we can see that the appropriations did not follow each other in a step-wise manner, new ones replacing old ones, but instead, they overlap each other.
Neither do they form a hierarchy of preconditions for each other's development.
Rather, the transformations to resources for action followed a path away from comic-specific means of expression  towards personalized forms of messaging.
These processes included parallel development in mastering the application's capabilities, aligning it with existing communication habits and sometimes inventing new communicative acts.
The next three sections present how the design of Comeks contributed to the three types of appropriation presented in Table 1.
This distorted the images but it did not seem to bother Tina.
On New Year's Eve in week 3, Tina sent a greeting to a friend who had just returned from New Zealand and noticed that Comeks is well suited to sending pictures from parties to other people, or the next day to friends who had been present.
Tina was already used to photographing her friends with a mobile phone, and she was now able to put these pictures into use.
Figure 6C is an example of such a message.
In the interviews, Tina said that this usage was also good because she could also craft messages so that they did not leave the feeling of a preferred reply.
Figure 6B shows the message that Eeva reused in her IM profile.
It is also an example of a practical use of Comeks in asking for information from others.
Tina was the only user who used Comeks recurrently to arrange practicalities.
In Tina's case, Comeks served as a resource for communicating issues that were similar to what the normal MMS can do.
However, the option to augment the pictures with text provided Tina with improved expressive possibilities.
In this way the messages could be made more nuanced and understandable, and leveraging the stock of pictures that Tina often collected became more convenient.
Learning how to use different functionalities in Comeks was a natural part of its evolution of use.
For instance, in successive interviews the users described their use of the color filter in different ways as their knowledge of its possibilities increased.
The users also migrated from using Comeks' integrated camera functionality to using the phone's native camera.
Comeks had an "Insert from photo gallery" option with which a picture taken with the native camera could be inserted into a frame.
Storing pictures in the gallery helped to create a special picture stock that could be used to prepare visual material for multiple messages simultaneously in an interleaved fashion.
A different example is the set of strategies that users developed to cope with the lack of space for text in comic strip frames.
Users often ran out of space because they did not want to occlude parts of an underlying image.
Three workarounds were developed during the first 3 weeks to cope with this problem, shown in Figure 7: using transparent bubbles, making space for sidebars and complementing Comeks with a normal MMS editor.
During which weeks Examples Type of 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Appr'n Asif "Bohemian messages": open-minded exploration of the purpose of use x x 5A Mastery x x x x x x x 5B Using transparent speech bubbles to include more text in messages Mastery Eeva Creating fictitious narratives with a link to everyday life situations x x x x x 4A 4C New acts Including mundane objects as props in messages x x x x x x x 4A 4B 4C Using transparent speech bubbles to include more text in messages x x x x x x x 4B Mastery Using the MMS text field to include more text in messages x x x x x x x 4E Mastery Communicating inside jokes, common matters and traditions, e.g.
TV reminders x x x 4E Channeling Creating messages together with Oskari x x 4B 5C New acts Sending messages to email addresses x x x x 4D Channeling Sending cheer-up greetings Oskari Creating fictitious narratives x x x x x 3A 3B Experimenting with visual effects x x x x x x x x 3C Mastery Including mundane objects as props in messages x x x x x x x x 3A Using transparent speech bubbles to include more text in messages x x x x x x x x 3C Mastery Creating messages together with Eeva x x 3B 3C New acts Creating messages of only 1-2 frames without a narrative x x x Tina Greetings and spontaneous thoughts x x x x x x x x 6A Channeling Squeezing images and using a sidebar to include more text in messages x x x x x x x 6A 6B 6C Mastery Practical messages, e.g., questions to get information x x x x 6B Channeling Sending messages to other people outside the user group x x x x x x 6A Photographing friends at a bar/party and sending them the pictures the next day x x x x x x 6C New acts Table 1.
Summary of usages in the most active users' messaging.
As a result, technical mastery was linked to the ability to develop one's own style of expression and communication with Comeks.
The opportunity for playful exploration invited users to play around with different settings for color, position, rotation, scale and so on.
It was important for the development of a personal style that most elements  could be tinkered with in many ways to allow different visual outcomes.
By supporting tinkering and exploration, Comeks invited the users to learn its functionalities and notice ways of use that were not selfevident.
In the trial, Comeks was sometimes used to deliver messages that were part of the social interaction patterns that had developed before Comeks was introduced to the setting.
These included sending greetings, reminding friends about TV series right before the show started and telling inside jokes, which previously had been communicated with text messages and other media shared by the group members.
To enable such re-channeling, users need to successfully incorporate the new technology into their existing practices.
Comeks could do this by being similar enough to text messaging and IM, although it provided new features as well.
Such a partial overlap with respect to the old medium was probably essential.
An example of this is Eeva's appropriation of Comeks for the maintainance of social relationships in different ways through discovering how to integrate Comeks with other systems.
However, the overlap must be understood on the level of resources, not merely as an overlap of functionalities: the new technology must also be ready at hand in the same settings and allow communicating similar things.
Therefore, by having a partial overlap with an existing technology, the users were able to apply their existing methods of communicating to the new medium.
Socializing by creating comic stories together, expressing spontaneous thoughts and sending thank-you messages after nights at a bar were examples of uses that were novel communicative acts between the users.
The variety of different styles of expression shows that the users could communicate in flexible ways, allowing diverging individual uses based on individual preferences.
The key factor here was the flexibility of expression, the ability to mix visual and textual content in open ways.
Users could vary the amount of effort they were willing to put into creating a message and match the visual effect to the purpose of the communicative act.
More flexibility was available through the option of using the phone's photo gallery.
This alleviated problems of a temporary lack of content and enabled the cooperative creation of messages.
Supporting flexible expression of communicative acts by blurring the boundaries of different formats  provided resources for communicating expressions that previous systems had not let the users do.
Koskinen, I., Lehtonen, T.-K. and Kurvinen, E. Mobile Image.
Ling, R. and Julsrud, T. and Yttri, B. Nascent communication genres within SMS and MMS.
MacLean, A., K. Carter, L. Lovstrand and T. Moran.
User-tailorable systems: pressing the issues with buttons.
Oksman, V. MMS and its "early adopters" in Finland.
Orlikowski, W. Improvising organizational transformation over time: a situated change perspective.
Persson, P. ExMS: an animated and avatar-based messaging system for expressive peer communication.
Petersen, M. G., Madsen, K. H. and Kjaer, A. Usability of everyday technology - emerging and fading opportunities.
Raento, M., Oulasvirta, A., Petit, R., Toivonen, H. ContextPhone: a prototyping platform for context-aware mobile applications.
Silverstone, R. Hirsch, E., Morley, D. Information and communication technologies and the moral economy of the household.
Consuming Technologies: Media and Information in Domestic Spaces.
Plans and Situated Actions: The Problem of Human-Machine Communication.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 1987.
Windows of opportunity: temporal patterns of technological adaptation in organizations.
Voida, A. and Mynatt, E. Six themes of the communicative appropriation of photographic images.
Williams, R., Stewart, J. and Slack, R. Social Learning in Technological Innovation: Experimenting with Information and Communication Technologies.
Edgar Elgar Publishing, Cheltenham, UK, 2005.
This paper has attempted to go beyond concepts such as openness, configurability and equivocality in defining appropriable technologies.
The examples have pointed out how system functionalities become resources for communication through both individual and interpersonal interaction with and through the artifact.
This has highlighted the usefulness of resources as an analytical tool to understand appropriation in practice.
The author thanks Bulbon Ltd. for their cooperation and Marko Turpeinen for steering Comeks' early development.
Sauli Tiitta helped in data preparation, Giulio Jacucci and Kai Hakkarainen commented on the analysis in helpful ways, and Antti Oulasvirta, the MobileHCI'06 doctoral consortium and anonymous CHI reviewers were important in commenting the paper's contents.
The Finnish Funding Agency of Technology supported this research through the Mobile Content Communities project.
