Inflatable Mouse is a volume-adjustable user interface.
It can be inflated up to the volume of a familiar mouse, but be deflated and stored flat in a PC card slot of a laptop computer when not in use.
Inflatable Mouse functions just like a typical mouse; moreover, it provides new interaction techniques by sensing the air pressure in the balloon of the mouse.
It also addresses some issues associated with pressure-sensing interactions such as the lack of bidirectional input and the lack of effective feedback.
Moreover, it can be used as both a control tool and a display tool.
In this paper, the design of an Inflatable Mouse prototype is described and potential application scenarios such as zooming in/out and fast scrolling using pressure control are explained.
We also discuss the potential use of Inflatable Mouse as an emotional communication tool.
The MoGo Mouse BTTM of Newton Peripherals and the Slim G4 Mouse of DaoKorea were developed to improve portability.
These two mice with their 5mm thickness can be neatly stored in a PC card slot.
These are highly attractive to laptop users as they can carry them easily, but less graspability has been indicated as a weak point due to their slim form factors.
A balloon can be a flat shape or an easyto-grasp shape depending on the volume of injected air.
The former state might give a mouse better portability and the latter state better usability.
So, Inflatable Mouse could give us good pointing performance as well as sufficient portability.
The balloon-like inflatable mouse can be deformed by a user's fingers and palm.
The pressure change by deformation provides users passive haptic feedback naturally and can be transformed into an input signal to computer.
It gives us a chance to apply pressure-based interaction techniques to Inflatable Mouse.
A pointing device is an essential element for computer users.
Due to the increase in laptop computer users, a pointing device with high portability and performance is needed.
The touchpad or the track point can support pointing tasks in a laptop computer, but many users prefer to carry and use a traditional mouse for better performance.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Controlling continuous parameters: If the pressure inside the balloon is sensed, the motion of pressing the balloon can achieve the same effect as pressing a pressure sensor.
Providing passive haptic feedback: Inflatable Mouse can also provide haptic feedback via the deformed shape and reaction that a user feels from the surface of the balloon.
Supporting bi-directional input: Previous pressure-based input devices have allowed only half-dimensional input; for example, a pen equipped with a pressure sensor at the tip allows a user to apply pressure against a surface, but does not allow pressure-based input in the opposite direction.
Inflatable Mouse addresses this limitation by allowing true one-dimensional control of pressure: users can squeeze the sides of the devices or press on the device from the top.
Providing an output channel: Inflatable Mouse can be used as an output device as well as an input device.
If the tempo of inflating and deflating is controlled, a variety of dynamic expressions can be made.
It brings a variety of benefits that tangible user interface devices support by harmoniously combining representation and control .
2 shows the structure of Inflatable Mouse.
This mouse is connected to an air pump by an air hose.
The air pump is supplied with power via a USB port and it can pull and push air bi-directionally.
2, Inflatable Mouse consists of an optical mouse module, left and right click buttons, a touch scroll wheel, an air balloon with an air pressure sensor, and four touch sensors for detecting hand position.
In order to be stored in a PC card slot, the size of the mouse when minimized should be 54x86x5mm.
We thus selected the Slim G4 mouse  as the base platform for Inflatable Mouse.
The bottom part of the mouse can be pulled out and this motion causes the mouse to switch on.
It also expands the mouse frame in order to inflate the balloon.
With this action, the air pump begins to pump air into the mouse.
A DC miniature vane pump  was used as Inflatable Mouse's air pump and we combined it with a USB connector.
The balloon is located under an elastic fabric cover, which allows it to stay invisible when not in use.
The cover helps maintain an overall organic shape.
An air pressure sensor is attached to the center of the bottom frame and measures the pressure in the air balloon.
For the air pressure sensor, we selected the Motorola MPXH6115A6T1CT.
This sensor reports 1024 levels of pressure spanning the range of absolute pressures from 15kPa to 115 kPa.
The minimum pressure value applied to this sensor by the structure of the device alone  was 104kPa.
The maximum pressure typically applied by users was found in pilot testing  to be 111kPa.
In order to make effective use of this limited range, we used a running average of 20 pressure values to approximate continuous values between the integer values reported by the sensor.
We found that we were able to extract smooth pressure values, accurate to approximately 0.1 sensor units, using this averaging technique.
Between the cover and the balloon, touch sensitive pads are attached to the surface of the balloon.
Connected to the charge-transfer touch sensor they are located on the top and both sides as shown in Fig.
These pads sense when the palm presses the top of the mouse or when the thumb and little finger  squeeze the sides of the mouse.
Additionally, one touch pad is on the mouse frame near the touch scroll wheel for the index or middle finger.
This touch sensor functions only by touching and not by pressing.
These sensor locations are based on the result of the research of Cechanowicz et al .
It is expected that this device will be useful for the navigation of documents or Web pages.
Pressure from the hand would control the depth.
This method can be applied to control pressure in detail.
Twenty university students used Inflatable Mouse for zooming in/out tasks.
User feedback on the benefit of Inflatable Mouse was collected after each trial.
Most of the users expressed interest in the mouse itself and its interaction styles such as inflating and squeezing.
They responded that it would be useful for its portability with flat shape, as well as the graspability with inflated shape was improved compared to when it was flat.
In terms of performance, users reported that zooming with the inflatable mouse was not significantly improved when compared with the mouse wheel.
The users, however, stated that it would have better performance if the users themselves were accustomed to the inflatable mouse, because it zoomed to what they wanted immediately at once.
On the other hand, some problems were indicated.
In the case of tasks that needed high pressure, the users felt fatigue and difficulty in maintaining the certain depth.
The pressure value was also unstable when users clicked the mouse button while pressing or squeezing it.
It caused errors in selecting the target because of the unstable pressure value.
The reason might be the same as that of what Cechanowicz et al.
For better performance and stable applications, the motion with a combination of clicking and pressing  should be rarely used.
Based on the user feedback, it is expected that squeezing the side was better and less tiring than pressing the top.
Squeezing can be used for tasks that need to be fast, and pressing should be used for tasks that don't require the mouse to move because it is difficult to move the mouse while pressing its top.
Consistent with the results of Cechanowicz et al.
It was especially difficult to press the right side without using the thumb.
It is possible to scroll not only vertically but also horizontally.
If the user clicks and holds the left button and squeezes, it is possible to control the thickness of the brush as with a stylus pen.
One of the other unique features of Inflatable Mouse is that it can be used as an output device.
Although only inflation and shrinking motions are currently possible, it is expected that it can express various possibilities in this area if the tempo and intensity of these motions are changed.
It provides both haptic and visual representation.
It is also possible to share the inflation of the mouse with other users as an indirect form of messaging.
We also found that some technical issues need to be addressed.
Users felt fatigue and difficulty in supplying the high levels of pressure required to activate Inflatable Mouse's pressure sensor.
Design modifications that allowed the sensor to detect a lower range of pressures would allow more effective operation with reduced fatigue.
Inflatable Mouse can be compared with other pressurebased interface devices as it supports continuous parameter control with pressure.
Numerous pressure-based interaction techniques have been studied mainly in pen-based computing environments using a stylus.
This work revealed potential of pressure input with proposing various concept designs for both discrete and continuous pressure widgets.
However, their results are mainly applicable to the use of pressure-based input on a stylus.
Other researchers subsequently tried to apply these interaction techniques to other pointing devices such as a mouse and a touchpad .
MightyMouseTM by Apple allows the sides to be squeezed using a pressure sensor that activates a Mac OS X Dashboard or other customizable features .
In their research using two pressure sensors, they defined the best controllable location of the sensor on the mouse and suggested a new interactive mechanism that incorporated tab-and-refine and switch-torefine in order to support bi-directional pressure input.
Prior to this, Rekimoto and Schwesig  introduced a pressure sensitive touchpad, PreSenseII, which addressed two major limitations of pressure-sensing UIs: lack of effective feedback and lack of bi-directional input.
It recognizes bidirectional pressure based on finger poses and gives tactile feedbacks using piezo-actuators.
The aforementioned researches partly solved the limitations of pressure sensing UIs that Rekimoto mentioned.
However, controlling opposite operations such as zooming in and out is not intuitively matched with two different finger poses.
Furthermore, intermittent vibration for tactile feedback cannot react adequately to continuous pressure values.
There are only few studies using an air balloon or air pressure for a user interface.
The volume of each balloon is controlled by an air cylinder that is equipped with a pressure sensor.
The user can deform it like clay and an image is projected on its surface.
In contrast to Volflex, Inflatable Mouse has only one balloon, and a user can vary the pressure-based input signal by varying the location of pressure application.
Furthermore, the device in this study is small enough to hold by one hand.
We presented Inflatable Mouse, a volume-adjustable input/output device based on a traditional mouse.
As it can be stored flat in the PC card slot of a laptop computer, it is expected to be convenient for laptop users in terms of portability.
Interactions by sensing the air pressure in the balloon of Inflatable Mouse can function as pressure-based interactions.
It also provides effective haptic feedback and bi-directional input, the lack of which is limitation of pressure-sensitive interaction.
In addition, this device can be used as a haptic and visual representation tool by inflation and deflation.
We also presented potential application scenarios of input interactions such as zooming in/out, controlling the scrolling speed, scrolling horizontally, controlling the brush thickness, and selecting a popup menu item, as well as output interactions such as expressing a heartbeat, warning, and imitating taking a nap.
Some of applications were tested by users and some drawbacks were indicated.
It was difficult to control stably the high pressure so that air pressure sensor should be improved to be more stable and more sensitive with less pressure force.
Future intended work on this study includes user studies of proposed applications as emotion and communication tools, as well as developing other devices using this interaction technique.
Since the development of miniaturization technology and the increase in the needs for devices with high portability grows gradually, it is expected that inflatable user interfaces can be applied to various products in the future.
