This paper describes the results of a study evaluating the effects of computer mediation on collaboratively solving architectural design problems.
Pairs of graduate design students were asked to work on a landscape architecture design problem via computer terminals.
In one condition they were allowed to communicate with an electronic whiteboard and a chat-line while in the other, the chat-line was substituted with video-conferencing .
The protocols were evaluated according to two models.
First, they were coded according to the pattern of collaboration, distinguishing meta-planning, negotiation, evaluation, and individual work.
No differences were found between the two groups when coded this way.
The protocols were also coded in terms of the problem-solving content, distinguishing task-related exchanges, interfacerelated exchanges, low-level design exchanges, and highlevel design exchanges.
The results showed that in the bandwidth-limited chat-line condition, participants cut down task and interface-related as well as low-level design exchanges but attempted to maintain the same amount of high-level design exchanges.
When the final designs were evaluated by professional architects, no differences were found between two conditions indicating that chat-line participants implicitly compensate for the narrower bandwidth interface.
This belief that social processes play a critical role is often unquestioned, to the extent that some CSCW research  assumes that collaborative activities, especially remote collaboration, can only be understood in terms of its context.
By assuming that situated actions, for example, are "givens" , the studies have reinforced the assumption that replication of physical spaces are necessary for virtual spaces to succeed.
This automatically leads to the assumption that video and audio communication at a high bandwidth are a priori tools for successful collaborative distal design.
Hollan and Stornetta  have highlighted the difficulties in this assumption and the failures of attempting such replication.
It is also important to note, however, that the question of whether computer tools actually influence how experts use their task specific knowledge in the performance of complex collaborative tasks has not been addressed by researchers in this area.
Similar to Harrison and Minneman, we examined the process of collaborative architectural design but reached very different conclusions.
If our findings are correct, then approaches to designing computer support for these tasks need to be fundamentally re-thought.
Our central research question concerned the effect of bandwidth limitations on collaboration and the consequent interface implications.
Since this question was raised in the context of computer mediation for collaborative work, the relative effects of different modalities of communication were explored in terms of how they impacted on the collaborative process in terms of activities such as task planning, interactive negotiation and individual effort.
We also evaluated how different forms of computer mediation affected the level of discussion in the problem-solving process.
Specifically, we wanted to determine whether low-level and high-level design concerns are consistently present in design discussions regardless of the nature of the interface.
There is a long history of research into the role and application of computers to communication and collaboration from which have arisen a variety of tools to facilitate work done in groups .
It is not necessary here to review the various directions and conclusions of this research but it is important to note that computer mediation has been found to impact the collaborative process in significant ways.
Collaborative architectural design requires that participants work together to solve a series of problems and arrive at one result.
In going through the steps to solve the design problem, the designers must organize their activities around two facets: when to carry out particular tasks and what tasks to undertake .
We have distinguished between these two dimensions of their problem solving by identifying one as a collaborative process model of problem solving - deciding when work is done - and one as a design process model - deciding what work is done.
We began by constructing a traditional cognitive model of collaboration based on the hypothesis that expert collaborative problem-solving is structured very much like individual expert problem-solving.
In collaboration, each participant can be considered as an individual agent working in parallel with other agents to achieve a common goal.
We modelled collaborators as agents with sets of problem-solving skills and sets of goals.
When attending to design, experienced architects working collaboratively on a problem should behave like typical experts in any other area of expertise.
They should have large chunks of knowledge which they can apply quickly and in a fairly error free way.
They should also be able to work forward from the initial state of the problem .
Furthermore, they should be able to reason by analogy from a large base of well cross-referenced knowledge about the field.
Experts also plan better and monitor their progress more carefully than novices .
The sort of cognitive processing demonstrated by experts on well-learned tasks allows us to predict the process of problem-solving with a reasonable degree of detail.
The model of collaboration which will be evaluated in these studies is shown in Figure 1.
The first step involves a process of planning how to execute the task in a coordinated way.
It is a meta-planning process in the sense that it is about how to break down the problem into individually manageable units as well as about how and when the collaborators should come together to integrate their individual efforts.
This process is followed by another collaborative step, negotiation, regarding specific aspects of the design problem.
Following an initial negotiation, each participant separately engages in welllearned routine expert problem-solving guided by the metaplan that was agreed upon and constrained by the jointlymade, task-specific negotiated decisions.
When the participants have completed their agreed upon components, they interactively evaluate the outcome and are then either finished or they iterate through the steps again.
Additional meta-planning may or may not be required and the process may begin again following further task-specific negotiation.
It is clear that, in addition to the problem-solving process, collaboration will also involve personality, emotion, culture, and many other social psychological factors.
We suggest that these do not play an important role in shaping  the combined expert knowledge or the measurable product of the collaboration.
As in Olson et al.
We argue that the skills and expertise of the participants i.e., the knowledge component of the collaboration rather than social or situational ones - primarily shape this.
Therefore, although context effects, socio-cultural variables, and other non-knowledge level individual differences will influence many aspects of the collaboration , they should not alter the process implicit in the knowledge level of the participants.
Model of Collaborative Design Social/psychological variables, which are unrelated to the task-specific knowledge of each participant may affect things, such as the degree to which the collaboration is enjoyed or disliked.
However, the real result of the collaboration, in this case, an architectural design, will be largely the consequence of the knowledge and experience of each collaborator.
A long history of research in cognitive science supports this view .
If our model is correct then the tools used to support collaborative work should focus on facilitating the meta-
The task given to our participants can be seen as having two aspects: the collaborative process, as discussed above, and an architectural design process.
Design consists of a large number of activities which can be considered to fall into four broad categories.
Initially, designers digest the information given, gathering and reading facts and determining the data at hand.
These we called task-focused activities.
Next the designer strategizes solutions, making broad decisions which will affect significant aspects of their later decisions.
These we call high-level design  activities.
These activities include planning the site, laying out major components and identifying primary routes.
Thus, a prototypical design flow by someone exhibiting expert behaviors will have more HLD at the beginning of a design session and more LLD later in the session.
Among all of these activities we can expect the designer to need to deal with the particular medium within which they are working.
If they work in pencil and paper, it would include things such as sharpening the pencil.
In our context, these interface-specific activities address issues of menus, commands, and connections.
For the audio we used head sets with a connected microphone so that subject's hands would be free.
For the video we used Connectrix's Color QuickCam for Windows.
However, even with the computers directly connected we found that the audio and video were of poor quality.
To remedy this we used a phone line for the audio and a direct feed for the video .
All connections passed through the wall so that, with the door between the rooms shut, subjects were cut off from any direct communication.
This allowed us to simulate a high band width communication between remote hosts.
Objectives: To resolve site access problems using basic rules of site design.
You are to work as a pair together to design a rest area and car parking with pedestrian access within a sloped site as described in the attached site plan.
The site consists of an evenly sloping site with a 13 meter difference in height from a hospital entrance at the top to a bus stop at the bottom.
A car park for six cars is to placed on the site half way up the slope with access from Middle Road.
Performance was measured in terms of the quality of the final output.
The quality of the final output is contingent on the ability of the designers to accommodate the particular computer-mediated interface's informationsharing characteristics to their expert task.
We therefore examined collaborations using video conferencing  and chat-line  with the expectation that subjects would create more efficient metaplans under the low band-width condition.
In addition, the method of communication was expected to influence the distribution of types of design communication exchanges.
We expected to see fewer exchanges with low band-width channels, of which a greater proportion would be HLD exchanges since the burden of the interface makes it impractical for low value exchanges.
Inversely, higher band-width communication would be more profligately used.
The subjects were twenty two graduate students from the University of Hong Kong.
Fourteen were peers from the Department of Architecture and eight were peers from the Department of Landscape Architecture.
Two adjoining rooms were each equipped with Pentium computers.
Both computers were equipped for video conferencing and were connected by a local network.
There were two conditions, one in which subjects could communicate using audio and video , and one in which subjects used only a chat-line .
In both conditions subjects could also use the electronic white board.
Subjects were run in pairs.
The video conferencing condition had five pairs and the chatline condition had six pairs.
Each pair of subjects was instructed in how to operate the conferencing technology and told that they would have one hour to solve a well defined architectural problem using the shared space of the electronic white board.
They were then given the problem and separated into the two rooms.
Each room contained an experimenter to directly observe the subject's actions, and a video camera to record them.
A site plan was already present on the electronic white board.
After one hour the experiment was stopped and the subjects were debriefed.
A reliability analysis revealed an Alpha coefficient of 0.877 indicating that all three measures were tapping the same construct, which we assumed to be a general competency for the task.
Taking an average of the three measures to create an overall score, the two groups  showed no difference, both producing a mean overall score of 6 out of 10.
Although the number of subject pairs was too low to rule out any effect for the conferencing technology we could rule out the existence of any large systematic effects.
This, despite the very real limitations imposed by the bandwidth in the chat-line condition .
Figure 3 shows an example of a completed design.
It should also be noted that there was considerable variability in the final design products and the ways in which they were created.
For example, some subject pairs worked together on each design element while others worked in parallel on different elements.
Also, some subject pairs worked in a very egalitarian, democratic manner while other pairs were dominated by a single authoritarian subject.
The protocols were coded according to the two models, one to extract the collaborative process engaged and the other to extract the design process employed by the participants.
Two of the authors coded the protocols.
A chat-line protocol and a video/audio protocol were first selected and extensively reviewed by the two coders.
Once the coding schemes were finalized, all of the sessions were coded by one coder for the Collaboration Model and by the other coder for the Design Model.
Finally, each cross-checked the reliability of the other coder by independently coding one protocol under the other's model.
For the Collaboration Model, the interrater reliability was 86% with a Cohen's kappa = 0.768 while it was 62% with a Cohen's kappa = 0.52 for the Design Model.
Finally, all design products were graded by teaching staff in the Department of Architecture to determine their design value.
Overall, the protocols of participant pairs in the video/audio condition had approximately twice as many exchanges as those of participant pairs in the chat-line condition.
Given that the final performance on the task was the same between the two conditions, one has to wonder how the participants in the chat-line condition made up for the overall decrease in communication.
Figure 3 Sample of a completed design.
Our initial hypothesis was that the chat-line participants achieved this by increasing the relative amount of metaplanning they did during the task.
We will report first on the evaluation of the finished designs since this is, perhaps, the most surprising result.
In order to evaluate the quality of the finished designs, we had the designs independently graded by two lecturers from the University of Hong Kong's Architecture Department.
Agreement between the two markers was high .
The disagreements were minor and were resolved through discussion.
Results of coding the protocols with the Collaborative Process Model.
As stated, we expected that the amount of Meta-Planning would increase while Negotiation and Evaluation would decrease in the chat-line condition, thereby accounting for the lack of difference in the quality of the finished designs.
This was not the case, however, as Figure 4 shows.
The total amount of each type of interaction decreased proportionately from the video/audio condition to the chatline condition.
Although the number of participants was relatively low, it is important to note that the aggregate pattern shown in Figure 4 was demonstrated by all the collaborator pairs.
The correlations among the patterns of communication shown by subject pairs were all above .7 and significant at the .05 level.
This extremely consistent pattern along the three categories indicates that the collaborative process was undisturbed by the two very different communicative conditions.
It also suggests that this approach to breaking down the collaboration captures something essential about the process.
Given two different channels of communication, participants in both conditions maintain a very similar pattern of collaboration .
The Collaborative Process Model therefore successfully describes the way in which people engage in collaborative work by strategizing, dividing-up the task and temporally ordering the activities, regardless of the nature of the communication channel.
These findings are similar to those of Olson et al.
They coded interactions into three clusters of categories: Coordination/Management Activities similar to our Meta-Planning category, Direct Design Activities similar to our Negotiation category, and Summary/ Walkthrough Activities similar to our Evaluation category.
The relative percentages of these three clusters were 27%, 43%, and 30% respectively.
Although, different to our results in terms of the magnitude of the differences between the three categories, the relative pattern was similar.
The magnitude difference may be the consequence of the fact that coordination and design activities were not distinguished in their coding scheme.
The two models proposed here pull apart these two kinds of activities.
The Collaboration Model focuses exclusively on the collaboration  aspects of the interaction while the Design Model captures the other side.
We would therefore argue that the larger differences between the categories found in our study are the consequence of using two separate models to code the protocols, resulting in a more sensitive instrument to evaluate the content of the interactions.
Given that there was a 60% decrease in the total number of exchanges in the chat-line condition , one would expect to find a significant negative impact on the design outcomes.
Since the Collaborative Process Model does not provide an explanation for why the design outcomes were equivalent in the two conditions, another explanation is necessary.
As indicated above, we expected that the relative amount of Meta-Planning would increase in the chat-line condition, counterbalancing the effect of fewer exchanges.
It would appear that more restricted channels of communication require more selective exchanges of communications and that the communication sacrificed would be low content-level exchanges.
Thus, the differences between communication channels might appear in the Design Process Model but not in the Collaborative Process Model.
Coding the protocols this way showed a clear difference in the content of the chat-line condition to that found in the video/audio condition.
Chat-line communication contained a notably higher percentage of HLD content, 50% of all exchanges, compared to video/audio, where only 22% of all exchanges were HLDs.
The ratio of LLD to HLD was inverted, with chat-line showing proportionately more HLDs than LLDs while video/audio showed the opposite effect.
Basically, participants in the chatline conditions made up for having a narrower communication channel by decreasing the amount of LLD in order to maintain a high number of HLDs.
Specific was 8% for chat-line and 20% for video/audio.
Participants in the video/audio condition, on the other hand spent a much greater proportion of their time discussing Low-Level Design issues as well as Task and Interface issues.
As in the Collaboration Model, the pattern of results found for each pair of subjects was very consistent with the aggregate data.
For the chat-line condition all pairs except one showed the pattern in Figure 5.
The same was true for the video/audio condition.
The fact that the chat-line collaborators did just as well on their designs as the video/audio collaborators suggests that it is the High-Level Design exchanges that play the most significant role in determining the quality of the outcome.
Most importantly, the nature of the communicative channel would seem to have little effect on this aspect of collaborative work as participants appear to implicitly adapt to communicative constraints by either increasing or decreasing the amount of low-level discussion.
Building from research that suggests collaborative interfaces must involve a high throughput of information , we started with the assumption that designers faced with limitations in communication bandwidth would adjust their collaborative strategy to compensate for the restrictions in communication.
Instead, we found the collaborative strategies to be the same.
Compensation obviously had to occur since there was a marked reduction in the amount of communication.
We found compensation occurred in the content of the communications, not in the strategy of collaboration.
We also found a marked reduction in the number of task-related exchanges and comments on the interface during chat-line communication.
This suggests that the chat-line subjects worked more independently, collaborating primarily when strategizing.
While not the expected compensation mechanism, the outcome is not surprising.
It is interesting that this shift in balance between HLD and LLD occurs without any explicit discussion between the subjects; there was no evidence that participants were even aware of the shift.
The research described here challenges assumptions evident in much previous research in the field of computermediated collaborative design.
Typically, previous work has been driven by the need to recreate a "design space" in all its properties, without critically evaluating the contribution of these properties to design outcomes.
An example of such work is that found in Tang .
By understanding what resources the collaborators use and what hindrances they encounter in their work, tools can be designed to augment resources while removing obstacles."
Since our individual cognitive systems are not built to cope with the full complexity of the environment at any one time, we pick out what is relevant and necessary in order to proceed.
The pattern of problem-solving found in this study reflects the knowledge the subjects had  regarding how to solve this kind of problem.
More importantly, it reflects a collaborative mechanism whereby the nature of the communication itself is implicitly shaped to the nature of the communicative channel without any loss in the quality of the collaborative outcome.
The consistent allocation of time or effort in different stages of collaborative process found across our different bandwidth conditions mirrors the consistency found by Olson  in their analysis of design meetings.
As with the chaotic activities which constitute a face-to-face meeting, the messy data recorded during our design studies shrouded consistent patterns of work.
So, although the collaboration looks very situated, it is in reality shaped and guided by the collaborators' individual knowledge of the task and their tacit ability to adapt to communicative situations.
Much has been said recently about the special nature of collaborative work, especially on open-ended, creative problem-solving tasks such as architectural design .
Our findings, however, paint a simpler picture: experts in a particular area of knowledge solve problems in consistent and regular ways.
Moreover, the process of collaboration is remarkably consistent along certain dimensions and remarkably adaptive along others.
We have found that the context is not an over-riding factor in successful collaboration.
While it cannot be denied that the context within which an activity is carried out will affect the outcome, it is clear that we are, as humans, adaptive to our environment  and adaptive of it .
Although we exist in an environment with infinite levels of complexity, we solve each problem and make each decision in a much more restricted informational context .
The results of this study suggests that there is negligible influence of communication channels on the collaborative execution of expert tasks.
The participants in this project carried out their collaborative tasks using the same collaborative process  regardless of the communication channel.
Thus, we conclude that designers adapt the nature of their communication to the bandwidth of the channel available without compromising their collaborative strategy or expert contributions.
That the communication bandwidth or technology had no effect on the outcomes of the task is resonant with the findings by Kraut et al.
This finding is also consistent with Olson , although they note that a significant deterioration in design quality was found when comparing face-to-face to non-video  communication.
The findings presented are not intended to be interpreted as suggesting that the nature of the comunication channel never makes a difference in collaboration.
Each box in the space needs to be filled in with the tools necessary to achieve the specific goals of the collaboration.
It may be valuable to view one goal of CSCW research as filling in the different boxes in this collaboration space.
We have filled in one box with a well-defined design task, two knowledgeable collaborators with similar backgrounds, and quality of design as an outcome measure.
Nevertheless, these findings, especially the implicit shift in the level of communicative exchanges, beg an explanation.
We expect that this explanation will be better framed, not within situated descriptions of activity, but rather at the knowledge-level as postulated by Newell .
Cuff, D. Architecture: the story of practice.
Fitzpatrick G., Kaplan, S. and Mansfield, T. Physical spaces, virtual places and social worlds: A study of work in the virtual.
Harrison, S. and Minneman, S. Studying collaborative design to build design tools.
Hollan, J. and Stornetta, S. Beyond being there.
Holtham, C. Groupware: Its past and future.
L. Group decision making and communication technology.
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Process, Vol.
Kraemer, K. L. and Pinsonneault, A.
Technology and groups: Assessment of the empirical research.
Space of collaboration characteristics requiring different computer-support solutions.
There are also implications for interface design - if collaborative work is much like individual work within this model, then a collaborative interface need not be different.
Furthermore, if the designers can adjust to their level of communication and achieve the same outcomes, there is no need to compromise an interface by providing excess communicative information.
This research was supported by the University of Hong Kong under a grant from the CRCG.
The authors are grateful for the assistance and support provided by the Departments of Architecture and Psychology and to Ms. N. Y. W. Cheng for use of her design problem as a basis for the task used in this research.
The comments of eight CHI reviewers where invaluable in helping us prepare the final version of this paper.
