The impact of interruptions on workflow and productivity has been extensively studied in the PC domain, but while fragmented user attention is recognized as an inherent aspect of mobile phone usage, little formal evidence exists of its effect on mobile productivity.
Using a survey and a screenshot-based diary study we investigated the types of barriers people face when performing tasks on their mobile phones, the ways they follow up with such suspended tasks, and how frustrating the experience of task disruption is for mobile users.
From 386 situated samples provided by 12 iPhone and 12 Pocket PC users, we distill a classification of barriers to the completion of mobile tasks.
Our data suggest that moving to a PC to complete a phone task is common, yet not inherently problematic, depending on the task.
Finally, we relate our findings to prior design guidelines for desktop workflow, and discuss how the guidelines can be extended to mitigate disruptions to mobile taskflow.
That is, do traditionally desktop tasks maintain the same component activities when they are carried out on the smartphone?
Have the orders, rhythms, or methods of carrying out these activities been changed?
And if so, are current systems adequately supporting these new models of taskflow brought about by such tasks going mobile?
Suspending ongoing taskflows due to external or internal interruptions has been studied in depth on the desktop PC .
Furthermore, characterizing the sources of disruption and users` management strategies have led to empiricallybacked design guidelines for supporting taskflow and productivity at the desktop .
In this work we pursue complementary research of the effects on taskflow when similar tasks are carried out on a smartphone.
The empirical work of Oulasvirta et al.
We instead explore how mobility affects the completion of tasks on the whole, such as when phone tasks become suspended as a result of contextual or resource constraints.
While prior work has identified four phases involved in managing interruptions to workflow on the desktop-- preparation, diversion, recovery and resumption --it is uncertain whether this model applies for disruptions to smartphone tasks.
For one, barriers to taskflow on a smartphone are not limited to interruptions, but also include practical limitations of the hardware and usage context.
Another difference is that recovery  on the desktop is often aided by persistent visual cues, which are not commonly presented on smartphone displays.
Finally, interruptions to mobile tasks that require completion on a PC impose crossover challenges to users in recalling and resuming those tasks.
We surmised that a variety of the challenges that thwart completing or resuming tasks on a smartphone are not encountered on the desktop.
In order to uncover these novel challenges, we conducted two studies to gather empirical evidence of the types of barriers people face in accomplishing smartphone tasks, how users follow up from suspended mobile tasks, and how problematic these disruptions are to users.
In recent years, mobile phones have become increasingly important in peoples` computing ecosystems, co-opting many of the tasks once performed solely at desktop or laptop PCs .
Traditionally PC-only applications, like email and web browsing, have branched out to phones, and have been largely successful at accommodating the device constraints, such as limited screen space and input capabilities.
Yet these interface designs and interaction models have largely not accounted for the situational constraints that are common in mobile usage scenarios.
For instance, mobile users` task-directed attention can become fragmented into spans lasting only a few seconds .
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Based on evidence that fragmenting email tasks across multiple devices can lead to pitfalls for users, we followed with a 2-week screenshotbased diary study to broadly catalog the more general types of taskflow disruptions that users face on their smartphones.
Taken together, our results allow us to offer three specific contributions.
First, drawing from 386 in situ examples of barriers that originate in smartphone use, we present a generalized classification of impediments to smartphone taskflow.
Second, we show that these barriers can lead to tasks becoming partitioned across devices.
We identify the properties of such tasks and suggest why some cross-device taskflows work well and others do not.
Finally, we relate our findings to prior design guidelines for desktop workflow, and discuss how the guidelines can be extended to mitigate disruptions to mobile taskflow.
To understand where users may be having difficulties with mobile email, as well as mobile tasks more generally, we asked our study participants to capture the contexts surrounding moments when they suspend tasks on the phone, including ones they planned to continue on a PC.
With a plethora of interruptions and increasing practices of multitasking, managing workflow on the desktop itself presents many challenges .
In a study of information workers using desktop computers, Mark et al.
In complementary work, Iqbal and Horvitz  characterized four phases associated with interruptions to workflow and corresponding recovery and resumption.
They found that it could take up to 15 minutes for a user to resume an activity after being interrupted by an email or instant messaging notification on the PC.
While notions of workflow with respect to task completion have generally not been applied to the mobile domain, Oulasvirta et al.
Our work extends their examination of task fragmentation at the micro-level, to understand the causes of, and strategies for, managing suspensions of mobile activities at the task level.
Studying user needs in mobile computing scenarios presents a unique set of challenges.
In contrast to a fixed, desktop computing environment, the user`s freedom to change location and activity results in a broader range of applicable contexts .
Observation , in situ logging , interviews , diary studies  and experience sampling   are typical methods adopted to address the dynamics of mobility.
In this tradition, our work uses a diary approach in which users take screenshots of their phone in situ, but annotate them later from a PC.
This design closely follows Carter`s suggested diary study pipeline : lightweight capture of memory-trigger media in-the-moment, followed by in-depth annotation and review from a PC along with in-person interviews.
The goal of our work is to develop a better understanding of smartphone taskflow in context by broadly sampling the moments during which flow, and possibly productivity, break down.
Our data bring new insight into the design requirements for systems supporting user activities, both on smartphones and in the context of tasks involving other devices such as laptops and PCs.
Over the last decade, there has been growing interest in the impact of mobility on productivity.
While early studies of mobile work typically focused outside the traditional workplace , many of the insights on the contextual constraints of mobile computing apply equally well to information workers, who, with the use of laptops and smartphones, have unprecedented flexibility in where and when to work.
Through a broader sample of interviews, Dearman and Pierce  offered further insight into the difficulties encountered when accessing and managing data across a variety of devices.
Our work extends this growing understanding of modern work practice by documenting taskflow specifically from the vantage of the mobile phone.
Modern mobile devices such as smartphones have had an undeniable impact on users` concepts of work and working hours, as observed in the opportunistic use of phones to fill gaps of time  that invariably blur the lines between work and personal life .
Not surprisingly these habits impact how we coordinate and collaborate with other people .
But beyond Mazmanian`s  study of how Blackberry adoption in corporations has changed users` relationships with email and the people with whom they connect, little attention has been given to how the mobile device impacts users` overall productivity.
We posit that multi-device email practices may introduce new and disruptive discontinuities to taskflow.
For example, manual workarounds, such as the anecdotal use of mark as unread on smartphones, suggest that the designs of today`s systems and infrastructures may be exacerbating the already well-
In particular, we queried respondents about: the frequency with which they performed typical email tasks  on their phones, task completion strategies when an email task becomes partitioned across multiple devices, and pain points in current multi-device email management strategies.
In addition to email-related activities, we also asked about other tasks they may have carried over from the desktop world--such as calendar, web, and document activities --to expose other activities where taskflows on the mobile device may depart from those established on the desktop.
Yet many of these respondents  also reported breakdowns including forgetting to mark an email as unread, losing track of emails that need follow-up, and overlooking email that was subsumed by a larger volume of accumulated email.
Respondents also expressed a need for reminder tools to help resume activities that were suspended on the mobile device , see Figure 1.
For example, despite that current mobile email management strategies were mostly viewed to be effective by the respondents, they reported finding value in new tools that would help them follow up on emails that were first read on the mobile device , or resume email tasks that were interrupted due to environmental or resource limitations , suggesting that there is room for improvement in how email is presently managed on multiple devices.
In fact, email management was not the only activity that users desired help on remembering and resuming--at least 60% of respondents felt that developing resumption aids on the phone for activities such as browsing, communications and note taking was important.
Figure 1 illustrates the relative importance that respondents placed on such reminder tools, and importantly, draws attention to tasks beyond email where users are likely facing interruptions or barriers, and where assists for resuming tasks would also be welcomed.
In summary, the main goal of our survey was to document email strategies that people use when mobile, including mechanisms for following up on email when returning to a PC.
While users reported that they found their mobile email management strategies to be successful most of the time, email is also a task that is relatively well synchronized between phones and PCs.
Still, the types of manual, mental, and systematized strategies that respondents reported using to remember unfinished email tasks were not completely reliable, and users expressed interest in new tools to help them follow up on email.
Furthermore, the survey identified other activities that users conducted on their mobile device that were subject to interruptions before completion.
More than half  of the respondents reported using mobile devices several times an hour, and the remaining reported using them several times a day.
As was expected for this population, mobile devices were overwhelmingly used for email activities.
The most common activities were reading  and deleting  email.
Reading  and composing short emails  on the device were considered very important to most of the respondents.
Respondents did not, however, rely on their mobile device to compose long emails .
Participants also reported relying heavily on their phones  for reviewing calendar appointments  and making phone calls ; a substantial number of users also used their phones at least several times a week for browsing the web , text messaging , and adding calendar appointments .
Specific questions on the survey probed how users addressed difficulties in migrating email related tasks from their mobile devices to their PCs.
64% of the respondents reported that they typically relied on memory for follow-up of email read on their mobile device when they returned to their PC.
40% admitted that they sometimes forgot to follow up.
34% reported to often set the unread` flag on email as an additional memory aid.
More than half of the respondents also responded to an open-ended question on their strategy for following up on email that was first read on the mobile phone.
Leaving emails in the inbox as an indirect reminder to revisit them was listed by 22% of the respondents.
Some users reported using flags , although a few respondents remarked on the difficulty of setting a flag on a message.
Less frequent strategies were the filing of emails into special folders  and forwarding emails to self .
We conducted a follow-up study to help capture and analyze user experiences across the range of tasks  being performed on smartphones.
We sought to characterize the current smartphone taskflow, sources of obstacles to task completion, and the types of experiences that most frustrate today`s users, to better understand the features needed to more effectively support recovery from task interruption.
We set out to capture a large number of examples in which real users found themselves deferring the completion of a task while using a smartphone.
By capturing details of the task being performed, usage context, user frustration, follow-up plans, and task urgency at the moment of deferral, we sought to distill design insights from what was and was not working well for users.
We recruited 12 iPhone and 12 Windows Mobile Pocket PC  phone users having a wide range of professional backgrounds from within our large software corporation.
Each device group had 5 women and 7 men, with an overall median age of 35.
We included the consumer oriented iPhone and the business oriented Windows Phone to cover the breadth of the smartphone category of devices.
In order to collect information about specific moments of task interruption  we asked participants to capture screenshots of their mobile phone at the moment of disruption and then later annotate those screenshots using a web-based form.
Participants were scheduled for two 1-hour in-office visits exactly two weeks apart.
During the first visit, the study software was installed and users were trained in the study procedures.
Training consisted of reading a handout describing the types of screenshots we wanted and the importance of timely uploads.
After answering any questions users had about the procedure, which was overwhelmingly described as pretty straightforward, the author led the participant through steps of capturing, uploading, and annotating an example screenshot.
The second visit consisted of an hourlong semi-structured interview about the screenshots that had been captured and removing software from the phones.
The screenshot guidelines that we provided were intentionally general.
Not only did we want to encourage as much participation as possible, but we were also searching for previously underreported phenomena, and so were cautious to avoid inadvertently limiting our potential findings.
In addition to introducing the study in general, the document enumerated four broad categories of disruption we were interested in, and provided 3-5 concrete examples in each category.
We made every effort to keep the experience of participating in the study similar for iPhone and Pocket PC devices.
All devices were configured such that a single button press or, on the iPhone, two simultaneous button presses would capture the screen.
Once a day, at random times between 4-7pm, each participant received an email reminder to upload his or her new screenshots and annotate them from a browser.
The study website presented each screenshot along with text fields that asked the participant for details about the type of barrier encountered, the context in which it occurred, and how the participant followed up .
In addition, the form asked the participant`s frustration level at the time of occurrence , the urgency of the task , and whether or not they had already completed the task at the time of annotation.
The annotation page provided a Skip` button in the event that the participant accidentally uploaded a duplicate image.
Our decision to have users annotate their screenshots in batch once per day was intended to strike a balance between ease of use and quality of user feedback.
We reasoned that the screenshots themselves would suffice as memory triggers when users recounted the details of the disruption later in the day.
Because text input on mobile phones tends to be tedious, we deferred that task to the PC, keeping the effort on the phone as lightweight as possible.
The webbased annotation interface was flexible enough to be used from any computer, thus encouraging study participation.
The incentive structure for participants was as follows: all participants were given a base of $25 for participating in two 1-hour office visits.
Follow-up Category Computer Mobile Abandon External Definition Moving to a computer to complete the task.
Persisting with the mobile device to complete the task at a later time.
Giving up on completing the task, usually because a time-sensitive task became irrelevant once a delay was encountered.
Using non-technical means for completing the task .
Pairwise comparisons found that following up on the PC  was significantly less frustrating than following up on the smartphone , p<0.0001.
While we expected that users would be frustrated when having to migrate to another device to complete their task, our data show that they were in fact more frustrated when having to follow up on the smartphone later.
These data reflect that users are more concerned about completing the task, rather than on which device they complete it.
Perhaps users` low expectations of what they can do on a smartphone blunt their frustration in having to move to a PC to complete the task, especially if a PC is nearby and they can work more efficiently on it.
Furthermore, since users often work on their smartphones when they are filling time that would otherwise not be productive, they may not mind starting a task on a mobile device without completing it.
To explore users` frustration ratings with following up more closely, we analyzed the 358 screenshots according to what task participants were engaged in when they were interrupted.
We wanted to understand if users` frustration ratings varied according to the task.
We iteratively developed a coding scheme to characterize what task the user was involved in for each screenshot.
Table 2 summarizes the task types for which we had at least 20 screenshots, together with how the user followed up and the average frustration rating .
A Kruskal-Wallis test was performed on the 328 screenshots listed in Table 2 .
Post-hoc tests showed that mean frustration for Email was significantly lower than for Social Networking, Media, and Maps/Transit.
Frustration for Web tasks was significantly lower than for Media and Maps/Transit.
Frustration for File Management tasks were significantly lower than for Maps/Transits tasks.
Looking more closely at users who followed up by migrating to a PC  versus persisting on the smartphone , the lowest average frustration rating was recorded for migrating to complete Email tasks , while the highest was recorded for completing Social Networking tasks  on a smartphone.
Users` frustration ratings were higher when following up on the smartphone compared to the PC for all tasks except the Web and Media.
Taken together, our data indicate differences in users` frustrations according to how well applications for different tasks are currently designed to manage migrating from smartphone to PC.
One reason that migrating email tasks between devices evokes low frustration is that much of the application state in email tasks is maintained at the server level, and can be accessed from any device.
A total of 467 annotated screenshots were submitted  across all 24 participants.
All authors engaged in an extensively iterative process to categorize the free-form text responses that participants submitted with their screenshots, yielding four stable classifications for barrier types, task types, follow-up types and contexts.
The classification process resulted in the removal of 81 screenshots that did not depict obstacles to performing mobile tasks.
Reasons for removal included screenshots depicting actions but not barriers, normal phone usage with no follow-up required , and duplicate uploads; 386 remained for further analysis.
We first wanted to understand users` perception of frustration when encountering barriers to mobile tasks.
We were interested in whether the manner in which tasks were followed up was any predictor of the level of frustration our participants felt in the moment of task interruption.
We generally assumed that switching to another device to complete a task would be considered more frustrating than completing the task on the mobile device itself.
To explore this hypothesis, we analyzed the frustration ratings that users provided according to where the task was  resumed.
The classification scheme that we developed to capture the general methods that participants used to complete suspended phone tasks yielded 358 screenshots which we coded into four follow-up categories.
We excluded 28 of the 386 screenshots from this phase of analysis because we could not determine how the user planned to follow up with the task depicted in the screenshot.
The follow-up categories, their definitions, counts and mean frustration levels  are presented in Table 1.
We were surprised to discover that our data showed users were least frustrated when moving from a smartphone to a PC than any other means of follow-up.
In analyzing the screenshots, it became clear that many participants interpreted our capture guidelines to include general user experience annoyances or user interface inefficiencies with their devices .
In addition 5% of the screenshots represented Software Failures .
While we include these for completeness at the bottom of Table 3, we don`t discuss them in any further detail because we deemed them to be too closely tied to a specific application instantiation to provide general insight into mobile workflow challenges.
Interact with any navigation information, Maps/Transit 3.3 e.g.
Interact with the one's personal Scheduling 3.4 schedule to add, browse, respond to, or   forward appointments.
Social Interact with any social networking Networking applications, such as Facebook,  MySpace, Twitter, LinkedIn, SMS.
Control, play, capture, or organize any non-text media .
We classified 127  as relating to email tasks that were deferred until some point after the time the screenshot was taken.
While there were a variety of reasons for which an email was not fully handled, we segmented the scenarios into three distinct groups: emails with outstanding action items, emails that remained unread, and emails whose next step was only a written reply.
The current design of email applications offers good support for resuming those tasks across devices without losing user effort.
By contrast, the two tasks which show higher frustration rates when migrating to a computer, Web and Media, reflect designs that do not support seamless transitions across devices.
The application state for browsing and navigating web sites , is typically kept locally on the device and not shared.
Thus, resuming a web task on another device often requires repeating the effort required to browse and navigate to that site.
Similarly, starting to view a video or streaming media on a mobile device would require a fair amount of re-work to find the media and the specific point in time to resume viewing it on another device.
Our frustration data identifies important design considerations in how applications can support migrating tasks across different devices.
The largest number of email related screenshots  required resources unavailable on the phone .
Just under half  of those were characterized by larger multi-step tasks .
At other times  the participant needed access to a corporate file share, a corporate software tool or a PC file to complete the task.
Five of the screenshots in this category required advanced email features that were not implemented on the phone, such as forwarding an invitation on behalf of someone else.
Impact: Emails that generated or represented incomplete tasks were clearly quite common, but as a group, seemed to be associated with low median frustration  overall.
The fact that this group had among the greatest percentage of outstanding tasks  at the time of annotation supports our interpretation that many of the screenshots seemed to represent larger tasks that might have been deferred even if the emails had been read on a PC.
Low user frustration ratings may indicate that the item`s presence in the inbox is sufficient to remind users of these unfinished tasks.
Our analysis of users` frustration ratings indicated differences in how well applications for different tasks are currently designed to manage migrating from mobile to computer devices.
To translate these observations into concrete design guidelines for future systems, we focused on the specific usage barriers that caused frustration.
Table 3 describes the coding scheme for barriers captured in the screenshots along with the count of screenshots and unique participants, mean and median frustration ratings, percentage of tasks followed-up on the phone and PC and the percentage of tasks that were completed by the time users annotated the screenshots.
The second-most common reason that participants took screenshots of their email was because they could not completely consume or read an email .
As with the previous category, a considerable number  of these emails referenced data that the user was unable to access from the smartphone, either because the phone did not have the capability to render/play an attachment or required additional permissions  to locate the file.
Impact: Although participants had completed reading a greater percentage of the emails reported in this category than they had completed in the previous category , participants seemed to be somewhat more frustrated by not completing these tasks in situ .
The screenshots with higher frustration captured times when participants seemed interested in viewing the email at that moment, but could not.
Given that phones are generally better suited to reading and reviewing email rather than replying, it is understandable that users would be annoyed from time to time when they have no way to access the content of an email they otherwise have the time to read.
Indeed, 55%  of the above-average frustration scores  were during bus rides, versus only 5% of the remaining examples.
Despite the current limitations users face today, these problems may subside as devices become more capable of rendering a wider variety of content.
The least common type of email deferral that we encountered in the screenshots was for emails where users needed only to type a reply but chose not to .
Participants overwhelmingly stated that the reply required too much work or would take too long.
An interesting minority of screenshots were those that required rich formatting, special characters, and spell check.
Impact: Unfinished email replies were generally seen as more frustrating  to participants than the other types of email barriers, which is surprising given that practically speaking, deferral was a calculated choice, not a strict barrier.
The fact that fewer of these tasks were completed on average at the time users annotated their screenshots than Unfinished Read tasks might indicate that the natural moment of wrapping up the task had been missed, causing more frustration and loose ends than desired.
Potential assists to users could come in the form of reminders for dangling emails that the owner typically replies to , and continuing to research ways to reduce the limits on speed and expressivity of mobile input.
More investigation is necessary to understand which features are most valuable to pursue.
Otherwise, systems can help users by saving and transferring state across devices to facilitate task resumption in a more appropriate context for the user.
Despite advances in screen resolution and rendering capabilities, small screens still pose considerable challenges to information presentation on phones, as seen in 52  of our participants` screenshots.
Almost half  of these screenshots presented or referenced web pages that did not display or function properly on the phone.
Impact: Overall, output challenges cause moderate frustration  and incompletion rates .
High frustration ratings generally indicated instances when users tried and failed to access information to perform a task, as opposed to anticipating the problem and choosing to wait.
While expected advances in mobile web browsers will go a long way toward solving many of these problems, others that involved reading, digesting, or getting an overview of information seem to indicate a need for generalized alternate, flexible and simultaneous views of information.
While nearly all phones impose a single-app/window view model, our data suggest that this design can be too limiting for some tasks, which would benefit from the ability to display multiple apps or windows at variable resolution.
Ninety  of the participants` screenshots indicated that their phone lacked some specific functionality required to complete their task.
Beyond the email-related shortcomings mentioned above, the episodes reported typically resulted from the phone supporting a more limited mobile version of an application.
Impact: Of the remaining 39 non-email screenshots in this category, none were considered by the authors to be Complex tasks , and so might have reasonably been completed on the phone had the functions been provided.
Most of the time users captured these problems with screenshots of network failure dialogues , but at other times, the participants incidentally noticed that their data had not synchronized properly, such as missing a calendar appointment.
Impact: Network problems inspired the highest reported median frustration level  of any barrier.
This relatively high level of frustration is understandable given the extensive effort that users expended in trying to overcome the barrier: rebooting, restarting apps, switching networks, and numerous re-attempts.
User comments also captured sentiments about the unpredictability and mystery of outages: ...I don't know why...for some reason could not connect...I am uncertain whether this error occurred due to an issue with the Gmail service or the device.
Failures resulting in lost work, such as un-posted comments, were consistently rated with frustration of 4 or 5.
Interestingly, network failures had the highest completion rate  suggesting that despite the high frustration it engenders, it does not especially impact task completion , as many were even completed on the phone itself, versus waiting or migrating to a PC.
Rather network failures expose missed opportunities, wasted effort, and delayed gratification.
Unfortunately, network inconsistency is likely to be a way of life for mobile users, so systems will need to be designed to minimize the negative impact on users, such as by preemptive information caching, notifying users of returns to connectivity, and minimizing rework by caching sufficient details of the task to enable retry on behalf of the user .
Impact: Given that participants` annotations indicated that they were making an intentional decision to defer their task, we were surprised that they also reported moderately high frustration .
However, the fact that most  of these screenshots were already completed on a PC at the time they were annotated suggests users may have sensed a missed opportunity in not finishing the task on their phone.
Environmental factors affecting the completion of mobile tasks included external interruptions  as well as context of use  that caused a task that otherwise could be accomplished on the phone, to be delayed.
We characterized 29  of the screenshots as being prompted by environmental factors.
Impact: Very low median frustration  and relatively high completion rates , the majority of which were finished on the phone , indicate that environmental factors do not pose a large threat to productivity.
Presumably many environmental interruptions are momentary, allowing users to return to the task quickly, without losing phone state between attempts.
The 22  input challenges represented in our data set captured problems specifically inherent to the low speed of text entry and absence of formatting capabilities on the phone.
The low overall frustration rating  and moderate short-term completion rate  indicates that people generally accepted this limitation and have strategies for completing such tasks on a PC .
We classified 43  of the screenshots as complex tasks: those which required multiple steps , access to other resources , data collection and analysis , and which we estimated would take more than 2 minutes  to complete.
Overall frustration with unfinished complex tasks was low  reflecting the fact that users had little expectation of performing the task on the phone in the first place.
Even so, it would be interesting to consider systems that allow users to manage these larger tasks as collections of subtasks, some of which are farmed out to the phone and checked off, so to speak, during dead time .
A small but interesting subset of screenshots  represented occasions during which the participant captured a photo as a memory aid for completing the task at a future point when near a PC.
Participant frustration was low  likely due to the fact that the users were not hitting a barrier with the phone, but rather using it to provide a bridge from an external setting to a desktop.
We specifically included both iPhone and Pocket PC  users in our study because we wanted to capture breadth in the range of challenges that people faced in maintaining mobile taskflow.
In this spirit, we made no distinction between the user groups in our classification exercises or statistical analyses.
Yet, through our familiarity with the data, we did observe some trends in the relative strengths of the platforms, such as the PPC having better support for Microsoft Exchange services and iPhone having a more compelling web experience.
In keeping with this broader scope, the following sections discuss and draw design inspiration from the elements that are invariant across platforms, as those are the ones that embody issues inherent to mobility.
The large number of in situ experiences that we collected during our study offers evidence of the regularity with which our study population experienced breaks in taskflow on the phone.
Importantly, the classification we derived from these samples demonstrates that many of the barriers people face are inherent to, and will persist with, mobile computing.
But perhaps the most striking observation was the frequency with which mobile disruptions caused a task to become partitioned across more than one device--over 70% of our 386 screenshots captured task suspensions that users expected to complete on a PC, many of which were strategic decisions by the user.
While our own prior work established that users perform similar types of tasks on phones and PCs , we had lacked evidence that users partition stages of the same task across phones and PCs.
And that many of these switches are strategic suggest they should be supported, not eliminated.
Thus, one perspective that our data offers is in how mobile user experiences are situated within a larger context of tasks that are completed on a PC.
This inspires us to focus on design implications not only for the mobile device in isolation, but also for tasks that extend beyond the mobile device to users` computing ecosystems.
In establishing the relevance of taskflow to mobile phones, we find that the considerable research on interruption management at the desktop extends naturally to the mobile phone, but suggest that systems also must support inevitable task transitions across devices.
Iqbal and Horvitz  offer two directions for recovering from interruptions on the desktop: reminding users of unfinished tasks and assisting users in efficiently rehydrating task context.
In desktop environments, open application windows serve both to retain state and indirectly remind users of suspended tasks.
It is interesting to consider how the absence of these cues may be hampering mobile users, and motivates thought on how similar models might be realized in the mobile context to remind and assist users in resuming suspended activities.
Yet we have also shown that task rehydration is relevant beyond the phone, calling for task state to be synchronized across phones and PCs.
In fact, our data support this approach: users` consistent, device-independent view of the email inbox is likely the reason that participants reported relatively low frustration when they deferred handling an email until reaching a PC.
In contrast, the lack of shared web browser state between PCs and phones may explain why involuntary suspension of web tasks caused users significantly higher subjective frustration than for email tasks.
In addition to improving the synchronization of relevant task state across devices , our data indicate that it is also important to convey on which device that state originated.
From our large sample of in situ examples of breaks in mobile taskflow, we derived nine generalized sources of mobile task interruption.
Reflecting upon the barrier categories of Table 3 and what they mean in terms of how systems can help users manage mobile interruptions more effectively, we noticed three even more general groupings.
First, some of the barriers we captured may simply be the temporary growing pains of a field that is rapidly changing.
For example, disruptions caused by Missing Functionality, Network Problems, and of course the user interface shortcomings depicted in the last three rows of Table 3, will all tend to decrease in frequency and severity with advances in technology and interface refinements.
Furthermore, the fact that many of these barriers were rated to be highly frustrating means that they may have already caught the attention of industry players, who will respond accordingly.
The second grouping we notice is one made up of barriers that result from inherent aspects of mobility, and as such, are those that are likely to persist for the foreseeable future.
Environmental Factors embody the unpredictable nature of mobile contexts, which are generally prone to external interruption, while task suspensions due to Cost/Benefit Choices and Complex Tasks are hallmarks of the contextual variability of users` cognitive, physical, and/or temporal resources while mobile.
It is primarily for this class of challenges to mobile taskflow that we seek guidelines for reducing the manual and mental burdens users currently assume with today`s infrastructures.
The final grouping we identified includes all email-related barriers, which we observed users to be managing relatively well today.
The vast majority of email screenshots depicted intentional task deferrals to a PC environment, and users` modest to low frustration levels suggest that users are comfortable with and confident in current structures to support this partitioning.
We believe constructive lessons can be drawn from examining email closely, and emulating its successful constructs when extending other, less mature tasks to the mobile phone.
The fundamental motivation behind our investigation was to understand how barriers to taskflow manifest on a mobile device and to form insights into how such disruptions to taskflow could best be addressed.
This example shows how performing tasks on the mobile device may require some reflection to the user when they return to a PC.
Thus synchronization infrastructures may need to track which user interactions were accomplished on which devices to give the user a more meaningful sense of the progress of the task .
Decomposing tasks into meaningful subtasks is one strategy that could allow users to more effectively maintain task progress when tasks span devices.
We posit that the lower frustration ratings for mobile email than for web activities may be attributable to how email management tasks divide into distinct sub-tasks that users can perform independent of one another .
Other mobile tasks may benefit from this solution, but more investigation is necessary to understand how the principles apply in task-specific ways.
For example, beyond sharing visited web links between PCs and phones, web clients know many more details about the progress of a browsing task that could be valuable to users when resuming a suspended phone-based session on another device, including the original search terms used, links followed, and interaction histories.
Tracking activities at a finer level of detail, sharing these data with all of a user`s devices, and surfacing them visually in a device-sensitive manner may help smooth the continuation of activities that are suspended on one device and resumed on another.
The goal of our investigation was to develop a deeper understanding of the nuances of managing taskflow on mobile devices.
Our survey documented strategies being used for mobile email management and also led us to consider other tasks  that are extending into the mobile arena.
Our screenshot study helped us understand how the barriers that users encounter with mobile tasks often lead them to move to another device to complete the task.
Thus, our findings open a window to a richer landscape of how multiple tasks  flow across multiple devices .
While more investigation is needed to understand the how our proposed design directions should be adapted to specific tasks, we see great opportunity for applying these insights to improve the design of systems that support seamless mobile and cross-device taskflows.
