Stress causes and exacerbates many physiological and mental health problems.
Routine and unobtrusive monitoring of stress would enable a variety of treatments, from break-taking to calming exercises.
It may also be a valuable tool for assessing effects  of using interfaces or applications.
Custom sensing hardware is a poor option, because of the need to buy/wear/use it continuously, even before stress-related problems are evident.
Here we explore stress measurement from common computer mouse operations.
We use a simple model of arm-hand dynamics that captures muscle stiffness during mouse movement.
We show that the within-subject mouse-derived stress measure is quite strong, even compared to concurrent physiological sensor measurements.
While our study used fixed mouse tasks, the stress signal was still strong even when averaged across widely varying task geometries.
We argue that mouse sensing "in the wild" may be feasible, by analyzing frequently-performed operations of particular geometries.
Stress may result from and also cause difficulties in using computer interfaces and applications: users may become frustrated, and they may feel trapped and unable to do what they want to do, leading to poor user experience and overall reduced productivity.
Being able to use "everyday" technologies to continuously monitor and detect stress on ordinary computers could open a new source of field data to gauge and understand user difficulties and to inform the design of better UIs or applications adaptive to user pains.
Self-report tools and specialized questionnaires have been successful in detecting and diagnosing acute distress disorder in clinical settings .
These methods, however, provide only a momentary snapshot of individual stress levels and are of limited use for in-situ, everyday monitoring.
Routine unobtrusive monitoring can help individuals better understand stress patterns and can enable a variety of interventions, including break-taking, breathing, and visualization exercises.
A number of physiological markers have been linked with stress, including heart rate variability, muscle tension, pulse oximetry, and galvanic skin response.
Custom wearable body sensors have been designed to continuously monitor these stress markers.
However, the costs of acquisition and continuous wear, even before stress-related problems are evident, present barriers for wide-spread adoption.
This paper explores the use of common computer mouse operations for measuring stress.
Studies by Lundberg  and Wahlstrom  have shown that increased arm muscle activity and muscular tension are prominent mental stress markers.
We show that muscle stiffness of arm/hand movement can be directly captured from common mouse operations with a physiological model of hand-arm dynamics, the Mass-Spring-Damper system .
We derive two novel mouse-derived stress metrics based on the parameters of this model and discuss a computational procedure that provide direct and accurate means to estimate these parameters.
A controlled study was carried out using a within-subject, fullybalanced design, where mouse activity data, ECG, and subjective stress ratings were collected from 49 participants under both calm and induced stress conditions.
The results suggest that within-subject mouse-derived stress measures are quite strong, and in fact stronger than parallel physiological methods.
We also find that stress detection is feasible, and un-
Stress has a profound impact on the emotional, cognitive and physical well-being and the quality of life of individuals.
It has been strongly linked to numerous chronic health risks, such as cardiovascular disease , diabetes, obesity , hypertension, and coronary artery disease .
Physiological reactions induced by stress are symptomatic of mental illnesses, such as anxiety disorder and depression which is a leading cause of suicides .
Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Increased muscle activity/tension is one of the most consistent physiological markers of stress and arousal .
Independent studies by Wahlstr om  and Visser , showed  that mentally demanding computer mouse tasks can also significantly increase co-contraction and tension in neck/shoulder muscles, upper arm  muscles, multiple forearm and finger muscles.
Visser's study further indicates that the accumulation of muscle tension has a significant effect in the tempo of arm motion in pointing tasks.
In this work we are interested in using motion produced by the user while operating a computer mouse to infer stress levels.
We begin by considering a physiological model of the arm to establish a theoretical basis for the subsequent study and analysis.
We argue that the model lends itself to directly capturing the physiological effect of stress and present a novel application of a computational technique to derive this model from data.
There is substantial empirical and theoretical evidence that the dynamics of human arm motion for two-dimensional tasks, such as handwriting and drawing, can be well approximated by a mass-spring-damper  system .
Variations of the MSD model have wide applications in science and engineering, such as in modeling arm motion for handwriting and drawing tasks  and in system design for robotics and haptic interfaces.
Consider the use of a single mass-spring-damper system to model arm motion along each axis of motion during computer mouse use.
The mass is a lump representation of the arm/hand, and the mouse.
The spring and damper components capture the interactions between the active and passive muscle elements of the arm.
The system takes as input forces generated by the arm and produces as output an arm motion trajectory which is recorded as a mouse movement.
Mechanically, an MSD system consists of a mass  attached to a spring component  and a viscous damper , where k is the spring constant and c is the damping coefficient.
The mass shall oscillate at a rate related to the tension of the spring but the oscillation will decay exponentially due to the drag/friction produced by the damper.
This behavior is fully described by the two fundamental MSD parameters - the damped frequency  and the damping ratio .
From basic physics, we know that the constant k determines stiffness of the spring component MSD model.
Furthermore, prior research have demonstrated that increased arm muscle tension is a strong physiological correlate of stress during computer work .
We thus postulate that an increase in stress will translate to an increase in the tension k of the spring component of the MSD model.
Prior work fitted mouse devices with custom sensors to measure and detect stress/arousal as well as affect during computer work.
Kirsch and Picard used the SenticMouse   to collect finger pressure while subjects browsed affective images.
Analysis suggested a correlation between finger pressure and valence states .
Click force was found to be significantly higher during the stressor compared to the control, but grip force had showed no significant differences.
A promising early exploration of the use of mouse movements to detect affect was the work of Maehr .
Maehr used several metrics of mouse movement, and emotions were induced in subjects by watching short videos.
A few of the metrics showed some relationships to emotion, but many did not show significant relationships.
Specifically, "motion breaks"  were significantly related to both arousal and disgust and close to significant for anger.
While the features used were intuitive, they were not driven by physiological correlates of arousal or stress.
Heart rate variability , which captures the variation in the inter-beat interval of the heart, is a frequently-used physiological measure of arousal/stress.
Numerous studies have demonstrated its use in detecting stress induced by cognitive and physical stressors, with varying degrees of success, e.g., mental math , interview , and computer work .
However, researchers have also consistently found HRV measurements to be frequently noisy and highly sensitive to motion artifacts when subjects are moving around  and inaccurate for short term measurements .
In fact, automatic HRV analysis almost always begin with manual data pre-processing of the ECG signal for artifact removal as per the recommendations by the Task Force European Society of Cardiology and the North American Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology .
We considered a third indicator variable: task completion time .
Subjects under stress typically increase their speed, especially on familiar tasks .
Direct identification of the MSD model will not be possible since only the system's output - mouse movement can be observed.
Hence a major modeling challenge is how to "invert" the system, i.e.
Linear predictive coding  is a signal modeling technique which builds a predictive model for future samples based only on linear combinations of observed signals from the past .
It turns out that an ideal second-order system, such as the spring-damper system, has a simple second-order LPC model.
Conversely if we build a second-order LPC model that best fits a series of samples, we can recover the MSD parameters.
We used a logger to record a sequence of raw mouse events describing x and y mouse motion.
Each event is a tuple , where dx and dy are the displacements along x and y directions, and t is the timestamp.
This event stream is segmented into individual trials, each corresponding to a particular instance of mouse task.
The relative displacements are linearly interpolated, resampled and summed to give uniformly time-sampled absolute mouse displacements along x and y axes.
This becomes the observed trajectory of the MSD system that we wish to identify.
LPC produces a sequence of coefficients that define the characteristic polynomial of MSD system.
The complex roots  of this polynomial characterize the MSD's damping behavior.
To decide which common mouse operations should be used in our study we first observe that the bulk of onscreen mouse interactions can be characterized by a small number of repetitive tasks.
For example, we frequently move the mouse cursor over a button or icon to invoke an action, e.g.
Another common set of tasks involve moving or rearranging objects by dragging, e.g.
Sometimes the mouse cursor must be moved through constrained "tunnels", such as in selecting an action from a drop-down menu or highlighting text in an editor.
These and other common mouse interactions can be described by three abstract mouse operations: point-and-click, drag-and-drop, and steering.
We designed the mouse tasks in this study based on these abstract operations for good generality and wide applicability, similar to literature on human psycho-motor modeling .
Given the discussion in the previous section, we designed an experiment to evalute the following specific hypotheses: Hypothesis 1a : Due to higher stress, the damped frequency  will be higher during stressed mouse use compared to a baseline.
Hypothesis 1b : Due to higher stress, the damping ratio  will be lower during the stressed mouse use compared to a baseline.
That is we expect the MSD model's parameters to capture the within subject stress variation for some well defined set of mouse tasks.
Timing pressure: The participant was given an upper limit of 5 seconds to verbalize the next number in the sequence.
When a visible timer expired, the participant was immediately interrupted and asked to restart from the beginning.
Repetition: In addition to the timer, when an incorrect answer was verbalized at any point, the participant was interrupted and was required to restart the counting from the beginning.
Performance: The participant was informed at the start of the math stressor she can earn a bonus up to $10 depending on how well she performed.
Specifically for every 5 correct answers in a row $2 will be added, and for every 2 incorrect answers, $1 will be deducted.
A task configuration corresponds to a particular assignment of values for two parameters: distance  and width .
For point-and-click and drag-and-drop tasks, D describes the horizontal distance between the center point of the targets, while W describes the uniform width of the targets.
For the steering task, D describes the horizontal length of the tunnel and W describes the vertical width of the tunnel.
In our design, each mouse task has twenty D and W combinations, as summarized in Table 1.
Each task configuration is presented 5 times to the subject for a total of 100 trials per mouse task.
The motivation for using a destress task was twofold: to provide a uniform control for pre-existing stressors that participants might carry into the experiment and to provide a recovery period at the end of study as required by the IRB for conducting stress-related experiments.
The task is based on mindfulness meditation and visualization which has been found to be effective in alleviating stress under various situations .
Participants were recruited from a list of potential subjects maintained by the campus.
No details regarding the experiment were disclosed to participants beyond that they will be asked to perform tasks similar to those encountered in academic settings.
To minimize psychological and physiological confounds, subjects were screened to exclude those with significant psychiatric disorders, heavy smoker and drinkers, and those with shoulder, arm, wrist injuries in the past 6 months.
Fifty-one, one-hour sessions were schedule over the course of two weeks.
Forty-nine successfully completed the tasks, split into 26 female  and 23 male subjects .
The average age of participants was 20 years old.
The minimum compensation was guaranteed $25, even if the participant earned a negative amount on the math stressor task.
The basic stressor task requires participants to count down from a large prime number in decrements of 13 sequentially as quickly and accurately as possible.
Recursive mental math calculations have been found to be effective in inducing cognitive stress with strong physiological markers, such as increased heart rate variation and reduced breathing rates .
Tasks containing the components of "uncontrollability" and "social-evaluative threat" are associated with some of the largest physiological stress responses and the longest recovery times .
Thus, we augment the basic stressor task the following additional components: Social pressure: We wanted the participant to feel like his/her performance might be negatively judged by another person.
To achieve this, during the mental math task, the participant was required to verbalize successive answers to the experimenter and the experimenter was seen to be recording all incorrect answers in front of the participant.
The experiment was partitioned into four main phases: * Calm-phase: a five-minutes destressor task designed to normalize for external factors and to help destress the participant.
The subject performs a collection of mouse tasks with a balanced number of pointing, drag-and-drop, and steering mouse operations.
The mouse tasks and configurations are described in the Mouse Task Design section.
Details of the task are described in the Stressor Task section.
The task orders are fully randomized.
Hence, each participant performed two sessions of mouse tasks, a control session  and a stress session .
To control for order effects in a repeated measure design, the ordering of the task couplings  were randomized between subjects, as shown in the two protocol schedules in Figures 4 and 5.
A uniform three minutes of Recovery takes place at the end of the experiment as per study requirements.
The participants gave subjective stress ratings  at the beginning and end of each task, as indicated in Figures 4 and 5.
The data is roughly balanced for gender and for the two experimental protocols, with 25  subjects completing the normal protocol, and 24 subjects  subjects completing the counter-balanced protocol.
Multiple Subject Stress Ratings  were recorded for each participant at different stages of the experiment.
Each SSR was reported on a 11 point Likert scale, where 0 indicates no stress and 10 indicates extreme stress.
Unlike ECG signals which are samples of a continuous signal, SSR are discrete, point-in-time values recorded at the start and at the end of an experimental phase in Figures 4 and 5.
To estimate subjective stress during any experimental phase, we take the average of the two SSR values reported by the subject before and after the phase was completed.
Continuous ECG data was collected from a 3-lead ECG meter.
The ECG electrodes were attached to a subject's chest in a triangular configuration, with 2 electrodes placed over the right and left coracoid processes, and one electrode over the xiphoid process.
The ECG device was connected to a computer and streamed continuous ECG signals for the duration of the experiment.
We extracted the HRV indicators in Table 2 using the Kubios HRV analysis tool .
These measures have been shown in prior work as promising objective indicators of individual differences in emotional response, particularly as it relates to stress .
Kubios will automatically detect QRS complexes in the raw ECG signal, compute RR intervals, and produce all the most commonly used HRV parameters according to the guidelines given in .
We further removed incorrectly detected beats and added missing beats.
In this experimental design mouse measurements were not made during the active application of a stressor or destressor, but during the next m-phase.
This was a difficult experiment design choice but was made so that we could be sure that subjects were actually experiencing stress during the stress phases.
We used stress-inducing procedures that have been shown to induce stress in many prior experiments.
There was no concurrent mouse use during those stressors, and in many cases this would have been impossible.
Prior attempts to use concurrent stressors in mouse experiments have had mixed success Garde , Wahlstrom , and Hoshikawa , although we feel that the right choice of stressors should work well, e.g.
Had we not done this we would have been at risk of not inducing enough stress, and of potentially measuring physiological phenomena other than stress.
With the experiment as executed, we saw very strong self-report and HRV differences between Stressor and Calm and weaker  differences between mStress and mCalm.
The weakness of this approach is that the physiological stress induced during the Stressor phase will decay somewhat during the mStress phases.
The three mouse tasks and a mouse motion recorder were implemented using C++ and Microsoft Windows GDI+.
The mouse motion recorder monitors and records device level raw-input events, which report mouse movements at the subpixel level.
We obtain the timestamp of an event from a high precision hardware timer.
A high resolution gaming mouse was used for the study.
The mouse has a spatial resolution of 5700 CPI .
While we did not collect data using a normal mouse, we did simulate normal mouse resolution by decimating the high-resolution mouse data to 400 CPI.
The experiments reported here are for the highresolution mouse.
We repeated all tests with decimated data.
This yielded the same detection accuracy  as the highresolution mouse.
The t-scores for decimated data were all within 20% of the high-resolution values.
An MSD model is computed from the resulting data, as decribed in Section "Model Computation".
Mouse motion parameters and interpretations are summarized in Table 3.
Description and Interpretation Mean of the rhythm-to-rhythm  interval series.
Lower value indicates high stress The root mean square of differences of successive RR intervals.
RMSDD describes short term variation.
Low value indicates high stress.
The powers of LF in normalized units.
LF demonstrates both sympathetic and vagal activation.
High LF value indicates high stress.
The powers of HF in normalized units.
HF is modulated by the vagal  tone.
Low HF value indicates high stress.
Ratio of LF to HF.
The ratio mirrors sympathetic and parasympathetic balance.
High value indicates high stress.
The standard deviation of the Poincare plot orthogonal to the line-of-identity.
SD1 describes short-term variation caused by sinus arrhythmia.
Low value indicates high stress.
The standard deviation of the Poincare plot along the line-of-identity.
Low value indicates high stress.
Indicator x y x y t Description and Interpretation The damped frequency of the MSD system along the x-axis of motion.
High value indicates high stress.
The damped frequency of the MSD system along the y-axis of motion.
High value indicates high stress.
The damping ratio of the MSD system along the x-axis of motion.
Low value indicates high stress.
The damping ratio of the MSD system along the y-axis of motion.
Low value indicates high stress.
Low value indicates high stress.
Table 5: Student t-test results for different Heart Rate Variability measures between Calm and Stessor phases and between mCalm and mStress phases.
These results are consistent with theoretically predicted direction of the parameters and indicate that the Stressor was effective in inducing stress.
No HRV measure was found to be significantly different  between mCalm and mStress phases.
We start by considering the Mixed Task model.
The Mixed Task model can be regarded as a kind of omnibus model that is independent of specific task types  as well as task configurations .
The Mixed Task model is obtained by averaging across all task types, configurations, and repetitions .
Summary statistics and t-test results are given in Table 6.
All effects will be considered at .05 level of signficance.
In accordance with Table 3, a single-tailed, paired t-test was applied between stressed mouse use mStress and the baseline mCalm for all the indicator variables.
On average, the damped frequency for both x-axis   and yaxis   was significantly higher during mStress than during mCalm.
Results indicate that t was not significantly lower during mStress compared mCalm  = -.02, p = .49.
On the basis of the above findings, we revisit the hypotheses set forth earlier and discuss the implications.
Hypothesis 1a  is well supported by the inferential statistics.
Results for the Mixed Task model suggests that the effects of stress was strong and consistent for damped frequency for both x-axis  and y-axis  of motion.
The  parameters were not consistently signficant under every task specific model, but this should not taken as an absence of effect.
In fact, it is clear that the effect of stress is present for the Dragging task , only that this effect is somewhat weaker compared to the Steering and Clicking tasks.
From our analysis for the Mixed Task model, we see that the damping ratio was significantly lower along the x-axis direction of motion , which supports Hypothesis 1b .
Analysis of the Clicking and Steering tasks show significant effect of stress on x , which further supports this hypothesis.
Intuitively this is not very surprising since the measureable effect of stress should reflect more prominantly in the dominant direction of movement, which is in the left-to-right x-axis direction in the design our mouse tasks.
Further studies are needed to verify this hypothesis.
Hypothesis 2  was supported for the Clicking task only , but not for the Dragging and Steering tasks, or for the Mixed task.
From the practical standpoint, the significance of the MSD parameters under the Mixed task model suggests that these parameters are strong indicators of stress and good candidates for stress detection during daily computer mouse use, which naturally contains a blend of different mouse operations.
Results from the Subject Stress Ration  was consistent with the mouse motion parameters.
Analysis showed a signicantly higher self-report stress level in the mStress phase compared to the baseline mCalm ECG analysis yielded several HRV measures  and HF  that were significantly different between the Stressor phase and the Calm phases.
This is consistent with the self-reported stress indicator, which showed very strong differences in stress level.
However, no HRV measure was found to be significantly different between mCalm and mStress phases.
SSR reports for mStress/mCalm showed that significant but weaker differences were present in stress between mStress and mCalm.
On the other hand, many mouse stress metrics  yielded strong, significant differences in stress between mStress and mCalm.
Next, we examine Task Specific models.
We consider separate averages for each of the three mouse tasks: clicking, dragging, and steering.
Task Specific models are obtained by averaging across all task configuration and repetitions.
The motion indicator variables were tested between mStress and mCalm phases .
This result is tion and set signficance to  = 0.3 presented in Table 7.
In addition, the damping ratio was significantly lower for mStress compared to mCalm along the x-axis   = 4.54, p = 4e-5 .
No signficant effect was observed for damping ratio along x-axis or y-axis.
Furthermore, none of the damping parameters were signficant  for the Dragging task.
Table 7: Summary of t-test results which show the significance of the stress indicator variables: damped frequency, damping ratio, and completion time for task specific models: clicking, dragging, and steering.
Star  indicates significance at .0167. sensitive, or at least less prone to artifacts, than classical stress measures such as HRV.
Subjects performing mouse tasks during mCalm and mStress phases naturally had bigger and more frequent upperbody/arm movement compared to Calm and Stressor phases, where they were predominantly sitting still .
We believe this is a plausible explanation for the noisier ECG signals we found for mStress and mCalm.
Once we have a model for a user, we can make an estimate of their stress by using single or  multple samples for the user in the same stress state.
Figure 7 shows the results.
The vertical axis is the classification accuracy .
The horizontal axis is the number of samples used for measurement with the remainder used for training.
This accuracy value is an average of classifaction accuracy for positive and negative samples.
That is, at 5 on the x-axis, 5 measurements of natural frequency were randomly selected in the stressed state and 5 were taken in the unstressed state .
The remaining 190 , were used to train the model above for each user.
The 5 measurements in each condition were averaged and compared against the threshold, and assigned as correct or incorrect based on the actual label of those 5 measurements.
This process was repeated 10000 times to get an overall accuracy measure.
There are three plots in the figure.
The lowest is a baseline model  using a simple average of the p as the threshold .
The middle plot shows a simple average of the p  as threshold.
The top figure shows the max-accuracy threshold of the p  as the model.
Note that the stair model with max-accuracy threshold provides a useful > 6 percentage-point improvement in accuracy at 10 samples.
We do not show the max-accuracy classifier applied to the raw samples p - it gave very close to random  accuracy.
Model accuracy improves with the number of samples at measurement time, peaking at about 71% accuracy with 30 samples.
As the number of measurement samples increases beyond 30, accuracy starts to fall because there are not enough remaining samples  to build an accurate model.
The upshot is with around 10 mouse movements with the user in a fixed stress state  should yield around 70% accuracy in classifying stress.
We studied the accuracy of within-subjects stress classification, i.e.
We did this by taking a random sample of k of the data points derived during the study, training a classifier on the remaining n - k points, and using this to classify the initial k samples.
We used a very simple model-based classifier, relying on the structure that is evident in Figure 6.
The model has a staircase structure, i.e.
The step for target distance is proportional to the log of the distance: the distances in our experiment were powers of two, so their logs are evenly spaced, matching Figure 6.
We use the same step magnitude for all subjects , and zero step slope for the click and drag tasks.
The step slope for the steering task was 0.005 for a 2x increase in the target size.
There remains a single model parameter: the vertical offset of the entire staircase, which needs to be learned for each user.
An advantage of this model for "real-world" mouse stress analysis is that it requires only knowledge of the distance of a mouse motion, not the target size.
Thus a low-level logging application can be used, which does not need to be aware of what task or application the user is using, which would entail increased privacy risks.
We used a very simple one-dimensional classifier: namely we choose the real threshold which gave the best classification accuracy on the training set.
Figure 7: Accuracy  vs. number of samples  of the damping frequency feature for the user in a given stress state.
The top curves are for the stair/sawtooth model and best accuracy threshold.
The middle curves are stair model with simple mean threshold, and bottom curves are no model and simple mean threshold.
We have shown a new physiologically motivated measures of stress that can be computed from common mouse operations.
This is the first work that establishes a theoretical connection between a simple mechanical model of the arm  and muscle stiffness - a strong physiological correlate of stress.
Further, we demonstrated the use of LPC as a computationally efficient and accurate method to estimate two fundamental parameters of this model - damping ratio and damping frequency.
Our statistical tests suggested that both measures are sensitive to stress states in mix-task and task-specific conditions; and when stress is present, they are much stronger than HRV measures derived from concurrently recorded ECG signals.
This work makes novel use of the computer mouse - a widely available input device as a stress "sensor", which in practice has three advantages compared to existing sensing solutions: it is universally accessible to computer users; it is unobtrusiveness and requires no wiring; and it is suitable for long-term and in-situ monitoring when people are engaged in stressful tasks.
This work examined a broad range of target sizes and distances, and showed that an accurate detector can be agnostic to the target size - which suggests that a stress sensing process can run on the user's computer without knowledge of the underlying application.
These are encouraging evidences that this work can be used as a basis for stress sensing solutions in the wild.
We believe the ability to use everyday technologies on ordinary computers to continuously monitor and detect stress opens a new source of field data to gauge and understand user difficulties.
Such affective information can also be usefully presented to help people interpret changes based on exposures to stressors.
Preliminary model results computed from a normal resolution mouse are quite positive which strongly suggests that the model can be deployed widely in work and office settings, and we plan to do so in future work.
Accot, J., and Zhai, S. Beyond fitts' law: models for trajectory-based hci tasks.
In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems, ACM , 295-302.
Berntson, G. G. Heart rate variability: Origins, methods and interpretive caveats.
Possible connections between stress, diabetes, obesity, hypertension and altered lipoprotein metabolism that may result in atherosclerosis.
Bryant, R., Moulds, M., and Guthrie, R. Acute stress disorder scale: a self-report measure of acute stress disorder.
Davis, M., Eshelman, E., and McKay, M. The relaxation and stress reduction workbook.
Dickerson, S., and Kemeny, M. Acute stressors and cortisol responses: a theoretical integration and synthesis of laboratory research.
Fitts, P. The information capacity of the human motor system in controlling the amplitude of movement.
Effects of mental and physical demands on heart rate variability during computer work.
The heat of shortening and the dynamic constants of muscle.
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London.
Hoehn-Saric, R., and McLeod, D. Somatic manifestations of normal and pathological anxiety.
An oscillation theory of handwriting.
Hoshikawa, Y., and Yamamoto, Y.
Effects of stroop color-word conflict test on the autonomic nervous system responses.
Kirsch, D. The sentic mouse: A tool for measuring emotional valence.
Lundberg, U., Kadefors, R., Melin, B., Palmerud, G., Hassm en, P., Engstr om, M., and Elfsberg Dohns, I. Psychophysiological stress and emg activity of the trapezius muscle.
Maehr, W. eMotion: Estimation of User's Emotional State by Mouse Motions.
Massie, T. H., and Salisbury, J. K. The phantom haptic interface: A device for probing virtual objects.
In Proceedings of the ASME winter annual meeting, symposium on haptic interfaces for virtual environment and teleoperator systems, vol.
McNames, J., and Aboy, M. Reliability and accuracy of heart rate variability metrics versus ecg segment duration.
The global burden of disease.
O'Shaughnessy, D. Linear predictive coding.
Pagani, M., Mazzuero, G., Ferrari, A., Liberati, D., Cerutti, S., Vaitl, D., Tavazzi, L., and Malliani, A. Sympathovagal interaction during mental stress.
Pickering, T. Mental stress as a causal factor in the development of hypertension and cardiovascular disease.
Rajendra Acharya, U., Paul Joseph, K., Kannathal, N., Lim, C. M., and Suri, J. S. Heart rate variability: a review.
Task force of the european society of cardiology and the north american society of pacing and electrophysiology.
Schnall, P., Landsbergis, P., and Baker, D. Job strain and cardiovascular disease.
Tarvainen, M. P., Niskanen, J.-P., Lipponen, J., Ranta-Aho, P., and Karjalainen, P. Kubios hrva software for advanced heart rate variability analysis.
In 4th European Conference of the International Federation for Medical and Biological Engineering, Springer , 1022-1025.
Visser, B., De Looze, M. P., De Graaff, M. P., and Van Die en, J. H. Effects of precision demands and mental pressure on muscle activation and hand forces in computer mouse tasks.
Wahlstr om, J. Ergonomics, musculoskeletal disorders and computer work.
Wahlstr om, J., Hagberg, M., Johnson, P., Svensson, J., and Rempel, D. Influence of time pressure and verbal provocation on physiological and psychological reactions during work with a computer mouse.
