Despite the abundance of research on social networking sites, relatively little research has studied those who choose not to use such sites.
This paper presents results from a questionnaire of over 400 Internet users, focusing specifically on Facebook and those users who have left the service.
Results show the lack of a clear, binary distinction between use and non-use, that various practices enable diverse ways and degrees of engagement with and disengagement from Facebook.
Furthermore, qualitative analysis reveals numerous complex and interrelated motivations and justifications, both for leaving and for maintaining some type of connection.
These motivations include: privacy, data misuse, productivity, banality, addiction, and external pressures.
These results not only contribute to our understanding of online sociality by examining this under-explored area, but they also build on previous work to help advance how we conceptually account for the sociological processes of non-use.
Changing privacy controls, data ownership policies, and questions about the kinds of social interaction it affords have all contributed to a growing trend of users pointedly leaving Facebook.
For example, on May 31, 2010, Quit Facebook Day  encouraged users to leave Facebook, listing a number of grievances and providing alternative venues for online socialization.
While no Facebook collapse ensued--the site claims just over 40,000 "committed Facebook quitters"--the initiative arguably drew significant attention, both the popular media's and Facebook's, to this growing contingent of Facebook quitters .
So why study Facebook refusal as opposed to non-use of any other social technology?
Consider, for example, Google's Gmail, which provides web-based email to hundreds of millions of users .
Despite its popularity, leaving Gmail does not carry the same significance as leaving Facebook, largely because of the unique social role Facebook plays for so many people--for example, 63% of U.S. adults have an online social networking account and of these, 93% are on Facebook .
Email is a platform available from many interoperable providers; if I have a Yahoo or MSN email account, I can still email someone with a Gmail account.
Facebook, on the other hand, is a service that does not provide for similar interoperability; if I have a MySpace or Friendster or Orkut account, I cannot friend someone on Facebook.
In short, refusing Facebook excludes me from social interaction in a way that refusing few other technologies would, thus making Facebook nonuse an important area of study.
To the authors' knowledge, no mass exodus from Facebook has yet occurred, nor is one impending.
However, it is difficult to know how many people have left Facebook, as the company does not publish such data.
Moreover, no extant research examines the prevalence of leaving Facebook, the commonality of the desire to leave, types of opinions about leaving, or other practices of limiting Facebook use without leaving entirely.
Furthermore, little is understood about what the leaving process entails or its personal and social ramifications .
To address this gap, we present results from a questionnaire of over 400 Internet users about their use and/or non-use of Facebook.
As of June 2012, Facebook boasts 955 million user accounts active monthly, with an average of 552 million users active daily .
Significant amounts of research have explored the use of Facebook and other similar social networking sites , examining the roles such sites play in their users' social lives.
But what about those who do not use Facebook?
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
First, there does not exist a strict binary distinction between use and non-use.
Through qualitative analysis of stories told by respondents, we find a broad array of practices enacting varied degrees and styles of engagement with and disengagement from Facebook.
Second, our analysis provides an account of the motivations and justifications that respondents provide for these varying degrees of use.
Thus, this paper helps deepen and add nuance to discussions in HCI about non-use, opting out, and the sociological processes by which technologies are deemed inappropriate, undesirable, or unwanted.
Portwood-Stacer posits Facebook refusal as a performative mode of resistance within the context of today's consumer culture .
Karppi describes Facebook quitting through the lens of digital suicide services such as seppukoo.com, which keeps a Facebook account active but disconnects it from its human owner; over time, basic information in the profile, friend lists, and browsing data, change independently of the original human account owner .
Rather than associate personality characteristics with non-users or highlight political statements made by quitting Facebook, this paper explores the motivations for stepping back from Facebook.
While non-use of Facebook has been less explored, researchers have studied non-use of technology more generally .
Perhaps the most broadly applicable typologies of non-users are Wyatt's four dimensions  and Satchell and Dourish' six varieties of non-use .
Wyatt broadly clusters non-users into four categories: resisters, rejectors, the excluded, and the expelled.
These categories are clearly arranged over two dimensions:  those who have joined and are now non-users  vs. those who never used the technology , and  intrinsic choice  vs. external constraints .
Satchell and Dourish lend more nuance to these four, describing six varieties of non-use particular to HCI: lagging adoption, those who have not yet adopted the technology; active resistance, essentially diehard laggards; disenchantment, a sense that the technology is in some sense inauthentic; disenfranchisement, barriers to entry or continued adoption; displacement, broadly second-hand use; and disinterest.
Motivations for use of Facebook are well studied.
Joinson, for example, describes seven Facebook uses and gratifications, which were also associated with user demographics and site visit patterns .
Further, research has explored the way people using Facebook manage their online self-presentation, for example using separate profiles for professional and personal networks .
The Facebook user population and their motivations for use, however, are moving targets that change over time.
Recent research about conflicts occurring on Facebook is both timely  and begins to reveal reasons for limiting Facebook usage.
McLaughlin and Vitak  explore the fallout of Facebook norm violation among college students, finding 'unfriending' to be a common response.
Gershon finds romantic relationship conflict  a reported reason for quitting Facebook .
Non-use of Facebook is less well-explored.
From a personality perspective, Facebook non-users may be more conscientious and socially lonely, and less extraverted and narcissistic, than Facebook users .
At the time of this writing, Facebook makes available two ways to disengage from their service.
First, a user may deactivate her or his account.
Upon deactivation, all data provided or uploaded by the user becomes hidden; the user's friends no longer see that user, as if s/he has disappeared.
However, all the data are still retained.
A user can deactivate her or his account using an option under security settings, but before the deactivation is complete, s/he will see the confirmation screen in Figure 1.
The other option, somewhat less readily apparent, deletes a user's account.
Doing so permanently removes a user's data from Facebook's servers, and Facebook provides no means for recovering these data.
From friends' perspectives, the effect is the same: the user simply disappears.
Deletion also has a two-week safety period; if the user logs in to Facebook  within two weeks of deleting, the account is fully restored, much like logging in to reactivate a deactivated account.
A user can delete her or his account through Facebook's help page, which fully describes what the deletion process involves.
Those who had not deactivated or deleted their account but had considered doing so were asked to describe a time that made them consider leaving.
Respondents who had never had a Facebook account were asked why they did not.
The factual questions about use and non-use similarly adapted to respondents' answers.
For example, respondents who did not currently have an account were not shown questions about their most used or favorite features.
Those who had deactivated or deleted their account were asked how happy they were with that decision.
Respondents who had not deactivated or deleted their account were asked if they had ever considered doing so.
The questionnaire concluded with demographic information, including age, gender, occupation, and city, state/province, and country of residence, all provided via free text responses.
A full description of the questionnaire instrument and anonymized response data can be found at http://hdl.handle.net/1813/30908.
The questionnaire was distributed via several relevant email listservs, including air-l@listserv.aoir.org, chiannouncements@listserv.acm.org, and chi-web@acm.org, as well as via snowball sampling on Facebook, Twitter, and other channels.
Recruitment text read, "Do you use Facebook?
We want to hear from you.
Do you not use Facebook?
We want to hear from you, too.
We're interested in people limiting their Facebook usage in some way, including deactivating or deleting their account," followed by a brief synopsis of the study goals.
In addition, respondents were asked to forward the questionnaire to or provide email addresses for anyone they thought might be interested.
The data on which we report here were gathered over two and a half weeks from June 20 to July 8, 2012.
Our study is driven by three general research questions: RQ1: What is the prevalence of both actual Facebook nonuse and consideration of non-use?
RQ2: In what practices do Facebook non-users engage, and what is the prevalence of these various practices?
RQ3: What motivations are used to justify, and what experiences surround, Facebook non-use?
To explore these questions, we adapted the methods of Rader et al.
Similarly, we developed a questionnaire with two types of questions.
The first type asked straightforward, factual questions about Facebook usage.
The second portion of the questionnaire explored the experience of deactivating or deleting through a set of open-ended, free text questions about these practices experiences.
Inspired by Rader et al.
Additionally, some portions of the questionnaire were either shown or hidden depending on responses to certain questions.
While we provide below some statistical analysis of yes/no and Likert responses, this paper focuses primarily on analysis of the qualitative data.
Responses to the open-ended free text questions were analyzed in two stages.
First, the questions were divided among the authors, such that each author read through all respondents' responses to one or more of the questions.
Each author worked independently and iteratively developed a list of themes for each question using open coding .
The authors then met and discussed the themes and patterns that each had observed, noting both resonances and differences among responses to the different questions.
Based on this discussion, the authors also generated a list of codes and themes that might be associated with one another.
Some codes pertained to thematic concerns, such as privacy, others to attributes of a respondent, such as whether the respondent was tech savvy.
These codes pertained only to the respondent and her or his experience, not to stories s/he may have told about others.
This list of codes became the basis for the second stage of the analysis.
In this stage, respondents were divided among the authors, such that each author read through responses to all questions for a subset of the respondents.
Each respondent was then coded by the assigned author.
After coding was completed, each set of respondents was rotated to a different author, who confirmed agreement with the initial author's coding.
Disagreements were discussed and resolved in a pairwise fashion between the first and second coders for each respondent.
This process was not intended to establish inter-rater reliability, and the coding does not play a pivotal role in the analyses.
Rather, this coding process served as another iteration in developing and refining not only our understanding of the themes in the data but also the relationships among them.
While respondents reported having careers as varied as civil service, veterinary medicine, publishing, homemaking, and missionary roles, a large proportion  of respondents were academics, either graduate students, post-docs, professors, researchers, or lecturers.
Furthermore, we identified 52/410  respondents as `tech savvy,' based on having training, a career, or other evidence of expertise in IT.
Our respondents spanned six continents, with the majority from the US and Europe.
Respondents initially joined Facebook between Facebook's inception in 2004 and 2012.
Three respondents indicated  membership since 2003.
Sizes of respondents' Facebook networks ranged from 0 to 2489 reported friends .
Motivations for first joining, and continuing to use, Facebook fit to a large extent within Joinson's  seven uses and gratifications: social connection, shared identities, photographs, content, social investigation, social network surfing, and status updating.
Professional and social pressures now sometimes suggest Facebook as the only accepted mode of communication and membership, such as enrolling as a member of a class or club, or to stay in touch with others:
This section presents three types of results.
First, it gives a quantitative description of who our respondents are and how they use  Facebook .
Second, it provides a descriptive summary of the stories respondents told and the accounts they gave about practices of leaving Facebook .
Third, it presents interpretive results that draw on themes from respondents' experiences to describe motivations for their varied degrees of use .
The second and third portions of the results come from the iterative interpretive analysis described above.
When possible, extended quotes are accompanied with gender, age, and occupation demographics.
We received nearly 500 responses.
Empty responses, nonsensical responses, and responses by people under 18 were removed , leaving N=410 respondents.
All but 20 of these respondents completed the entire questionnaire, although due to the addition or removal of questions based on previous responses, as described above, no respondent answered every question.
Fifty respondents provided incomplete demographic data .
When asked their gender, 199 respondents replied female, 160 male, 2 gender neutral, 1 transgender, 1 identified as non-male, and 47 did not share their gender.
Lastly, following companies and `liking' others' content only became available after 2008.
Figure 2 summarizes how frequently respondents reported using various Facebook features over the preceding month.
Liking and commenting on others' content, as well as general lurking behavior, were reported more frequently.
Of our respondents, 110  reported having deactivated their account, of whom 73  reported being "somewhat happy" or "very happy" with their decision.
28 people reported both deactivating and deleting their account.
We also asked those who had never deactivated their account or never deleted their account to what extent they had considered doing so .
Respondents considered deactivation slightly more often than deletion, but not significantly so .
Knowing someone else who had left Facebook differently affected deactivation and deletion.
Respondents who knew someone that had deactivated were almost three times as likely to deactivate their account , but knowing someone who had deleted had no effect on a respondent's likelihood of deleting their account .
Conversely, knowing someone who deactivated did not make a respondent more likely to consider deactivating, but knowing someone who had deleted did make them more likely to consider deleting their account .
These results address RQ1 by providing a sense for the prevalence of both consideration of and the actual act of leaving Facebook.
Of our 410 respondents, 75 reported not having a Facebook account, either active or deactivated.
While some respondents reported simply not having a use for the site, others provided elaborate lists of reasons they would not join.
Some did not want to be on display or live "life in a global aquarium."
We also observed a sense of rebelliousness and pride among those who resisted Facebook.
Of our 410 respondents, 127 indicated that they had deleted or deactivated their Facebook accounts at some point, but only 45 of them described doing so permanently.
A few mentioned leaving Facebook with the help of friends or during the 2010 Quit Facebook Day.
Many other respondents described attempting to delete their accounts and having difficulty doing so.
This survey has made me aware that there is another procedure to remove my account permanently, although I doubt whether I will be able to find it since I looked for this before!
This is one of the reasons I want to quit: if you can't quit easily I don't trust the application."
I avoided deactivating the account directly, because I believed and do, that it can pull one back psychologically.
The mail shunt works better."
When I woke up and realised I had no idea what I had changed it to,  I realised I was locked out.
I was surprised that it made me a bit anxious for a couple of hours.
After that I realised I felt great, that actually I'd been thinking and talking about how stupid, pointless, and time-wasting the damn thing was for ages, let alone the fact that I was giving a corporation all of my personal details and habits for free.
Other respondents left Facebook without any intention of returning but later found themselves back on the site.
Some of these respondents were happy to return, either because they took specific steps, such as `unfriending' hundreds of their friends, or, as one put it, they " somehow  got a more positive experience the second time around ".
In other cases, respondents described returning for a specific purpose and limiting use of their reactivated accounts to accomplish those tasks while avoiding the aspects of the site that initially drove them away.
This subsection shifts to more interpretive analysis, addressing RQ3 by identifying thematic motivations and justifications for respondents' varied styles and degrees of non-use.
Due to the nature of our methods, we provide rough estimates rather than exact numbers for how often each theme was mentioned.
In a general sense, users objected to the idea of being on display: " living my life in a `global aquarium '" felt uncomfortable.
The idea of someone "being able to flip back through to several years ago with just a few clicks " and "knowing the most intimate details about friends as well as strangers " affected the perceived "authenticity" of the users' relationships.
In cases of interpersonal conflict, Facebook provided content for harassment and blackmail in various relationships, as discussed later.
Many users felt that the violations they experienced on Facebook happened because, as an entity, Facebook "disrespected and devalued" the idea of privacy.
Others specifically highlighted discussions occurring on Facebook that were not of interest to them.
For some it was political or religious discussions that were banal, for others it was seeing photos of other people's babies.
Such content was either not what they expected or not sufficiently interesting.
These respondents did not mention whether they had tried to use Facebook's built-in filtering features to limit the amount of, or whose, content they see.
Respondents also spoke to the banality of Facebook relationships.
One respondent tied this inauthenticity to a sense of lurking in others' lives without rich contact:
In addition to privacy, a separate set of concerns highlighted data ownership, control, and misuse, cited by about a fifth of respondents.
In contrast to privacy concerns, which dealt with other users seeing personal information, many respondents expressed concerns about the use of personal information by Facebook itself.
They described concerns with Facebook's data policies and practices and did not "trust Facebook to adequately protect  information and keep it private."
Respondents perceived Facebook's policies as an inconstant and even "insidious" document.
One user described the rationale of his friend quitting:
These are seen as "unannounced changes in privacy settings" that happen under the table with a lack of "transparency" in the data-usage agreements.
Respondents also recounted rumors about Facebook's practices--"Heard that you can never really delete your account "--and the difficulty they experienced in trying to change their privacy settings or to delete their accounts.
They also speculated on what their mined data points were being used for:
While a variety of respondents reported deactivating during high stress periods, our coding showed a strong correlation between academics and productivity concerns.
Productivity may not be as salient for others, such as office workers whose IT infrastructure blocks access to Facebook.
However, we suspect Facebook may impact productivity for others whose work environments are less strictly controlled, such as consultants or freelancers.
Another respondent described working with a friend to "limit each other  use of FB and the internet more generally through shaming techniques."
Many of the respondents who had not left or had left and then returned looked up to those who had successfully quit or who never signed up for Facebook as paragons of virtue.
Not everyone who left did so out of self-directed action.
About a seventh of our respondents limited use of or left the site due to varied types of pressures from other people, both on and off Facebook, or from institutions such as work.
In these cases, the network begins to represent a realized space that has to be bounded and avoided in a manner similar to physical locations.
In some cases these pressures resulted from the need to maintain professional boundaries:
Other Facebook users found themselves "stalked" or "tracked down" by certain individuals, and they limited their use of or left Facebook to prevent these behaviors.
Such limiting or leaving often occurred following the dissolution of a romantic relationship when the Facebook user no longer wanted to be in contact with their ex-partner:
We see here many resonances with previous work on nonuse.
Respondents who did not have an account could be described as actively resisting  Facebook.
These include not only those who resisted using in the first place but also those who used Facebook once but do not any longer, i.e., resistors and rejectors .
Disenchantment  aligns with descriptions of the banality and inauthenticity of social interaction on Facebook, particularly in contrast to face-toface communication, though we did not observe a nostalgic longing for "the way things were" or for a time gone by.
The section above on pressures clearly aligns with Wyatt's  expelled category.
While these pressures also resemble disenfranchisement , these cases were not due to geographic or socioeconomic configurations as much as to socio-institutional pressures, such as the case of the parolee described above.
Also, while cases of respondents accessing Facebook via others after deactivation or deletion occurred, these were more often post-hoc coping strategies rather than arrangements of one person offering technology use as a service to others .
While Satchell and Dourish  note lagging adoption as the most common form of non-use in HCI, we found little evidence of it in our data.
Those who did not use Facebook reported no intention of joining and provided well-reasoned explanations for their non-use, in contrast with lagging adopters who simply have not yet adopted the technology.
Instead, we saw something we term lagging resistance, a sense of wanting to quit but not doing so just yet.
Large numbers of respondents who had so far neither deactivated nor deleted reported having considered doing so .
We see a variety of justifications for this lagging resistance throughout the results: simple external constraints, such as a PhD advisor insisting on Facebookbased communication until dissertation defense; network scale effects leading to the fear that non-use will result in isolation, missed events, etc.
This point draws attention to the social role of Facebook limiters and leavers.
While previous work found that romantic relationships led to changes in use, e.g, posting different types of pictures, that work found less evidence for leaving or limiting .
Respondents also recounted stories about users who were required to alter their use of Facebook because of their occupation or legal troubles:
He is a military officer, and I think taht  the institution made him do this."
Typologies of technology non-use and non-users often problematized them, for example, highlighting barriers to entry  and developing policy initiatives to stimulate use .
Other research has found that network structure can also increase likelihood of adoption .
For example, resistance to early telephone and electrical technology, particularly among rural populations, led producers to develop new designs and infrastructures better suited to rural life .
Thus, these non-users became important agents of sociotechnical change.
Our results suggest that social pressures can similarly stigmatize non-use as a deviant behavior; one would leave Facebook only "if something was wrong."
Just as various pressures can lead to non-volitional non-use , such pressures can also lead to non-volitional use.
The above results also show how limiting or leaving Facebook not only has important utilitarian consequences, e.g., impacting productivity, but also plays an important symbolic role.
It can demonstrate commitment to a romantic partner  or serve as means of rejecting a consumption-driven identity .
On one hand, the performative nature of such active resistance can frame refusal as something for an elite and therefore not emulable.
On the other hand, the performative nature of such refusal may help account for the network effect where knowing someone else who had deactivated increased a respondent's likelihood of doing so.
We suspect a similar effect does not occur for deletion because deletion is more permanent, while deactivation allows the curious user to experiment with non-use.
At a higher level, just as network effects can help explain the diffusion and adoption of new technologies , they may also help explain non-use or rejection.
Collectively, these points emphasize the importance of nonusers.
Seeing non-use only as problematic or deviant risks missing important insights that may be gained by treating non-use as a legitimate phenomenon of inquiry.
While such a bias may be problematic for questions of representativeness , it may have helped for understanding practices of and motivations for non-use , since those questions require a more purposive sample.
Second, the prevalence of academics may have impacted the importance of some motivations, such as productivity concerns, as noted above, or data use and privacy, since these are popular topics of academic research on SNS.
However, privacy issues also feature prominently in popular media , suggesting this theme may occur more broadly.
Finally, since this exploratory study sought to be as openended as possible, we simply collected stories rather than ask about specific motivations or experiences.
Thus, the proportions for each theme may not be representative; a respondent not mentioning, say, addiction does not mean s/he has not experienced it.
Future work should examine each theme and motivation more closely.
While questionnaire responses gave us many rich personal narratives, the medium of pre-made questions yielded responses that were often ambiguous and hinted at more insights "under the surface."
Future work should use such techniques interviews, focus groups, diaries, and others to explore deeper.
Our sample was also heavily biased towards academics and excluded minors; future work should examine non-use among particular populations, such as teens or certain socio-economic groups.
Also, as noted above, better theoretical understandings are needed of the interplay between technology design and nonuse.
Significant effort has helped theorize the roles that technology can play in society .
We suggest there is space for developing equally important theoretical accounts for the roles that non-use or refusal of technology play.
As described above, previous work on non-use  does not fully account for use followed by non-use , nor for the lagging resistance we observed.
We see this area as ripe for theorization.
Finally, respondents hinted at a dynamic between Facebook users and non-users: users regarded non-users with both non-understanding and reverence.
Future work should examine further such perceptions.
Although somewhat tempting, we do not interpret the above results as an implication not to design , that there should not be a Facebook or that certain features should be eliminated.
However, while respondents' leaving or limiting was not precipitated by the researchers, this work could be seen as what Baumer and Silberman call "technological extravention" , i.e., studying the removal of a technology.
Similarly, we would not necessarily suggest that someone should "undesign" Facebook by displacing it, erasing it, or using other strategies that Pierce  describes.
However, there may be possibilities for Facebook to include more varied self-inhibiting options  beyond simple deactivation or deletion.
Whether Facebook's owners and designers are interested in facilitating more nuanced varieties of non-use, though, is another question entirely, one that is beyond the scope of this paper.
Just as HCI research attends to motivations for technology use , we should similarly attend to motivations for not using technology  as well as understanding social ramifications of non-use.
This paper does so through a questionnaire of over 400 Facebook users and non-users.
Results show that non-use is not an atomic category but encompasses a broad array of practices.
This paper provides an understanding of both the variety of those practices and the motivations and justifications given therefor.
Thanks to our respondents for sharing their stories; to Steve Voida, Maria Hakansson, Emily Sun, Jamie Guillory, and the anonymous reviewers for helpful comments on earlier drafts; and to the Interaction Design Lab for helpful conversations.
This material is based in part on work supported by the NSF under Grant Nos.
