Authentication in public spaces is a risky task.
Frauds on cash machines  are not uncommon nowadays.
The biggest group of attacks is observation attacks, which focus on recording the input done by the users.
In this work, we present VibraPass, a system created to be resilient against observation attacks using tactile feedback provided by the users' own mobile devices.
In this way, secret information is shared between the terminal and the users to add an overhead of `lies' to the input which makes it hard for attackers to steal the real PIN or password.
We present an evaluation, which shows that VibraPass has the potential to replace current authentication systems due to increased security combined with reasonable input speed and error rates.
Interaction with public terminals and large public displays becomes more and more part of our everyday's life.
There are several services that require interaction with public terminals.
Examples are train ticket vending machines, quick check-in counters or ATMs.
Despite their many advantages like efficient in- and output capabilities, they comprise severe privacy and security risks.
A successful attack on an ATM, for instance, can grant access to the user's bank account.
Due to their location and mostly unlimited availability, they can be manipulated, for instance to record the input done by a user.
The most common attacks are based on camera recordings or simple shoulder-surfing .
The most important interaction with public terminals is authentication, which is carried out nowadays mainly either by PIN or passwords.
In order to safeguard authentication against attacks, we developed VibraPass, a system to increase the security of public authentication, which will be presented in this paper.
Enhanced security is achieved by utilizing the vibration function of the user's mobile devices as an invisible communication channel.
This way, an overhead consisting of `lies' can be enforced by the terminal to make it hard for attackers to spy on the real input done by the users, which makes it resilient against any form of observation attacks.
We conducted a formal evaluation that shows promising results for VibraPass.
Private and secure interaction with public terminals has been approached in many different ways, mostly reduced to solving the problem of authentication.
The approaches can be roughly divided in three categories.
The first one tries to solve the problem on a software level.
That is, software is designed in a way that makes it hard for onlookers to spy on the input.
Examples for this approach are the Spy-resistant  keyboard by Tan et al.
Similar to VibraPass, both add additional steps  to the input to hide it from onlookers.
The weakness of software based solutions is that they are not resilient against attacks based on visual recordings.
Using additional input hardware is characteristic for the second category.
The most famous example is probably biometric authentication as tested by Coventry et al.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Other work in this field has been performed by evaluating the appropriateness of eye-tracking for authentication on public terminals .
Tactile PIN Entry by Deyle et al.
For instance, Undercover uses the movement of a ball that can only be felt by the user holding it.
This movement has to be interpreted as different number pad layouts that are used to define a password picture within a set of five pictures.
The main problem of the approaches using additional fixed hardware is that the hardware can be manipulated since public terminals are generally publicly available to everyone.
Compared to these approaches, VibraPass is resilient against this kind of manipulation since the mobile device is possessed by the users.
Private interaction with public displays based on hardware owned by the users is the last category.
This hardware cannot  be manipulated by attackers since it is carried by the users.
For instance in , mobile phones with acceleration sensors are used to authenticate with public terminals.
While the information on the terminal is blurred, interaction takes place on the PDA that displays a non blurry version.
Theoretically, VibraPass could be used to enter arbitrary amounts of information on public terminals.
Due to its nature of adding overhead to the input it seems more suitable for short authentication tokens.
Doing the input directly at the mobile device would require transmitting the password/PIN and would make it vulnerable to man-in-the-middle attacks.
In VibraPass, no sensitive data is transmitted but only `vibrate' commands.
Thus, cracking the input in one time would require a synchronized camera and sniffing attack.
The main weakness of VibraPass is that repeated observations can lead to successful attacks by analyzing the differences between inputs.
The highest success rate for an attack can be assumed if the lie overhead is known by the attacker.
For instance, two recordings can lead to breaking a four-digit PIN when the smallest overhead is used.
In real world situations this threat is minimal since manipulated terminals are usually quickly repaired and users mostly do not interact twice with the same terminal within a short time.
To enable secure authentication on public terminals, VibraPass introduces the lie overhead.
PINs and Passwords are enriched with `lies', i.e.
This additional information is randomly mixed with the real PIN/password.
The knowledge about lies is shared secretly between the terminal and the user.
Therefore, the terminal can extract the real password from the input.
In VibraPass, this knowledge is shared utilizing the users' mobile devices.
Each current mobile phone, PDA and the like is equipped with vibration functionality.
That is, they provide a tactile output channel, which is an appropriate way to transport simple messages like `true' or `false'.
VibraPass works as follows:  The user connects her mobile device to the terminal.
This is necessary each time the user wants to interact with a terminal.
The randomization prevents attacks based on knowledge of the order of lies.
Every time the mobile device vibrates, the terminal indicates to the user that for the next input she should lie .
When the device remains quiet, the next part of the real password/PIN should be input .
As mentioned before, VibraPass provides enhanced security for public authentication while relying on basic input mechanisms of the terminal.
VibraPass has been evaluated with a lightweight prototype written in JavaSE  and JavaME .
Bluetooth has been used for communication.
A public terminal has been set up in a public corridor of our labs consisting of a 42 inch screen and a keyboard connected to it.
Two cameras, one pointing at the keyboard and the other recording the whole interaction from the right side, were installed as well as two microphones .
The recordings have been used for usability as well as security analysis.
Participants were equipped with a Nokia N80 mobile phone placed in the pockets of their trousers.
Synchronization between the user and the terminal has been achieved by sending the vibration signal immediately with the release of the previous button.
No participant had major issues with this approach.
VibraPass was evaluated using a repeated measures within participants factorial design.
The independent variables were PwType , PwLength  and LieOverhead .
The lie overhead of 0% represents the control condition since it is identical to standard PIN/password entry without lying.
The task was to authenticate with the terminal using every combination of the independent variables .
The order of PwType was counterbalanced between the participants, while the order of PwLength and LieOverhead has been randomized to minimize learning effects.
Randomized passwords/PINs were provided on printed lists.
Randomized passwords were generated using a vowel as every second letter to increase readability and memorability.
Each password/PIN was only used once not to influence the results.
In the next step, the participants were equipped with the mobile device, which was already connected to the terminal via Bluetooth.
At the beginning of each authentication session, the terminal informed the current participant, which password to choose from the lists and created a randomized lie sequence based on the current lie overhead.
Every key press, correction, error etc.
For each authentication session, there was a maximum of three tries to fill in the right authentication token.
Changing to the next session took place whenever the previous one had been filled out correctly or failed three times.
In the end, each participant had to fill out a questionnaire.
Ratings were given using Likert scales from 1  to 5 .
Based on first evaluations of VibraPass, the following main hypotheses were stated:  VibraPass is more secure to observation attacks than standard PINs/passwords.
The study was conducted with 24 volunteers with an average age of 23 years, eight of them female.
All of them own mobile phones with vibration functionality.
Choosing 24 participants allowed perfect counterbalance of PwType to minimize learning effects.
Thus, Results are based on 768 authentication sessions performed by 24 participants.
No significant interaction effects could be found.
Post hoc tests revealed that the difference in the occurrence of critical errors using PwLength of 8  compared to 4 critical errors with PwLength 4 is significant .
No critical errors occurred using levels of 0% and 30%.
The post hoc tests revealed significant differences between LieOverhead level 100% and 0% and between level 100% and 30%.
Performance in sense of low error rates is crucial for authentication since tries are limited on public terminals.
For instance, most ATMs confiscate the users' bank card once the PIN has been wrongly input three times.
Therefore, we have to differentiate between two types of errors: basic errors that indicate that at maximum two tries of the authentication session failed, and critical errors, which indicate that the authentication session failed completely.
Out of the 768 authentication sessions, 63  were performed with at least one wrong input .
None with a lie overhead of 0% or 30% created a critical error.
557 out of the 576  sessions using a lie overhead bigger than 0% could be completed successfully.
Even though error rates for VibraPass are quite low, it is worth taking a closer look at which levels of the independent variables influence critical errors.
Interaction time has been measured for each authentication session from the first key press to releasing the last key.
Failed sessions were excluded from the analysis.
Figure 2 depicts the average interaction times for all combinations.
It shows that mostly interaction time increases when LieOverhead is increased.
It also shows the increase of time needed for authentication with PwLength of level 8  compared to level 4 .
Nevertheless, when comparing the time needed for four-digit random PINs with lie overhead 0%  to four-digit random PINs with lie overhead 30% , the time needed for the more secure variant is still within a reasonable range.
Comparing the different levels of LieOverhead showed significant results as well .
We evaluated the security of VibraPass based on a worst case scenario.
We set up two video cameras, one filming the keyboard from above and one filming the users from the right side.
To make the attacks even more efficient, we assumed that the attacker knows as well the lie overhead as the length of the input and we chose a mobile phone with a very loud vibration alert.
The video recordings were analyzed abiding to strict rules to ensure mostly unbiased results.
The question was how many passwords and PINs could be stolen by an attacker.
It should be highlighted that it is next to impossible to have such optimal conditions in the real world since public terminals are usually located in rather crowded and noisy places and that this decision has been made to evaluate the security of VibraPass with a worst-case scenario.
Out of the 749 successful authentication sessions, 100% with a lie overhead of 0% could be identified .
VibraPass enhanced authentication sessions only revealed the true password/PIN in 32.5% of the cases .
The main reason for successful attacks was audible vibrations, for example due to keys in the pockets of the participant .
Only 41 attacks  would have been successful without a perfect audio recording.
A 4x2x4  within participants analysis of variance showed only a significant main effect for LieOverhead  and no interaction effects.
Post-Hoc tests revealed that only the differences between LieOverhead 0%  and all LieOverhead > 0% were significant .
These results support hypothesis .
We argue that in real world use, the number of successful attacks is more likely to be what we found without hearable vibrations.
The most interesting finding is reasons for the other successful attacks, `bad lies'.
Examples for bad lies include repeated pressing the same key, confused waiting before pressing and using characters as lies for PINs.
The evaluation showed that VibraPass has the potential to increase security while providing low error rates and fast input speed.
VibraPass with a lie overhead between 30% and 50% seems an appropriate trade-off between usability and security.
It highly increases security but still provides a reasonable input speed with low error rate.
In fact, in sense of error rates lie overhead 30% performed as good as standard password and PIN since it did not result in any failed authentication session.
It also provides an input speed close to standard PIN and password entry.
The qualitative data collected from the participants supports this conclusion.
During the study, some starting points for future work became apparent.
The most interesting finding is on the quality of lies.
The security evaluation showed that all successful attacks besides hearing the vibration were due to `bad lies' like repeated pressing of the same character.
Therefore, we are planning to conduct a long-term study to find out whether lies can improve after repeated use of the system and if they have influence on the recall of PINs.
Coventry, L., De Angeli, A., Johnson, G. Usability and biometric verification at the atm interface.
Deyle, T., Roth, V. Accessible authentication via tactile pin entry.
CG Topics, Issue 3, Mar.
Kumar, M., Garfinkel, T., Boneh, D., Winograd, T. Reducing shoulder-surfing by using gaze-based password entry.
Patel, S.,Pierce, J. Abowd, G. A gesture-based authentication scheme for untrusted public terminals.
Please enter your 4-digit pin.
Roth, V., Richter, K., Freidinger, R. A pin-entry method resilient against shoulder surfing.
Sasamoto, H., Christin, N., Hayashi, E.. Undercover: authentication usable in front of prying eyes.
Secure mobile computing via public terminals.
Tan, D., Keyani, P., Czerwinski, M. Spy-resistant keyboard: more secure password entry on public touch screen displays.
In the questionnaire, participants were asked to rate their preferences regarding the levels of lie overhead.
The results showed that all participants preferred either a low lie overhead of 30%  or the medium lie overhead of 50% .
Lie overhead of 0% as well as 100% were favored by none of the participants.
As a reason for liking 30% - 50%, most participants mentioned they found it still very easy to use but more secure.
One participant called the medium lie overhead a "good trade-off between usability and security".
