This work presents a novel and always-available nail mounted display known as NailDisplay.
The proposed display augments the use of a finger by allowing for always-available visual feedback owing to its fast accessibility and binding user controls with the display, i.e.
Potential benefits of NailDisplay are demonstrated in three applications: from displaying to combining it with user controls.
In the first application, NailDisplay can reveal what is occluded under a finger touch, making it a solution to operate small UI elements.
In the second application, NailDisplay is complementary to an imaginary interface, helping users to learn an imaginary interface  and allowing them to reassure the interface when their memory of it becomes unclear.
In the third application, NailDisplay is integrated with rich finger interactions, such as swiping in the air.
We also report users' feedbacks gathered from an explorative user study.
Three scenarios of operating with NailDisplay.
A finger nail can easily control the visual display of a mobile device, owing to its flat and smooth surface, as well as visibility while users' hands are involved in manual tasks.
We believe these two fashion and display technology trends will soon converge.
Early works on finger mounted devices developed schemes to augment fingers with a haptic display.
In such approaches, vibrators are attached to fingernails in order to generate tactile feedback on the touch screens .
FingerSight  extended this idea by mounting additional cameras on fingertips, allowing for individual fingertips to view objects and transmit signals back through tactile feedback.
SenseableRays  added a photo sensor, which transfers projected patterns to tactile feedback.
SmartTouch  envisioned a new layer of skin made of a thin circuit capable of generating tactile output on fingertips through electrical stimulation.
FingerFlux  augmented a fingertip with a more expressive, attractive and repelling force by mounting a passive magnet on the fingertip.
Previous research also demonstrated how to sense fingerbased interactions, including finger pointing , tapping , bending , and clicking .
This work adopts a different approach to finger mounted devices in order to turn fingernails into visual displays.
Instead of a replacement, NailDisplay is considered here to be complementary to tactile output and other input methods applied to fingertips.
This work presents an always-available nail mounted visual display, known as NailDisplay, which binds user controls with the display.
Figure 1 illustrates three possible scenarios for NailDisplay.
In the first scenario, See-Through Touch reveals what is occluded under a finger touch, allowing for precise pointing and operations with small UI elements.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
In the third scenario, Free Finger Interaction transforms finger movements  into visual output, allowing for free finger interactions.
In contrast to other always-available visual displays , NailDisplay creates a symbiotic input and output on the fingertip, subsequently minimizing visual separation between the input and output and ultimately allowing for a direct input display scheme with no location constraints.
Moreover, in contrast to solutions to fat finger problems using special visualization approaches  or back-of-device interaction , NailDisplay transforms fingertips into a transparent display, allowing users to see through their fingertips for precise selection without modifying the original interface.
NailDisplay also allows users to point to an extremely small target.
Figure 4b demonstrates this notion.
The cross hair shown around the fingernail tip  displays a precision pointer.
Users complete a selection by taking off the finger.
In contrast to Shift , which creates a callout of the occluded content, NailDisplay shifts the content to the fingernail.
To fit the curve of a nail and to superimpose contents, the flexible t-SWNT film  is an advanced technology.
However, no functional module as small as a normal nail is commercially available.
Therefore, this work adopts the 4D Systems 0.96" OLED module, which is rigid and slightly larger than the adult thumbnail yet is still reasonable for the proposed prototype.
According to Figure 2, the display module has a 20mm x 14mm screen, allowing for a resolution of 96 x 64 with 65K colors for each pixel.
An Arduino board with an ATmega32U4 microprocessor is used to bridge the display module with other electronics  for I/O, depending on the applications.
To compensate for this slightly larger and opaque screen, an image of natural nail appears on the screen and the display content appears only in the nail area to simulate a smaller nail display .
An adjustable finger ring allows for easy wearing, and the portion around the fingertip is left open for native haptics.
NailDisplay tightly binds a finger touch with the display, allowing visual outputs for devices without screens.
According to Figure 5, users browse through musical selections stored in a screen less media player.
To achieve this, a pressure strip sensor is attached along the center of the music player, along with a long capacitive button beneath.
When users touch the pressure sensor, NailDisplay displays the current mode .
Users switch to another mode by swiping their fingertip against the device edge , and navigate through artists by moving their finger along the pressure sensor .
When a musical artist of interest is found, users play that particular musical selection by again sliding their fingertip against the edge of the musical device.
NailDisplay, once worn, is always available, allowing for maximum mobility.
NailDisplay is thus considered here as an auxiliary output to an imaginary interface, which relies on the spatial memory of users .
In addition to helping users to learn an imaginary interface, NailDisplay allows them to reassure the interface when their memory of it is unclear.
For instance, this work demonstrates the feasibility of using NailDisplay as a visual output for an arm input interface .
Fat fingers make direct touch inoperable with small UI elements accurately .
NailDisplay allows for a transparent fingertip, making it a feasible means of mitigating this problem.
According to Figure 4a, users operate with a virtual keyboard, allowing them to instantly view the key pressed on the fingernail.
An explorative user study is conducted to understand how effective users found NailDisplay to be while performing tasks in given scenarios.
Seven participants  were recruited from the university.
Except for the male participants, all female participants but one had experience with nail beauty.
The study lasted for one hour, including one free exploration session and three scenario sessions.
Following a 5-minute introduction, participants can freely explore the NailDisplay prototype and describe their initial impressions.
The free exploration session lasted 10 minutes.
During the scenario sessions, participants were instructed to perform interactive tasks, which include See-Through Touch, Touching the Imaginary, and Free Finger Interaction.
Participants were encouraged to share their thought through think-aloud protocol.
Each scenario session began with a 5-minute demonstration and training, followed by several tasks to perform, lasting approximately 15 minutes.
A finger allows for rich input modalities, enabling subtle and fast access to input.
In this example, NailDisplay is used as a visual output binding to free finger input.
Several possible free finger interactions can be applied, such as bending, swiping, poking, or circling the finger.
Here, swiping is selected to demonstrate the feasibility of the proposed prototype.
We enhance NailDisplay with an accelerometer in this application.
An HMM based gesture recognizer detects swipe gestures.
According to Figure 7, when an incoming call arrives, users receive the notification by peripheral awareness , and check the caller's name on NailDisplay.
A two step action is performed to answer or ignore a call.
Users first swipe rightward or leftward to answer or ignore a call.
Users then swipe downward to confirm the action on NailDisplay.
Four participants reported a visibility problem, largely owing to the occasionally severe skewness of their fingernails when performing the tasks.
This problem occurred in the transparent touch function, when the participants had to bend their finger inward in order to complete some pointing tasks.
Also, in the imaginary touch function, when users slid fingertips on devices without screens, visibility of the NailDisplay changed constantly when the finger was in motion.
This skewness became the worst with single handed operations.
Similarly, pointing and sliding tasks also induce orientation problems.
A rotation invariant design of visualization is preferable to tackle the orientation problem.
For instance, rotation free circle size rather than a linear bar is used to represent volume scale.
To handle this limited yet dynamic visibility on NailDisplay due to skewness, visualization can be designed in different abstraction levels, and then adapt to an appropriate level, depending on the available visibility.
All participants found NailDisplay to be useful in the selection task.
Three participants described they need some practices to become accustomed to a vertical separation between NailDisplay and the touchscreen.
Other participants did not find this separation to be problematic.
Of particular interest in investigating NailDisplay is to determine to what extent vertical separation and inclination between NailDisplay surface and touch surface  might affect the resulting touch interaction.
Some participants stated that they did not see through their fingertips but, rather, an elevated yet isolated display on the fingernail.
This is an actual situation since NailDisplay does not support eye tracking.
With a truly transparent fingertip, users reported that they would like to roll their fingernail to fine adjust the pointer.
Such a feature should be developed in NailDisplay in the future.
Notably, users' finger orientation was not recognized on the touch screen.
During the Touching the Imaginary session, participants preferred to browse icons rather than text.
However, none reported problems in reading because they could easily achieve a higher clarity by retrieving NailDisplay closer to the eyesight.
During the Free Finger Interaction session, all participants enjoyed the scenario of operating a music player by swiping a finger in the air.
However, some users reported that they would still enjoy this feature without a display on the fingernail.
Two participants reported experiencing fatigue during the session.
Those users suggested a touch function in the palm  or pinch on the index finger to obtain physical support.
Participants found NailDisplay to be good at displaying private information, because they could easily conceal NailDisplay from others' eyesight.
For instance, positioning NailDisplay on the thumb could be easily covered by other four digits.
Users also mentioned to play sound with NailDisplay.
This is owing to that when NailDisplay is completely hidden , sound notification could inform users to check information on the fingernails.
One user mentioned that would enjoy using NailDisplay as a translator while reading books.
Three participants liked the notion of having multiple functions on different fingers.
For example, multiple NailDisplay in a row on four fingers allows users to read a meaningful sentence.
Additionally, with a microphone on the pinky finger and a speaker on a thumb, users can directly talk to the caller via finger devices after answering the phone using NailDisplay.
Finally, the participants did not appreciate the aesthetic function, mainly owing to the slightly oversized current prototype.
Miniaturizing NailDisplay to the size of acrylic nail tips would likely make the participants to enjoy this feature.
This works presents an always-available nail mounted display known as NailDisplay, which tightly binds user controls with the display on fingertips.
Efforts are already underway in our laboratory to deploy NailDisplay plus an eye tracking device which allows for a truly transparent fingertip.
Of particular interest is how this transparency can further help point out objects precisely on extremely small screens, such as a ring display.
As for visualization, efforts are also underway to investigate the visibility problem while using NailDisplay bimanually and single handedly.
Future research should also determine which visualizations are more effective for this limited yet dynamic visibility condition.
In a different track, we also are interested in understanding what benefits and interactions could be provided by multiple NailDisplay devices.
