Reading is increasingly being performed interactively on-screen; for instance, new novels are now routinely released in electronic format for viewing on PCs and mobile devices.
Unfortunately, on-screen reading loses many of the natural features of conventional physical media, such as the ability to annotate, slip in bookmarks, turn page corners, and so on.
How best should these features be represented electronically?
Can computerized representations give benets that excel the conventional benets of paper?
We describe the design and implementation of a novel reading system that mimics key properties of paper and surpasses them by incorporating digital techniques.
A comparative user study evaluating the system conrmed the eectiveness of the features and the value of the system as a whole.
This paper presents a novel digital reading system that has been designed to support the needs of users engaged in attentive reading.
Our design acts like a real book sitting open on a desk, with digital features including search.
It uses a drag-and-drop interface to create a We used a large  screen, rather This paper presents single form of note that can be used as a bookmark or annotation.
For example, when a note is no longer required on a physical document, one can simply remove and discard it without the comparatively laborious extra task of clicking and selecting delete.
Another instance is found in place-holding and note-taking: a single piece of paper can be used to take notes and to serve as a bookmark , whereas digital reader software separates these two functions.
Research consistently demonstrates that current digital note-taking tools suer from poor interaction design .
By focusing our attention on how users interact with physical documents we can gain a useful grounding for understanding the shortcomings of digital document interaction.
A diary study on work-related reading tasks concluded that reading occurs more often in conjunction with writing than without .
Users form a contextual understanding of the text, and various forms of writing and drawing  support this activity with little cognitive attention being paid to these secondary tasks.
Hence tools without marking support will have limited value in work-related reading activities.
It is vital to the success of any digital reader, then, that mark-up support is as eective and subconscious in use as is the case in print.
Several researchers have explored the dierences between physical and digital reading.
Similarly, O'Hara et al  conclude that although digital oers some benets over paper , when reading for the purpose of writing, the benets of paper outweigh those of digital documents.
They conclude that understanding the use of paper helps improve the design of digital reading technologies.
Reading is an ubiquitous human activity that is increasingly done on-screen, whether using traditional PCs or specic reader devices such as the Amazon Kindle.
It is therefore timely to examine and optimize the interaction design of digital reading.
Previous ressearch demonstrates numerous decits in screen reading compared to printed text, particularly for close, attentive reading that involves annotation, bookmarking and navigation to support the cognitively demanding task.
In the physical world, the act of note-taking requires very little conscious eort.
The lightweight  properties of paper, coupled with years of learned behavior, facilitate easy manipulation and use of paper-based tools.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
We mirrored the interaction pattern of the physical book, in order to improve digital reading.
Our intention is not to slavishly replicate every aspect of physical reading in our design, but to pick out key features and build upon them to eventually surpass the limitations of the printed page.
For example, to exactly copy the physical world, digital Post-its would be of a xed size and color, yet to make the system more eective we can allow users to alter such attributes, breaking the book metaphor and exceeding the restrictions of paper.
To overcome the problem of restricted space for notes, we incorporated a virtual desk into our design.
The desk acts as a backdrop for the page spread, and can be used to make general notes or summaries about the document as a whole .
Figure 1 depicts a scenario where Post-its are placed both document itself, and on the desk surrounding the document which is always visible.
Most current digital document readers oer no comparable space, forcing notes to be made in the documents themselves.
We adapt previous work on visual placeholders , where they protrude from the side of documents, like tabs in physical books.
Our design allows users to create notes and bookmarks from the same object.
Post-its can be placed either:  completely on the document,  on the desk next to, or behind the document, or  protruding from the document .
This exibility means that one tool performs three separate functions:  to make notes about specic pages,  to make notes about the book as a whole, and  to make notes that also act as placeholders.
Post-its that act as bookmarks navigate to the correct page when clicked and, as in , ip' from one side of the book to the other depending on which page is open.
Thus Post-its that are before the current page, are on the left, whereas those that are on pages that are after the current page are on the right.
In physical documents, a page can be marked simply by slipping in a scrap of paper: this bookmark can also serve for note-taking by writing on it .
Digitally, these functions would typically be distinct tools: bookmarking and note-taking.
Prior research demonstrates the high value of mark-up , yet the uptake on digital media is low.
To increase the use of digital mark-up, we designed a system, Digital Reading Desk, to bridge the gap between the physical and digital domains by incorporating tools that behave in the same lightweight manner as paper.
The Digital Reading Desk provides interaction patterns that mimic physical tools.
Drawing from physical books , the PDF document on the desk is a double page spread that opens in the same manner as paper books: two pages are seen when the book is open and a single page  when it is closed .
This design creates a space around the booka known advantage when reading in print .
To reduce on-screen menu clutter, we use a drag-anddrop style interaction for the creation and deletion of Post-its.
On the right of the desk are three inexhaustible piles that can change color using the palette at the top.
To create a Post-it, the user drags one from the pile onto the document .
Notes are removed by dragging them back onto the pile.
As well as the addition of text to the Post-its, they can be moved, resized or lifted up' , borrowing from and extending the behavior of physical notes.
All interactions are performed without menus: to add text is a double click, lifting up' is a single click, etc.
This group represents skilled users who regularly take notes on documents, and would be typical users of digital texts.
The structure of the study consisted of a short introduction to the three experimental systems, followed by a series of open and closed tasks on each interface, and nally, a questionnaire and semi-structured interview.
We used three PDFs which we rotated amongst the task sets and systems to ensure that the results are a product of the interface, rather than the task.
The study was therefore, run in a single blinded and counterbalanced manner, as we also ensured that the order in which our participants used the three interfaces was varied in sequence across the six available combinations.
We conducted a user study comparing our implementation with two other designs created specically as controls for the main features of the system.
The rst control system was created to evaluate the unied Post-it tool as well as the drag-and-drop interface.
This system, Traditional Desk, consisted of the document and desk area described above, but instead of the unied Post-its for bookmarking and note-taking, it contained two distinct tools to mimic established digital annotation and placeholding.
To evaluate the additional desk' space, a second control was used, Traditional PDF, that contained the same bookmarking and note-taking features as the rst control, but instead contained no additional desk space surrounding the document area.
We did not compare our design to existing systems such as Adobe as doing so would add many variables to the experiment: e.g., previous experience with a system ; dierent function sets and implementations may cause eects .
This was substantiated by the observed behavior of the participants when engaged in open tasks; where the desk is available, users make use of it for document summaries 72% of the time.
Specically, 78% of participants felt that the unied drag-and-drop Post-it tool was slightly or much better than traditional methods for annotation and bookmarking.
Although the results for this portion of the study are not signicant, qualitative comments such as drag-and-drop is much the same as pa-
We have presented a novel drag-and-drop Post-it system for digital note-taking which supports active reading tasks.
The system provides a lightweight interface for annotating documents with a minimum number of interface tools.
Rather than using extensive sets of menus and dialogs, we exploit direct manipulation and an extend the user's workspace to minimize the interaction eort for attentive reading.
A comparison study on the new interface indicates that by designing for appropriation , we were able to create an eective and novel unied tool for placeholding and annotation that actually encourages placeholder uptake.
We also concluded that an additional workspace surrounding the document area is a benecial component for the creation of notes and summaries and that a drag-and-drop interaction increased user satisfaction of the interface.
While this paper evaluates the use of digital note-taking tools on desktops, a useful area of future work would include the exploration of the design on smaller screen devices such as eReaders, not least because of their current popularity with consumers.
As smaller screens pose potential space trade-os, it would be a useful area of future investigation.
The results of the study conrm the eectiveness of the techniques employed by the Reading Desk system.
The virtual desk' area, intended to overcome the issue of space, proved to be both popular with and well used by the majority of participants.
The behavioral and statistical data shows that the desk is the preferred position for document summaries.
Interestingly, the use of bookmarks diers signicantly between the systems: 75% of participants used them on the Reading Desk, while only 25% and 19% used them on the Traditional PDF and Desk systems respectively.
Though the Reading Desk mirrors some properties of paper, it avoids many natural limitations, including: the Post-its are unlimited, can be resized or changed in color.
