We present an evaluation of Panopticon, a video surrogate system, as an online eLearning support search tool for finding information within video lectures.
A comparison was made with a standard video player  in two scenarios with two classes of users: revision students and independent learners.
Results showed that users of Panopticon were significantly faster at finding information within the lecture videos than users of the YouTube player.
It was also found that videos predominantly featuring a talking lecturer took longest to navigate, presenting design implications for lectures to be uploaded to open eLearning platforms.
Furthermore, little thought has been given to independent learners who may access the freely-available lectures in order to complement their existing courses or to further their own knowledge .
Existing player interfaces for iTunes U - QuickTime Player - and YouTube Education - Adobe Flash based player - equip the user with basic controls like as pause, play, fastforward and rewind.
YouTube also presents temporal context in the form of thumbnails of adjacent frames.
However, the random access approach provided by these interfaces is not well suited to searching for specific content.
Panopticon was originally conceived as a video surrogate system and has been shown to help users in finding points of interest in certain videos faster than other player interfaces including YouTube .
The system displays a tiling of video thumbnails for a complete film and does not exclude any frames.
The animated tiles scroll from left to right as the video plays, thus removing the distracting effects of static thumbnails that reset regularly.
Users can mouse over the tiles to reveal an enlarged presentation of the tile and its corresponding audio .
In principle this should make Panopticon an effective search tool for lecture videos, but the composition of the videos may play a role, e.g.
With this in mind we evaluated Panopticon's suitability for searching lecture videos by comparing it to the YouTube player with three classes of lecture videos  obtained from the HEC Paris iTunes U portal.
The first video predominantly featured a talking lecturer with minimal focus on the PowerPoint slides , the second video focused predominantly on PowerPoint slides  and the final video featured interactive content such as videos in addition to PowerPoint slides .
On the other hand, in a distributed context it usually refers to Massively Open Online Courses  which have seen a recent rise in popularity due to their global availability and flexible learning times.
Lecture videos are an important component in both eLearning contexts and vary widely to support a range of learning habits - from 11 hours for a university-level MOOC  to 44 hours for a typical university course.
In addition to the primary consumption of the video material, the videos are provided as refreshers during revision periods .
Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
The next section describes the design and materials of the user studies and the details of each individual study along with its results.
The final section discusses the implications of the findings and presents design guidelines for uploading lecture videos to eLearning platforms.
These three mechanisms were chosen to cover a range of possible behaviours that viewers may want to perform.
Study 1 looked at participants who had previously seen the video and were looking to answer the three questions posed by the researcher.
Study 2 looked at participants who had not seen the video before but were looking to answer the same three questions.
As such, Study 1 simulated revision students while Study 2 simulated independent learners.
The YouTube player  presents an improvement over QuickTime Player - the default video application for iTunes U content - by providing the user with localised context when scrubbing.
The context on screen only covers approximately 10 seconds of a 30 minute video.
Panopticon  was initially conceived as a video surrogate system that presented a complete overview of the whole video without missing out any frames.
As such, every frame is viewed in its original context.
Participants were randomly assigned to one lecture type and a video player.
Once participants had been briefed, and informed consent collected, they were shown one of the lecture videos  on a laptop screen.
Participants were asked to be quiet and pay attention to the material as they would be quizzed on it later.
The experimenter supervised participants throughout the duration of the video.
Once the video was finished, participants were individually introduced to their randomly-selected system.
This process consisted of participants using a practice video  to answer practice questions to familiarise themselves with the different functionalities of their system.
Following the practice, participants were given the first question both orally and on a tablet device and were asked to answer the question verbally.
Once participants had correctly answered the initial question, they were asked another question.
Once the second question had been answered, the third and final question was asked.
The effectiveness of searching lecture videos using two video interfaces - Panopticon and YouTube was investigated.
Searching was evaluated in two studies of distinct scenarios: revision students using a lecture video and independent learners using the lecture video to clarify topics.
In accordance with previous studies, Panopticon was significantly more effective than YouTube for finding specific information in lecture videos for both scenarios.
Additionally, the type of lecture video played a role in the ease of finding information.
Participants searching the Talk lecture video fared the worst  in both scenarios, while no difference was found between highly interactive and slide-based lectures.
These findings present some important implications for the design and editing of video lectures as well as for the tools that are available to users for online courses.
The advantage that users of Panopticon had over YouTube users means that students could save a significant amount of time when using this interface for searching within lecture videos.
While the advantage was observed for both revision students and independent learners, the latter are set to benefit the most from using Panopticon: they on average saved upwards of two minutes while revision students on average saved just over 13 seconds.
While Panopticon was effective for searching videos, the practicality of using the interface for watching the video in its entirety or to obtain its gist are up for debate.
QuickTime Player, for example, is a good option for watching the videos from start to finish with its minimalistic interface and basic controls.
Meanwhile, a short text summary of the video written by the lecturer would probably be preferable for gist comprehension rather than skimming through the video.
In other words, we do not propose that Panopticon should be the sole video player for lecture videos, but rather that it should be an optional search tool for students.
With regards to designing video lectures, the study has shown that talk-only lectures - or lectures with minimal focus on visual aids - are not optimal for students in need of searching for information.
Our Talk lecture did include slides in its original live form, but the main focus of the recording was the speaker.
Therefore, it is recommended that videos destined for eLearning platforms heavily feature slides in the edited final video.
As such, they also recommend that slides feature heavily in lecture videos.
No time difference was found between the Slides video and the Interactive video, suggesting that the presence of a visual aid is more important than the type.
This supports our other finding that a video with little focus on slides leads to longer search times.
While it is not expected that this finding will influence the design of the live lectures themselves, it does mean that lecturers should focus the video recording on the visual aids to support independent learners and their own students for revision.
There are a couple of limitations with this study that should be considered.
Firstly, the subject matter covered in the videos was different for all three videos - marketing, statistics, and education.
The questions for each video covered the same aspects - visual search, problem search, and oral search - but it is possible that participants may have been more familiar with one topic and that could have played a part in their performance.
However, we believe that any effects of participants' previous knowledge would have been minimal given the questions were video-specific rather than subject-specific meaning they could not be answered based on subject knowledge alone.
This plays into the second limitation: participants in the revision condition had not attended the live lectures.
An evaluation using these types of students would yield a more accurate result for revision students where they have more knowledge of the material and less knowledge of the editing of the video.
We note that errors were not measured directly in our design, but they were measured indirectly in that the overall time taken to complete the task took into consideration any mistakes made by participants - i.e.
While we believe this measurement evaluates an important aspect of the search tools, we acknowledge that other measures should be considered for evaluating the usability of the systems, including error rates and qualitative measures.
As another future step, it may prove beneficial to refine the Panopticon application to allow more seamless multitasking.
In its current state, Panopticon operates in a full screen window mode that easily allows users to take notes on paper, but may prove inconvenient for note-taking on the same machine.
In order to make it easier to find the desired section of the video, a feature could be implemented where keywords are displayed near or around a selected frame.
Panopticon was evaluated as an online eLearning support search tool for finding information within video lectures.
We found that users of the interface could find information in lecture videos significantly faster than users of the YouTube player.
We also found that participants took significantly longer finding information in the video that did not predominantly feature visual aids.
We therefore recommend that recordings of lectures destined for eLearning platforms should principally focus on the slides rather than the lecturer to support both local students and independent learners.
