Public displays and projections are becoming increasingly available in various informal urban settings.
However, their potential impact on informing and engaging citizens on relevant issues has still been largely unexplored.
In this paper, we show that visualizations displayed in public settings are able to increase social awareness and discourse by exposing underlying patterns in data that is submitted by citizens.
We thus introduce the design and evaluation of Reveal-it!, a public, interactive projection that facilitates the comparison of the energy consumptions of individuals and communities.
We conclude by discussing emerging participant behaviors, as well as some challenges involved in facilitating a socially motivated crowd-sourced visualization in the public context.
While the majority of urban displays serve mainly civic, commercial, artistic or entertainment purposes, only few works present a civic goal: that of increasing the awareness and discourse on socially relevant topics .
One topic of growing public concern is environmental sustainability.
Several non-governmental organizations are actively trying to raise awareness on this issue by focusing on making relevant data available in the public media.
However, although people are becoming increasingly conscious of the ongoing "Climate Crisis", they are rarely aware of how their own activities contribute to greenhouse gas emissions .
As a result, the interaction with energy-consuming appliances tends to occur without any conscious consideration of their environmental impact .
Recent initiatives address this problem by providing tools for precise quantitative measures of energy or monetary expenditures.
Confined in a private context, these tools negate the potential of social comparison  and discussion, which might support people in making sense of, and reflecting on, their personal consumption habits.
Furthermore, they tend to not gracefully integrate into the physical environment, and do not typically spark occupants' curiosity .
We propose that these opportunities could be addressed by exploiting the unique characteristics of social visualization within the context of the urban environment.
Social visualization, in its original definition, describes the enriching of social, electronic communication by making its rich and salient qualities visible in easily accessible and understandable ways .
Accordingly, social data exploration offers people the chance to increase their understanding of complex information by the power of collective and collaborative efforts .
Recent research in this field has indicated that people seem to become encouraged to create public visualizations for participative purposes, even spurring social activities alongside .
While most social visualizations have focused on online environments, little is known on whether they can be successfully deployed in other contexts, such as public spaces.
Electronic displays are becoming increasingly ubiquitous in our urban environment, ranging from community centers, museums to airports.
As display technology is developing rapidly, it is likely that this trend will accelerate, so that people will become more accustomed to this type of situated media .
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Session: Tensions in Social Media externalization of contextualized data, for instance by means of social viewing and comparison.
As a case study, we thus introduce Reveal-it!, a life-size, public visualization that consists of a dynamic infographic illustration to facilitate the comparison of individual and community energy consumption data.
A comprehensive taxonomy of the design space and requirements for interactive public displays exists , as well as several studies of their real-world deployment in a range of informal public or semi-public contexts: from museums  and galleries , to urban settings .
They have been designed to display information of relevance to a specific group of people , support opportunistic conversations , provide playful information experience , or enrich casual interactions of people sharing an environment .
While ambient displays communicate at-aglance information in the periphery of human attention, Reveal-it!
Based on the ecological issue of energy consumption, our concept relates to "eco-visualization", originally defined as data-driven animations that display ecological information of any sort .
Others constitute unusual interfaces to encourage playful and aesthetic engagement and exploration of energy , exploring the experiential and reflective potential of the systems .
In contrast, we use the concept of eco-visualization to promote public awareness and discussion outside of the domestic context and shared by many.
We commenced our design process with a pre-study, which helped us better understand the relation between citizens and energy-related information from an individual and community perspective, leading to the design requirements for a shared visualization in public space.
The pre-study consisted of seven focus group sessions, each with one to three adults with varying backgrounds and professions.
In total we talked to 14 participants  ranging from 22 to 57 years.
Each group shared the same household, among which 4 were home-owners.
The focus group sessions lasted from 30 to 55 minutes.
The questions probed participants' attitudes and knowledge about their own and public resource consumption.
The discussions were based upon a short description of our concept and design examples in the form of sketches.
The analysis of the focus group data helped us identify the types of information that seem to capture the interest of people, as well as opinions regarding publicizing this data.
The focus group sessions indicated that the public comparison of individual consumption might spark opportunistic engagement and discussions.
However, participants were not interested in the personal data of others in an "isolated" manner.
Instead, they were interested in comparing values to averages, which could answer questions like "Am I consuming more or less than others?".
The discussions revealed how participants assumed there is a "good" average or a "reasonable" consumption  that they found crucial and beneficial to compare on various scales: me vs. neighbors, me vs. neighborhood, neighborhood vs. neighborhood, or neighborhood vs. city.
The discussions also revealed that people are only aware of the `monetary value' - what they actually pay - of their household energy consumption, compared to their consumption expressed as kWh, for instance.
A majority of focus group participants argued about the "fair" positioning of personal data within its context.
They often mentioned factors like household size, but also geographical aspects such as climate conditions or living in the same neighborhood or city.
Eight out of 14 participants mentioned the importance of "attractive" or "more visual" representations of consumption data.
The discussions suggested that people are interested in nonnumeric forms and in 80% of the cases participants found it even unnecessary to talk about "data units".
Several urban displays have already brought debate on sustainability to the forefront by projecting related data into the public sphere.
Some have augmented urban spaces with abstract, metaphorical representations of environmental data, such as future sea water levels , CO 2 measurements of the surroundings  or the energy consumption of a local nuclear plant .
Others have playfully allowed passers-by to form statements on climate change .
However, the impact of these visualizations has either not been studied, or little influence on public discussion has been shown, beyond the fascination with the interactive features of the installations .
Furthermore, unlike this prior work, Reveal-it!
We conducted an iterative refinement of design constraints and requirements during a collaborative 3-week workshop with data visualization experts .
This process was conducted in an extensive dialogue with paper and digital sketches, interactive prototypes and tests in-the-wild.
To structure and maintain an overview of the design goals, we used the Design Space Explorer Framework for Media Facades .
This framework allows us to describe Revealit!
We developed a form of personal, yet public, form of data entry that allows any onlooker to voluntarily input their data into the system.
We chose to use a mobile interface, to allow multiple participants to simultaneously interact with our system while still keeping some form of privacy.
This deliberate act of public data entry is also meant to enhance public engagement, as it provides an opportunistic moment at which participants must dedicate their attention to the topic at hand.
The data entry form requested the participant's monthly energy expense , her neighborhood and the number of co-inhabitants in her household.
The participant could also provide her name, however this data entry was not made obligatory.
Based on observations from our pre-study, we chose to include a monetary value range instead of electrical usage .
Secondly, we made a list of value ranges available, since people generally do not remember the exact quantitative values.
Aiming to address the consideration for fairness, the interface required the input of the number of co-inhabitants.
Accordingly, the system normalized the reported electricity bill by the number of coinhabitants to derive an estimated consumption value per participating household member.
While there are admittedly many additional  factors that contribute to the real average consumption within a multiperson home, we believe that this estimation proves sufficient to evaluate our research goal.
Considering the situational along with the spatial aspects in the design of public visualization is important, as situations determine the shared understanding and social interpretation of cues in the physical environment .
Based on the pre-study and previous work  we specifically aimed at creating a situation that supports spontaneous and opportunistic conversations.
We thus chose to focus on public and semi-public settings that host informal, opportunistic social activities and encourage informal gathering, dwelling and transition, such as spaces in front of local cafes, inner yards or entrance halls of community centers.
Previous work on visualization in shared settings  emphasizes on the seamless aesthetic integration of the display in the physical environment.
Therefore, we attempted to mimic the visual style of graffiti, by avoiding the visible rectangular frame of traditional data screens.
Our visualization was implemented as a life-size  projection, which is suitable to a wide range of physical spaces.
This type of low-cost and portable display technology was preferred above alternatives such as LC displays or multi-touch interfaces, as these tend to be too fragile or expensive for a typical public setting.
Previous work has used public, comparative feedback to reduce energy consumption by triggering feelings of competition, social comparison or social pressure .
The observations from our pre-study support previous results in literature, which suggest that visually distinct interfaces, visual aesthetics and animation have the potential to promote curiosity and initiate participation .
We chose a visualization technique that combines the "seriousness" of the topic with the more accessible style of popular infographics.
The circular visualization technique allows for scalability and hence an arbitrary number of people to be represented.
Upon data entry, the participant's name  appears in two distinct places: in the center of the sunburst graphic as a textual statement "X spends Y !"
The integration of dynamic visual cues can make visualization richer, vivid and more understandable .
This visual feature focuses the attention to one's electricity consumption as a shared resource - if an individual consumes more, the average increases and vice versa.
In addition, the burst of each new participant visually appears with a smooth animation and bouncing effect, to highlight the recording of fresh data.
A new entry is displayed in a white color to unambiguously distinct it from the rest of the graphical representation, which then smoothly takes over the color of its respective neighborhood.
To offer an opportunistic "conversational window" between the visualization and the audience, we used the center of the sunburst to occasionally animate inviting messages such as "Do you know how much you spend?"
The projection was installed for 16 days in a semi-open space within an open-air inner yard of the centers.
To expand the diversity of possible overlapping situations , Reveal-it!
The situations during deployments varied largely across locations: Reveal-it!
In contrast, location C hosted various parallel activities at the time of the deployment.
In each of the study locations a mobile iPad interface was situated in front of the visualization to facilitate participation.
Visitors could dwell around in the spaces, discover and spontaneously approach the visualization.
A sign, placed on the wall next to the projection, informed visitors about the study being conducted.
Two observers watched people for 6 to 8 hours per observation day at location A, and for 3 to 4 hours at locations B and C. Due to ethical constraints, we never recorded video or audio material, but always kept field notes.
To facilitate the process, we devised observational categories that were subsequently refined.
We analyzed field notes and visitor opinions using grounded theory to draw bottom-up findings based on the direct quotations and to establish hierarchies and connections among remarkable findings.
Apart of descriptive statistics of visitors' participation, we used the logs together with the questionnaire test data to evaluate the comparative understandability of the visualization.
We further used this data to triangulate participants' comments and reactions upon participation.
The semi-structured interviews typically varied between 7 and 15 minutes and were performed after participants submitted the data entry form in front of the display.
Interviews were conducted with individuals or groups, during which we also recorded demographical data, such as age and gender.
The interviews included questions regarding the opinions about the Reveal-it!
Visitors were also invited to freely express their suggestions and thoughts in relation to the project.
Throughout the 3 study locations, we conducted 18 interviews with 86 visitors overall , who interacted with the visualization and spent at least 2 minutes in front of it.
The interviewed people ranged from single individuals or couples to groups of 20 people of approximately 15 to 70 years old.
At all study locations, we logged the data entries of the visitors who directly interacted with the visualization  .
To quantitatively assess how well the visualization conveyed comparative information, we conducted a postresponse questionnaire test with 30 participants in the last deployment day at location C. The questionnaire was integrated in the data entry interface and shown on tablet device.
The test followed a simple 2-step procedure: 1.
Participants first entered their personal consumption-related data .
They then observed the visualization and while still standing in front of it, proceeded to the post-response questionnaire.
Participants provided a response to the questions "Compared with my neighbors, my consumption is:", and "Compared with my city, my neighborhood's consumption is:" expressed as a 5-point Likert scale .
Our study sheds light onto how the actual situational contexts in a public space influence the intrinsic motivation to engage with Reveal-it!.
The vast majority of visitors at location A and B were interested to actively acquire more knowledge about the installation: approximately 86% at location A  and all visitors at location B  intentionally approached the visualization.
In contrast, we observed only 52%  at location C. This result indicates a close connection between the visitors` engagement with the visualization and the degree of situational diversity during the deployment.
From the overall 52 visitors who directly interacted with Reveal-it!
Previous research discusses that introducing displays into urban spaces transforms the situations specific to these spaces .
Accordingly, we analyzed how the interest in Reveal-it!
We measured an average threshold of 8 minutes from the moment when the visitors entered the space until they would intentionally approach the display.
In most of the cases , this occurred upon arriving, when visitors had to wait for their activity to start.
Most of the visitors understood the significance of the visualization only after closer inspection, that is after reading the visualization labels or the information flyers.
After a certain time, participants seemed to want to acquire some form of external confirmation of their initial preconception about the goals of the visualization: "So, this is an ecological project.
To promote responsible consumption, right?"
People tend to be curious and intrigued first by its prominent visual presence, after which the attention switched to the data that was shown.
It was only after further active involvement and reflection that people adopted a more critical perspective towards the visualization and its implications.
However, they seemed only motivated to closely approach afterwards: once the activities were over, visitors would progressively gather in front of the projection, talking and pointing at the visualization.
Generally, our results demonstrate that the use of visualizations in a public setting entails an unfolding transformation of the pre-existing situation.
In particular, this transformation involves a temporal dimension in that certain `opportunistic' situations such as idling, dwelling, waiting or gathering  are more adequate to engage potential users, in contrast to short-term or goal-oriented situations such as arriving, departing or passing-by.
Physical Setup and Visual Design.
The prominent position and size of the installation were key factors in evoking initial curiosity.
All visitors throughout the evaluations looked  at the projection upon entering the space, although some did not approach it.
The visual design and the animations further increased people's curiosity.
Approximately 86%  of the interviewed participants  mentioned that these features had some persuasive effect on them, e.g.
The more dynamic features caused positive, even affective attitudes, such as "I really liked it, it resembled breathing, which makes you think that it is like something alive."
The altruistic nature of the data positively influenced people to engage with the visualization, with V16 explaining.
It is an attractive way to address a serious topic."
Approximately 67%  of the interviewed visitors described the data visualization as "intriguing", 50% as "innovative", 42% as "relevant to the community".
However, 73%  of the visitors who actually entered their data expressed aloud their doubts about how accurate they could remember their household bill.
This might explain why some visitors did not directly participate, but observed the display from a distance.
Previous studies on public screens have revealed that the implicit expectation to `perform' in a public context presents a participation barrier .
Approximately 87%  of the visitors who submitted the data entry form of the visualization  reflected on their own consumption behavior afterwards.
Although the installation did not convey any opinion about `good' or `bad' energy consumption, the uttered qualifications varied widely from "reasonable," , "satisfactory,"  to "it could be lower," , "shocking," , "too much for living alone" .
These interview statements confirm that the comparative features of the visualization provided participants with the opportunity to reflect on their preconceptions about their own energy habits.
Approximately 24% of the interviewed participants  explicitly claimed that the visualization motivated them to enhance their consumption habits in a positive way.
For instance visitor V15 explained: "I know I use a lot, but now seeing this , I would try to do better.
At all three locations, the participants who explicitly compared their individual consumption to the other bursts in the graphics were mostly part of a group.
The relatively private and trusted situational context of a group often empowered people to put  pressure on others to participate.
Session: Tensions in Social Media her friend, and exclaimed happily " Look, I spend less than you!," which directly caused the addressed participant to explain why this might happen " You live alone, of course you spend less!".
The women then proceeded to invite a friend of theirs to compare herself as well: "Come one, come, let me see how much you spend!".
The participant names shown in the visualization also seemed to support a playful competition among friends.
Participants would often read aloud or comment on those visual sectors that were accompanied with a name-tag.
They would cheer up their own name when it appeared in the visualization and would be disappointed when the next participant caused it to disappear.
Comments of participants indicate that the infographic visual style combined with this "social"  feature seemed to create a more playful situation to engage with this otherwise seemingly boring or impersonal data, with participant V21 saying:"This graphics and the  names gives a social face to the data, it's not like looking at an impersonal statistics."
Visitors explicitly paid attention to `outliers', patterns in the data that visually stood out within the visualization.
For instance, visitors frequently commented on particularly long burst: "This guy has definitely shot high!"
Others reflected on their personal consumption, for instance by comparing it to a low value: "I thought I am doing fine!
We observed a similar focus on outliers in the case of neighborhood averages.
A vast majority of discussions were concerned with a particularly high neighborhood average, for instance in thinking up its possible causes.
People often discussed on the relatively high average consumption of their own neighborhoods, although they never attributed the cause to their own behavior, but instead referred to external factors like construction, infrastructure or city politics: " Of course, houses here are not so well isolated  They cannot be very energy-efficient," ; "Here most of the houses are very old, there is no central heating installed ; " There is a lack of general energy awareness, this issue is not really a topic in this neighborhood."
We observed that this emergent comparison of neighborhood consumptions triggered critical thoughts, even for neighborhoods which were not even represented in the visualization.
For instance, in 11 of the 18 interviews at location A, participants noticed out loud that a certain neighborhood was not included - an economically disadvantaged region with a high unemployment rate and where energy bills are subsidized by the government.
These participants argued that people from those regions were the highest consumers of electricity in the city.
Their comments were often motivated by preconceived ideas, such as "they have the whole day the TV on ."
We also analyzed the usability and understandability of the projected sunburst visualization.
The neighborhood average in the moment of participation was calculated using the data from the participation logs.
A nonparametric Spearman rank test revealed a highly significant correlation between this difference and the post-response of the questionnaire .
This result demonstrates that participants were able to accurately assess their individual consumption, compared to the average of their neighborhood.
This suggests that the visualization could not accurately transmit information about participant's neighborhood average, compared to the city-wide statistics.
This poor performance could be due to the visualization techniques we used.
The distinction between participant's individual consumption and her neighborhood average is supported by several visual features .
In contrast, neighborhood and city-wide statistics have a similar graphical representation and can be distinguished only by color, which can become difficult to differentiate in the uncontrolled setting of a public projection.
The analysis of the questionnaire test data shows that approximately 70% of the test participants, who consumed less than their neighborhood average  assessed accurately that they are below the average.
In contrast, only 30% of the participants who consumed more than their neighborhood average  reported that they consumed more.
This result indicates that participants tend to interpret their own comparative data differently for the different visual "extremes".
There may be social factors which influence these different interpretations in a social public setting: high-consumers would feel embarrassed and tend to reject their high consumption, whereas low consumers would acknowledge their "positive" behavior.
Our results confirmed the ability of public visualization to convey socially motivated, data-driven information and consecutively inspire both individual reflection and social debate on the underlying topic.
Our analysis further uncovered following implications in regard to people's sensitivity to displaying visualizations in a public settings.
The public comparison of normally `private' information did not cause significant privacy concerns, similar to what was reported in .
On the contrary, 93% , of the visitors who directly participated in the visualization provided a name, which was often a quite long and playful pseudonym.
These results suggest that visitors seemed to perceive the public visualization as a harmless social experience.
While the potential of play has been recently discussed in the context of participatory urban sensing , our results encourage further exploration of playful data dissemination and comparisons by way of public visualizations.
The ability to compare data values, enhanced by a playful visual design and the explicit personalization of participants' data can particularly support group exploration of the data, and consecutively lead to friendly competition and mutual "nudging".
Both high and low outliers of others were singled out and discussed, the latter causing curiosity on "how they have done it".
People were able to self-reflect based on what they perceived on the visualization.
When asked where they stood, higher consumers tended to negate their `negative' behavior, assessing their consumption as lower-than or about-theaverage; lower consumers however, assessed their individual consumption more accurately.
People also interpreted the apparent averages of their own communities in the context of external factors.
Research in psychology has demonstrated that people would try to recognize themselves, and subsequently report about their result more positively than in reality, especially when social comparison is involved .
Public visualization researchers should thus be aware of subjectively different interpretations of personal data versus the data of others, when designing as well as evaluating public, user-driven visualizations in a social context.
It is still an open question whether such systems actually succeed in questioning or reinterpreting, or just affirming the self-image of participants.
CHI 2013: Changing Perspectives, Paris, France efficient and effective displaying of a very large number of participants.
Future studies could explore how the explicit presence of the data entries of others influences the entries of following participants.
For instance, some people might feel embarrassed to enter a truthful - but relatively higher - value when most previously entered values are much lower.
For instance, participants frequently asked whether there existed an online version, so they could later check "how the data is doing" .
We therefore suggest supporting alternative ways of engaging with the user-generated data, in addition to the original physical setting.
Complementary interfaces can be developed that are aimed at different public and private user-contexts  and support complementary objectives  of social data exploration and analysis.
In terms of public participation, our observations and activity logs showed that an average of more that 70% of the visitors who intentionally approached the visualization , entered their own energy bill estimations.
However, the specific characteristics of the sunburst visualization technique increases the complexity and density of the graphical representation the more people add data values .
While the analysis of the questionnaire test showed a very good performance in participants' understanding of individual comparative data , it is important to note that the visualization was populated with only 22 visual entries for the first tested visitor, but with 55 for the last tested visitor.
In spite of our rather high-tech data entry and display technologies, people often interpreted "Reveal-it!"
This often positively influenced their personal motivation, such as to "help us collect as much data as possible," .
Several of the interviewed participants proposed that Reveal-it!
Some suggestions proposed to communicate the data in different public venues such as "publication of the results in other cultural and educational centers" ; or "contact and broadcast this data in the mass-media.
These spontaneous visionary ideas from participations seem conceptually similar to those discussed in the context of participatory sensing.
Energy , among others, can be interpreted as a citizen-related urban data activity that acts l i k e a " s o c i a l c u r re n c y w i t h i n a n d a c ro s s communities" .
Such a visual style might also impact its trustworthiness along with factors like professional appearance of the material or the showing associations with a trustworthy organization reported in .
Session: Tensions in Social Media data", or to discover "the ideal values".
Participants who seemed more knowledgeable on energy issues were concerned that the visualization did not capture water or carbon footprint and even meat consumption, some of them proposing to provide us with "a better" or "the right" data.
Therefore, a public visualization should ideally balance the issues of sufficient information capacity and intuitive visual understanding, while still allowing for parallel interaction styles, from an at-a-glance overview to more explorative strategies that allow a deeper sense-making.
In addition, public visualization designers should consider that this issue not only relates to aesthetic preferences, but also to the expertise and background of the onlookers and their interest or motivation on the underlying topic.
Previous research has pointed out that the diversity of situations in the public sphere may pose challenges in urban display design .
We showed specifically how the opportunistic engagement promoted by public visualization is influenced by the types  and variety of situational contexts.
For instance, people engage with public visualizations easier in situations such as idling, dwelling, waiting or gathering, in contrast to short-lived situations such as arriving, departing or passing-by.
In addition, our findings suggest that engagement with the visualization involves certain dynamics that tend to unfold over time.
While it is well known that prominent visibility  and presence of others  attracts attention and evokes initial curiosity to public displays, we discovered that the actual engagement with an underlying topic involves a temporal flow, namely first to realize that the display is a visualization, then to understand what the visualization is about, and finally, how to relate to the presented information.
We investigated a public visualization of crowd-sourced, self-reported energy expenditure as an approach for encouraging awareness and opportunistic discourse on the socially relevant issue of energy consumption.
Our in-thewild deployments in three distinct informal public settings empowered citizens across locations to reflect on their own as well as their communal energy consumption issues.
We leveraged our findings to propose social and opportunistic data comparisons as essential to raising awareness and provoking discussion.
Our results should encourage future case studies that address the public and visual communication of data as a catalyst for increasing civic awareness.
For instance, other urban issues such as air pollution, council expenditures or traffic can benefit from such social visualizations to open up and contextualize the relevant data in the public sphere.
In addition, such visualizations could allow opportunistic data entry to encourage voluntary, grass-roots data collection and communication among urban stakeholders for social and political purposes, such as public opinion, census and alike.
We also observed several challenges involved in integrating socially motivated data visualizations into the public context.
While the use of abstract aggregate visualization techniques can evoke curiosity and support comparisons among arbitrary individuals and groups, it may impact the accuracy of understanding and the perception of trust.
However, the explicit expectation to submit openly one's own data may induce feelings of embarrassment, which may ultimately lead to false data entries and negating the truthfulness of the display.
Lastly, our work highlights the challenges of crafting study methods in-the-wild that are able to capture the subtleness of integrating technological means such as visualization projections to encourage an unpredictable, public discourse.
Some of the most salient are the discrepancy in self-reflection and the unfolding temporal dimension of engagement with the visualization display.
We would like to thank Medialab Prado, Centro Cultural Espana Cordoba and both the community centers La Bareloneta and Sant Marti, Barcelona for making this study possible.
Special thanks to Juan Pablo Carrascal, Guillermo Malon, Penelope Maldonado, Uta Hinrichs, Martin Inderbitzin, Sytse Wierenga, Andrea Rosales, Ernesto Arroyo, Rodrigo Oliveira and Sebastian Mealla.
Research has highlighted the existence of moral aspects of the public, collective experience of online social media .
Observations from our study underline some important moral aspects of how visualization of socially relevant data is collectively interpreted in the public sphere.
For instance, specifically high neighborhood consumptions were often attributed to issues related to local urban politics or infrastructure, while economically or socially deprived neighborhoods were publicly discussed as governmentally supported `outliers'.
While these observations confirm the potential of public visualization as a catalyst of critical debate on civic topics, it also calls for awareness of unexpected  group dynamics that may unfold and might even enforce negative social effects, such as stigma.
For instance, people or neighborhoods who - intentionally or not - do not take part in the visualization might still be affected due to this uncontrolled social discussion and reflection.
This phenomenon implies several implicit responsibilities when designing a public visualization such as its inevitable use as a subjectively interpretive and seemingly data-driven, thus `accurate', artifact.
Ananny, M. and Strohecker, C. TexTales: Creating Interactive Forums with Urban Publics.
Handbook of Research on Urban Informatics: The Practice and Promise of the Real-Time City, IGI Global, Hershey, PA, 2009.
The Aesthetics of Energy in Everyday Things.
Blomberg, J., Giacomi, J., Mosher, A. and Swenton-Wall, P. Participatory Design-Principles and Practices.
Ethnographic Field Methods and Their Relation to Design, Lawrence Erlbaum, 123-155.
Bodker, S. When Second Wave HCI Meets Third Wave Challenges.
Breinbjerg, M., Riis, M. S., Ebsen, T., and Lunding, R. Experiencing the Non-sensuous.
Brignull, H. and Rogers, Y. Enticing People to Interact with Large Public Displays in Public Spaces.
Broms, L., Katzeff, C., Bng, Magnus, M., Nyblom, S., Hjelm, S., and Ehrnberger, K. Coffee Maker Patterns and the Design of Energy Feedback Artefacts.
The Plasma Poster Network: Posting Multimedia Content in Public Places.
Dalsgaard, P., and Halskov, K. Designing Urban Media Facades : Cases and Challenges.
Dalsgaard, P., Nielsen, R. and Halskov, K.: Towards a Design Space Explorer for Media Facades.
Donath, J., Karahalios, K. and Viegas, F. Visualizing conversations.
Dourish, P. and Christine, S. The Moral Economy of Social Media.
From Social Butterfly to Engaged Citizen: Urban Informatics, Social Media, Ubiquitous Computing, and Mobile Technology to Support Citizen Engagement , MIT Press, 21-37.
Fatah Gen. Schieck, A., Briones, C. and Mottram, C. The Urban Screen as a Socializing Platform: Exploring the Role of Place within the Urban Space.
Willis, K. Chorianopoulos and R. Hennig 
Festinger, L. A Theory of Social Comparison Processes.
Fritsch, J. and Brynskov, M. Between Engagement, Affect and Information - Experimental Urban Media in the Climate Change Debate.
From Social Butterfly to Engaged Citizen: Urban Informatics, Social Media, Ubiquitous Computing, and Mobile Technology to Support Citizen Engagement , MIT Press, 115-135.
Gilbert, E. and Karahalios, K. Using social visualization to motivate social production.
Grasso, A., Muehlenbrock, M., Roulland, F., and Snowdon, D. Public and Situated Displays: Social and Interactional Aspects of Shared Display Technologies, Ch.
Greenfield, A., Shepard, M.: Urban Computing and Its Discontents.
The Architectural League of New York, New York .
Harrison, S. and Dourish, P. Re-place-ing Space: the Roles of Place and Space in Collaborative Systems.
He, H., Greenberg, S. and Huang, E. One Size Does Not Fit All: Applying the Transtheoretical Model to Energy Feedback Technology Design.
Hinrichs, U., Schmidt, H., and Carpendale, S EMDialog: Bringing Information Visualization into the Museum.
From Exhibition Halls to Media Facades.
Holmes, T. Eco-Visualization: Combining Art and Technology to Reduce Energy Consumption.
Linking Public Spaces: Technical and Social Issues.
Kim, T., Hong, H. and Magerko, B., Design Requirements for Ambient Display that Supports Sustainable Lifestyle.
Kuznetsov, S. and Paulos, E. Participatory Sensing in Public Spaces: Activating Urban Surfaces with Sensor Probes.
McCarthy, F. Public and Situated Displays: Social and Interactional Aspects of Shared Display Technologies, Ch.
McCullough, M. On Typologies of Situated Interaction.
Requirements and design space for interactive public displays.
Pierce, J., Schiano, D. and Paulos, E. Home, Habits, and Energy: Examining Domestic Interactions and Energy Consumption.
A Taxonomy of Ambient Information Systems: Four Patterns of Design.
Redstrom, J., Skog, T., and Hallanas, L. Informative Art: Using Amplified Artworks as Information Displays.
Roberts, S., Humphries, H., Hyldon, V.: Consumer Preferences for Improving Energy Consumption Feedback.
Report to Ofgem, Centre for Sustainable Energy .
Rodgers, J., and Bartram, L. Exploring Ambient and Artistic Visualization for Residential Energy Use Feedback.
Schroeter, R., Foth, M. and Satchell, C. People, Content, Location: Sweet Spotting Urban Screens for Situated Engagement.
Between Aesthetics and Utility: Designing Ambient Information Visualizations.
Struppek, M. The Social Potential of Urban Screens.
Townsend, A., Maguire, R., Liebhold, M. and Crawford, M. The Future of Cities, Information, and Inclusion.
Report for the Rockefeller Foundation Institute of the Future.
The Visitors: Designing Media Facades to Support Links Between People and Places.
Valkanova, N., Moghnieh, A., Arroyo, E., and Blat, J. AmbientNEWS: Augmenting Information Discovery in Complex Settings through Aesthetic Design.
Comparative Feedback in the Street: Exposing Residential Energy Consumption on House Facades.
Viegas, F., Perry, E. Howe, E. Donath, J. Artifacts of the Presence Era: Using Information Visualization to Create an Evocative Souvenir.
Vogel, D. and Balakrishnan, R. Interactive Public Ambient Displays: Transitioning from Implicit to Explicit, Public to Personal, Interaction with Multiple Users.
Ware, C. Visual Thinking for Design.
In Morgan Kaufmann Series in Interactive Technologies, 2008.
Wattenberg, M. Babynames, Visualization, and Social Data Analysis.
