During testing each participant entered the phrases three times.
To correct errors the participants were instructed to retype the incorrect character.
The participants spent between 45 and 80 minutes for the whole experiment.
Different phones were used for each method, although an attempt was made to ensure that they were of similar dimensions.
In contrast, the study reported in this paper used the same device across all methods to eliminate any possible devicedependent effects.
In addition, each participant entered a total of 400 phrases over 8 sessions conducted on 4 consecutive days.
Deletion was allowed for error correction and error rates were measured as described in .
This paper reports the results of a user study designed to evaluate text entry methods for mobile phones used in Korea.
At present the keypad layout for Korean mobile phones has not been standardized and different manufacturers produce phones with different layouts.
Included in the evaluation are three of the dominant text entry methods: Chon-ji-in, EZ-Hangul, and SKY.
The metrics used in the analysis are key strokes per character, words per minute, and total error rate.
The results suggest that SKY offers a good balance between speed, effort, and accuracy.
The paper also introduces a phrase set that has high correlation with the Korean language and could be used in other experiments on Korean text entry methods.
This paper presents a formal user study that compares the three dominant Korean text entry methods for mobile phones and introduces a phrase set for Korean that could be used in other experiments.
The phrase set is derived from the work of MacKenzie and Soukoreff  and has high correlation with the Korean language.
This is the first comprehensive user study, to the best of our knowledge, for evaluating Korean text entry methods.
The closest prior work  involved 15 participants and used the same two phrases  for both training and testing.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
The predominant Korean text entry methods are Chon-ji-in, EZ-Hangul, and SKY found on phones by Samsung, LG, and SK Telecom, respectively.
This method  incorporates cultural elements to aid the user in adopting the technology.
The symbols corresponding to the keys 1, 2, and 3 have the meaning of sky , ground , and man , and all vowels are constructed using these keys .
The consonants are assigned to the rest of the keys and are produced by multitap.
The compound consonants are normally not shown since their placement is implicit by their single counterparts.
This layout is considered easy to learn, but in general it requires more key strokes for text entry.
It suffers from segmentation of the consonants, i.e., typing consecutively two letters assigned to the same key.
KLM-GOMS penalizes each grapheme  that requires 2 or more keys.
Nine letters in A are not penalized  while 12 letters are not penalized in C. In B 10 letters are penalty-free and the movement time component is also large because of the need to use the control keys for doubling and adding a stroke.
This method  uses the concepts of adding a stroke and doubling to compose the letters based on their shapes.
Only six consonants are assigned a number key and are used with the keys *  and #  to compose the rest.
The vowels are composed similarly.
In general this method requires fewer key strokes.
However, since only a subset of the letters is visible on the keypad and the composition rules are not readily apparent, it is considered somewhat difficult to learn.
A distinctive feature of this layout is that it does not suffer from segmentation.
This method  places the consonants on the left two columns of the keypad and the vowels on the right.
Unlike the previous two methods all the basic consonants and vowels are visible on the keypad.
Similar to A this method suffers from segmentation.
This method requires at most 3 strokes per vowel - 5 require 1 stroke, 10 require 2 strokes, and 6 require 3 strokes.
In contrast, with A, 17 vowels require at least 3 strokes; with B, 9 vowels require at least 3 strokes.
The experiment was a mixed design with one betweensubject factor, method  and one within-subject factor, session .
The participants were divided into three groups of eight  and assigned a method that they had not used in the last five years based on a pre-study questionnaire about their mobile phone history.
Each participant attended 8 sessions  on 4 consecutive days .
During each trial a phrase was displayed on the screen and the participants typed underneath.
The phrase remained on the screen until the participant confirmed the end of the trial via the right soft key.
The only means of correcting errors was via the Backspace key.
During training the participants were asked to type 15 phrases exactly as shown with a maximum of 5 attempts per phrase.
During testing they were instructed to type each phrase as fast and accurately as possible, but did not receive feedback about their speed and accuracy.
A 2-minute break was enforced after every 15 minutes within each session.
The phrase set was derived from the one in .
The phrases were translated by the second author  and were altered where appropriate to reflect the idiomatic use of the language.
The correlation with Korean  was analyzed with the software in  using the letter frequencies reported in .
For this metric word is defined as five characters of transcribed text .
This difference was significant .
Tukey's HSD showed B > C, A , i.e., B was significantly faster, while there was no significant difference between C and A.
In total the participants entered 400 phrases.
Of these, 27 were discarded since they corresponded to incomplete trials killed via accidental press of the End key.
Analysis of variance  was used to analyze the results with Tukey's Honestly Significant Difference  test for post-hoc pairwise comparison.
Figure 5 shows fitted learning curves for each method extrapolated to 24 sessions.
The crossover points indicate that C affords ease of learning, since by session 7 it achieves higher speeds than both A and B, and the extrapolated curves suggest that its advantage will continue.
This is consistent with the fact that among the 16 most frequently used letters  13 require 1 stroke and 3 require 2 strokes with C.
Surprisingly A maintains a speed advantage over C for the first 4 sessions even though among the top 16 letters 7 require 2 strokes and the rules for composing the vowels place higher mental load.
Perhaps this can be explained by the fact that half of the participants assigned to A had used it before .
In general, it is difficult to find participants who have not used A, since it is one of the first methods for Korean text entry, introduced in 1999.
Methods B and C were introduced in 2005 and none of the participants assigned to B and C had used them before.
Method B had the best initial performance, despite the fact that the rules for composing the letters are complicated, not all letters are visible on the keypad, and 6 of the top 16 letters require 2 strokes.
Figure 5 suggests that B is likely to lose its speed advantage over A, which is in contrast with the common perception in Korea that B is more difficult to learn but eventually affords faster text entry speed.
Three error metrics were computed as described in :  uncorrected error rate: a measure of the errors that remain in the transcribed text  corrected error rate: a measure of the corrected errors  total error rate: uncorrected plus corrected error rate Figure 6 shows that the participants tended to correct errors as the uncorrected error rate was very low.
This difference was significant as shown in Table 4.
Tukey's HSD showed A < B, C , i.e., there was no significant difference between B and C, but there was significant difference between A vs. B and C.
However, C achieved faster text entry speed by the end of the experiment and learning curve analysis suggests that this advantage is likely to continue.
The total error rate for A was significantly lower than that of B and C. Overall, C seems to offer a good balance between speed , effort , and accuracy .
A distinguishing characteristic of all three methods is that the consonants and vowels are arranged in two separate sections.
In A the keys for the vowels occupy only the first row, while in B and C they are assigned to the right-most column.
This grouping appears to facilitate two-thumb typing of consonant-vowel sequences that are inherent in the structure of syllables.
In fact, the computer keyboards for Korean text entry also exhibit a similar grouping - left half for consonants and right half for vowels.
The observations from this study could inform the design of text entry methods for other languages.
As a proof of concept, the layout in Figure 7 employs the vowelconsonant split, maintains alphabetical order, and does not hinder recognition, but has considerably fewer conflicts  and lower KSPC  than the standard layout on the phrases in .
This paper presented the results of a formal user study for evaluating the three most common text entry methods for Korean mobile phones: Chon-ji-in , EZ-Hangul , and SKY .
The phrase set used in this study, derived from , is shown to have high correlation with Korean and could form the basis of a corpus for further studies.
The text entry methods were evaluated based on KSPC, WPM, and total error rate.
ANOVA found method to be a significant main effect for all metrics.
In terms of KSPC, statistically significant difference was observed between all methods with lowest for C and highest for A.
Kee, D. Evaluation for performance and preference of Hangul entry methods using real mobile phones.
Korea University Institute of Korean Culture, 1997 MacKenzie, I.S.
Text entry for mobile computing: Models and methods, theory and practice.
Phrase sets for evaluating text entry techniques.
Myung, R. Keystroke-level analysis of Korean text entry methods on mobile phones.
Silfverberg, M., MacKenzie, I.S., and Korhonen, P. Predicting text entry speed on mobile phones.
Metrics for text entry research: An evaluation of MSD and KSPC, and a new unified error metric.
