We established an interdisciplinmy, intergenemtional collaboration in the fidl of 1995, between the University of New Mexico's Computer Science Departmen4 the College of Fducatiou and local Albuquerque elementary school children.
The goal of this reaeamh was to develop an expressive digital medium with an intuitive zooming to support a learning environment tbr children.
In the _ of this eollaboratio~ design methodologies that support a child's role in the development of new technologies WE explored.
What follows is a summary of our iterative design experience, collaboration, and the results of the resuch to date.
While children may not be programmers or engineers, they are experts in what they want and why they want it.
We believe that children have a great deal to say about the world they live in and the technologies they use .
Therefore, it is critical to tind methodologies that support a child's role in the design process.
We have begun to combine participant obsemation techniques with participatmy design experiences.
In this way, we believe we can better understand what children may do with technology, and what they may want to do with it in the firtum With this in mind, remrchem fiorn the College of Education and the Computer Science Depar@ent worked fbr six months with 48 local elernentmy school children .
Initially, as a way to explore the ehildmn's interests, we had them use an existing version of Pad++: soflware developed by reseamhem at the University of New Mexico and New York University which replaces windows with a zooming tiormation environment .
Instead of double-clicking through piles of folders and icons, the children drew, mote stories, and zoomed through their information space.
While Pad++ was not designed to be a tool fir children, resxmhers saw the possibilities fbr fhture changes and developments appropriate fbr chiklnm.
Part@ant observation% video taping, and macmckw notes were used to understand the children's technology experience.
From these observations, a new set of Pad++ tools  was developed .
Children then worked with these new tools to continue their story-writing experiences.
After a fw months, the KidPad child users were asked to describe their own "dream" KidPad environments.
The children brainstormed with researchers, drew storyboards, wrote explanations, and presented their work.
These concrete design suggestions motivated a new version of KidPad.
With this new versiou again, mmrchem worked with children to analyze the potential ibr fixture In the design briefing that follows, a development.
Children like to tell stones; they love to draw.
We observed this time and again among the children we worked with in schools.
In addition, teachers and parents find it crucial that children learn to express themselves with words and pictures.
A new type of literacy is being stressed by educators that asks learners to be literate verbal and visual thinkers .
With the advent of multimedia technologies, children and adults must come to make sense of their world in words, pictures.
This wide range of users was seen in the collaboration begun in the fall of 1995.
The 48 local elementary school children that we partmmd with were extremely diverse in their skills d backgrounds.
These children included participants in basic literacy programs and participants in gifted child programs.
Their ethnic backgrounds ranged from Native Americans to recently immigrated Vietnamese, Chinese, and Hispanic children.
All too often, when a computer application is labeled "educatioti verses `<a game", it comes to mean "drill and ptim" instruction or an interactive textbook.
Flashcards which prompt children tbr the "right" answers are not the only way to create manir@d learning environments .
Recently, educational environments fix children have focused on more open-ended, toolsoriented environments.
These are often called "ccmstructivist" or "constructionist" applications which * children tools to explore ditlkmt content areas by constructing their own paths to knowledge .
Examples of such environments are Logo , H~erStudio , and PageMuker .
A majority of the current litemture that discusses children's input in the technology development process consists cf anecdotal descriptions of how children have offend feedback .
While this type of interaction with children is valuable in short-term technology development, it does not ollix possibilities for genemlization and lasting impact on new technologies.
If children can be heard betbre technology has begun to be develow more profound technology innovations may be possible.
For example, at CHI'95, 50 tutorial attendees worked with 25 children in small design groups to prototype new multimedia environments h children.
From this experience, the adult participants ofbxi such comments as: c'Kids really know what they like..." "The childm.n seemed to be catalysts and sparked ideas I wouldn't have thought of..
At the University of New Mexico we believe it is important to develop methodologies that support collaboration experiences with chikiren as our design partners.
When we began our collaboratio~ we looked to work with students, @ and pmf&ors from both the Computer Science Department and College of Education.
We believe that both computer scientists and educators can make significant contributions to the development of educational technologies.
In working with our child collaborators, we were caretid to have both education aod computer science mearchm experience significant contact hours in the classroom.
In this way, there were finv questions about the field reaeamh that was conducted, Different researchers with di&ent points of view contributed to the data collected.
What we found was that mearchers from each discipline were sensitive to ditlkmt issues, observations, and experiences.
For example, educational resmdem wm more awme of when the children gmw bored, excited, or cow with the technology.
On the other Itar@ computer scientists were more sensitive to how the children used the software and quickly saw where new technologies could be developed.
Together, mearchers developed a knowledge base of information HOIE even one line of new code was generated.
Only after two and a half months of collaboration with children, was the beginnings of a new tedmolo~ environment developed.
This made some of the computer scientists nervous.
They were much more used to titing code than they were spending their xeswmh time with children.
At the onset of our field work in classrooms, there were days when some computer scientists klt unsure of what to look fir when working with the classroom children.
They fdt uncomfortable that they had been thrust into the role of teacher rather than ~her.
But as time went on, confidence grew in many of the computer scientists when it came to working with chikhen.
One technique that seemed to put both adults and children at ease was that researchers worked in small groups with students .
Slowly, both adults and children began to feel more cumhtable with the technology and each other.
Eventually, children were able to oflkr design suggestions and point out problems with the software.
It was then that the computer scientists took the lead and began to develop the first versions of KidPad.
It should be noted however,
They can't dkx you a list of the five important things you must include in your technology.
Oftem children me not that self-aware or vedxd about their needs.
They must be given opportunities fix communication and self-awareness, either through experience with technology or through participatory design exercises that ask them to see possibilities using low-tech prototyping tools.
For example, one design exercise early on asked children to begin brainstorming on paper by using a game board.
On one side of the board they selected cards containing a short description of the technology they were to design  , and on another side of the board they selected the various interke devices they thought th~d use .
Lastly they were given a few blank squares to draw their thoughts about the software they were designing.
Thanks to this exercise, we saw software "features" we could never have anticipated .
Through this exercise, our child collaborators became more sensitive to the ingredients that they were asked to consider with the real softwzue they used and discussed with adult researchers.
What we tbund in our collaboration with clikhen was We began our work together, as change and growth.
We as adults had to facilitate the unequal partners.
We had to explain how things work~ and what possibilities they might try.
While many of the children had used computers M% none had ever used a zooming software interfhce.
It took some tine to get used to, and some time to start asking questions.
While we adults were fkilitators and advisors, we were also observers.
We immediately saw what activities the chikhen enjoyed; we immediately saw what COthem.
However, as the children's expertk giew, so too did the number of suggestions and design ideas they offiatxl.
Eventually, as their confidence grew we asked directly fbr design ideas, as opposed to waiting to be told them.
We asked the children to develop storyboards of design ideas for the fidure.
By the time the children were done, they had grown into Ml-fledged design partners.
They needed time, experience, self--awareness, and confidence in our design relationship.
With adult design may not be partners, time, experience, and self--a~ something necessary to develop; with children it may be critical.
This however, did not mean that the~ was full consensus in what to work on and when.
There were times that the educational reseatchets wanted much more than what was possible with the limited programming resources available.
Eventually however, thanks to some insightful discussions, a common undemanding was established.
What we f~ interesting about the development process as a whole, was that each research discipline took turns leading the activities, depending upon the expertise that was needed in the cxmtext of the work.
However, at no time were rmeamhm from either discipline excluded tkxn the ~ activities.
While there were moments of tiustmdon when resemch activities WE @iunil& or not clear, we finmd that an interdisciplinary reseamh partnership can bean exceptionally supportive, creative, and productive Wence.
Many times while zooming, the children would make what ...... they called "zooming noises" .
In additio% they would tell stories while zooming: "Once there was a boy who had lots of friends.
When you zoomed into his eye you could see his friend Fernando.
When you zoomed into Fernando you could see his friend Jean.
Children simply placed what looked like au empty box over a picture.
When the box was placed over that picture some "hidden information" was seen .
For example in the case of a cow picture, when a lens was dragged near or over it the word "moo" appeard.
Thanks to these very basic activities.
First and tiremom we saw that children wanted to tell stories.
And what came as a surprise to us, was that the activity of zooming strongly supported the creation of non-linear stones.
It seemed to be a very natural way tbr children to tell their stories.
They enjoyed the fivedom of piecing together their thoughts and comecdng them any which way they wanted to by zooming.
This zooming approach to story-telling also strongly supported collaboration between children.
Many times one child would begin the story by typing or drawing, and another child would add the next part of the story in another part of the Pad surf&e.
In this way, children would work together endlessly writing, drawing zooming, and telling their stories.
For us as rwearehers, these experiences made clear that the children nefded zooming story-telling tools that suited their needs.
To begin with, they wauted a better way to "program their zooms" between story elements.
It was far too easy for the children to become lost on the Pad++ surface when zooming in the wrong direction.
The children also seemed to need diffatnt drawing tools for their story-telling.
When using the existing palette of drawing tools in Pad++, they easily became ccmhed with all the extraneous tools not necessary for their drawing or writing.
They also had a difficult time when they would zoom on the Pad++ smface and weren't sure why the drawing tools "lived in a differmt box from the rest of the things in the zooming world'.
They're always in the way of our zooming," said one child.
In addition, there were times that the children also seemed to need our help in getting started on their stories.
They often would ask, " Start me a picture, PIease'?"
With this in mind, we also tried to consider new ways of offering story resources.
If the child wanted to drop that tool and use another, the child would double<lick in the place they wanted to drop it and the tool would remain in that place on the Pad++ surfhce.
These tools included what the children called a "crayon" to draw with, an" a-awry' to delete objects, and an "anew" to select objects .
The arrow was used in combination with the picture scrapbook.
This scrapbook consisted of a slider to move through pictures which ranged km green dinosaurs to red hats.
Once the child saw what they wanted, they chose a picture with the arrow, and cirwwed the Picture onto the Pad surke.
Figure 4 KidPad Local Tools Another local tool was the "nuwic wand".
In restmnse to the children's love fir zoomin~ and their ~:on with getting lost "on along zoom" the magic wand was created.
When children selected the wand, then selected anywhere else on the Pad++ surtkce, a link was started.
The next place children selected was the place that would be "linked to".
These two places could be seen easily because a bright yellow line comected the two selections.
When children de-selected the magic wand, they could zoom between links by touching a "hot zooming spot" with another tool.
Children seemed to love this tool.
While similar functionality was available in the Pad++ substrate, the interfkcx was not intuitive to childre% and therefbre was used very little.
Once this became a magic wand with "yellow magic lines" showing where there would be zoom paths, the children used this tool repeatedly to tell stories.
In addition to these local tools, there was a "tool box".
This box was placed in the bottom right corner of the screen.
When children clicked on it, all the local tools would zoom back to where they started, lined up along the bottom of the screen.
Once the children had spent some time with this new environment we asked the children to brainstorm with us on how to make a better technolo~ fix them .
What we heard tiom them in conversations, drawings, and writing were the following suggestions :
They wanted sound fix their stories.
They wanted zooming to take you back in time instead of space .
They wanted to use zooming, to zoom into dil%rent worlds .
They wanted additional drawing timctionality: a writing  local tool, a ruler , more colors for the crayon, and paint brushes.
Up until this brainstorming experience, we had genemily chosen to fm our development efibrts on "the biggest problem of the week".
A; our classroom sessions with children  they would show us where they had difficulties, or suggest new possibilities.
These were generally not large development projects, but small areas that could quickly be implemented and tested with the children.
However, once examining the results of our children's brainstorming work the team went back to the lab to decide what features seemed to suggest important new directiom fbr the fidwe.
What follows is a discussion of where the children's ideas have taken us,
We created a "zoom in" and a "zoom out" local tool .
By picking up a zoom tool, the cursor became that tool.
Moving and pressing it would zoom at that spot.
We also developed a "panning fian# which enabled children to merely move the mouse over the tie in the direction they wanted to go and the pad surke would pan in that direction .
Each of these tools had the additional featwe of animating when the cursor w over it.
We came to the conclusion that local tools should not have a text label, thus accommodating younger children.
The zoom and pan tools proved to be excellent in their self-explanatory nature.
In addition to these tools, we tried developing a "drop bucket", one which would replace the need fir doubleclicking to drop a tool.
However, we quickly saw and heard fmm chikhen that this drop bucket was not the right solution.
The "dropping" was an unnecessary step to the They children.
Instead, they wanted to "swap tools" wanted to merely click on another tool and have that tool become the cursor and have the previous tool be put on the Pad++ surfhce.
We took this to heart and quickly Interestingly implemented this intmfm suggestion.
In h$ it appears tiom our pilot tests with a small number of children ages three and four, that much younger children were able to use these KidPad tools.
One important area that the children pointed out was zooming.
We heard and observed that the 3-button mouse was Confilsing and diflicult to use for many of our children, By making the left button the select button, the middle button the zoom-in button, and the right button the zoomout button, we found that children usually had to depend on trial-and-error to mnember which button did what.
The mice that the children drew had whiskers and noses h zooming, which we suspected might be much easier to remember than right button or middle button.
Many of them just wanted to get rid of the mice all together and point at the screen, Listening to their concerns.
In a pedkct world, we would love a 1,000 more hours with hundreds of more childre~ in a relaxed setting outside of the structme of a typical classroom.
But without more resourm fbr personnel and facilities, we have continued on with our small group of ~hers, finding access to classrooms and Currently, our energies = children where possible.
We are in the process of expanding the drawing tools, developing sound capability, simpli$ing the "X-Ray" interfke, and adding animation functionality.
We also would like to see two more long-range additions to KidPad.
The first addition would be in automating the drawing process.
We call it the "DrawMe" tool.
It is envisioned that a child could use this to xeplicate and mod@ existing objects more easily.
A child could select the DrawMe tool and place it over a given drawing.
When the child clicks on the drawing all the local tools that were used to create this drawing would gather right below the picture selected.
For example, a child might select a picture of a pumpkin.
And what sihe might get with the DrawMe tool would be an orange crayon, black ruler, and the eraser gathaed below the pumpkin.
Once any of the tools gathenxi directly below a picture were used, they would timction as in the past to create a new pictwe.
The second set of timctionality we see as important, is to support new forms of collaboration between children.
In much of our work we saw children sharing one computer.
Many times they were frustrated when they could not agm who would get to use the mouse to zoom or to draw.
We observed that more assertive children would tend to monopolize the use of the computer, frustrating mo~ passive children.
Them%ore, we hope to implement software and hardwme support br two mice on one computer.
In this way, a computer might better support the work of two children sharing the same Pad surfke.
This is interesting to us, not only horn the standpoint of children's storytelling endeavoxs, but in terms of new collaboration fimctionality for the Pad++ substrate.
In addition, our development work on the Pad++ substrate has also benefited.
Thanks to suggestions tiom our child design partners, we have simplified the hyperzoomiug tool and the "X-Ray" or lens tools in Pad++.
In addition, we have continued our exploration of "Local Tools" in new areas such as layout and design for adults.
Harel, 1. and Papert, S. "Sofhvare Design as a Learning In I.
MIT Media Lab Publication Cambridge, Learning.
Children Designers: Interdisciplinmy Constructions for Learning and fiowing Mathematics in a Computer-Rich School.
The Art of Human-Computer Inte~ace Design.
Multimedia and Learning: A School Leader's Guia2.
NortoK P. "Literacy By Design".
DARPA's Human-Computer Interaction Initiative , fir its continued tiding of the Pad++ nsearch at the University of New Mexico.
We a also indebted to our design partners at the Lowell Elementary School, in Albuquerque, New Mexico.
In additio~ we would like to thank David Rogers fir his KidPad Scrapbook drawings.
Finally, we would like to acknowledge the on-going support, inspiratio~ and collaboration of the Pad++ development teams at both UNM and New York University.
Baecker, R., Small, I., and Mander, R "Bringing Icons to Life".
Bederson, B.B., Hollan, J., Perlin, K., Meyer, J., Baco~ D., and Furnas, G. "Pad++: A Zoomable Sketchpad fbr Exploring Alternate Inter&e Physics".
