Trust is the prerequisite for successwhen a collaborative task involves risk of individualistic or deceitful behaviorsof others.
Can trust emergein electronic contexts?
This issue is explored in an experiment in which trust emergenceis measured in both face-to-face  and electronic contexts.
In this experimenttrust is revealedby the degree of cooperationthe group is able to reach in solving a social dilemma, i.e.
The experiment consists of two stages.
The first stage analyzes the effects of F-t-F and electronic communication on trust Trust succeedsonly with F-t-F communication.
The second stage investigates whether a pre-meetingF-t-F can promote trust in electronic contextsResults are positive.
Examination of how people converse in these two contexts sheds some light on the effects of technical characteristics and social circumstanceson the emergence of trust.
Reluctance toward electronic media of communication appearsto be particularly strong when vulnerability derives from the risk of individualistic or deceitful behaviors.
When no standardizedproceduresor hierarchy guarantee control on individual behaviors, uncertainty and therefore vulnerability increase.In this situation, mutual adjustment and trust are the only coordination mechanismsable to makean organizationsurvive.
However,mutual adjustment and trust are very delicate resourcesrooted in the flow of informal F-t-F relations .
This would explain reluctance toward CSCW technologies.
As Nohria and Eccles argue,
Others report need for a prior F-t-F meeting before accepting electronic mail or video-conference as an alternative to F-t-F communication .
Sensible as these conclusions are, these studies are based on observations not backed by controlled comparisons.
A goal of this study is to achievea better understandingof the requirements for trust, by disentangling causes of vulnerabiity depending on the task, the characteristicsof the groupwaretechnology, and the social circumstancesin which the technology is used by a group.
The communication technology employed in this study is an electronic mailing list used in a synchronous way.
It approacheda chat box in terms of speed,but users had to open and close messages like in regular electronic mail.
Group members were assigned electronic mail accounts from which they could send messages to the whole group through a group alias.
Messages were not anonymousand everyone could read messages posted by everybody else.
Messages were accessed like usual electronic mail messages.
No private or sub-groupexchangeof electronic mail was permitted in this experiment.The experimenttook place in a laboratory, where six-person groups were engaged in an iterative task involving investment of personalfunds and receiving a paymentdependenton what others invested.
The task embodieda dilemma, known in the literature as "social dilemma" .
In a social dilemma individuals face the temptation to defect rather than cooperateto achieve a common goal.
The moral of a social dilemma is that overall defection leads to miserable results for the group.
Positive impact of F-t-F communicationin social dilemmas motivates this investigation into whether similar results occur when people communicate electronically by a mailing list The study is organized in two stages.
The first stage analyzesthe effects of F-t-F and electronic communication in groups consisting of strangers.
Expectationsare that the existence of effects associated with computer-mediated communication will make it difficult for trust to emerge .
For instance, de-personalization,lack of contextual presenceand non-verbal cues might fail to signal a desire for teamworkand goodwill.
The secondstageof the study looks at the effect of different social circumstances.
In this stage each group meets the day before the experiment to play a gameintended to promote group socialization.
The day after, thesame groups face the usual social dilemma experiment with electronic communication.
F-t-F socialization may overcome reluctance toward computer-based technologies of communication when collaborative tasksrequire trust.
On the other hand, it is also possible that future groupware technologies could be designedto include features that are revealedin this study to be necessary to establishtrust.
Method Experimental groups were composedof six subjects who met for about 35 hours to serve in the experiment, Subjects were physically located in the same room, everybody sat in front of a networked computer.
Subjects were undergraduate students at the University of Venice , with experience in the use of electronic mail.
IndividuaIs were grouped in such a way that fiiendship or acquaintancerelationships *thin the group are minimum.
Quantitative methods are used to describe groups' performance, participation in the discussion and communication patterns.
The experiment is drawn upon a previous experiment for the study of F-t-F communici3tionon the emergence of cooperation.
Experimental Task The individual task consistedof an investmentin a market.
The sametask was repeatedfor about 28 rounds.
Somevalues of the experiment calculated in correspondence to the sum of individual investments.
Then each subject received her individual payoff as a shareof the group payoff.
Subjectshad a table with complete information about the market payoff in correspondence of each possible investment.
At the beginning of each round each subject received the same number of tokens to invest.
She also received an updated record of her past individual investmentsand payoffs, and a record of the total group investment in each round of the game .
But she was not given information about how much each person invested.
Thus a subject could monitor group behavior but not individual ones.
At the end of the experiment everybody received a monetary payoff proportional to the individual payoff accumulatedin the game.
The main problem facedby the subjectswas that the market hid a trap: after a certain level of group investment, the bigger the group investment., the lower the group payoff.
In other words, the market payoff had a parabolic profile: if subjectsmade large investmentseverybody was worse off.
People however wanted to make large investmentsbecause the way in which the individual share of group payoff was calculated in the game.
This sharewas proportional to the individual investmentof the group investment.For instance, if a subject invested 10 tokens and the group had invested 40 tokens, then this subject got lo/40 of the group payoff.
Thus, this rule encouraged everybody to make large individual investments.
The dilemma was: should I make small investments to avoid the trap built in the market or large investmentsto earn as much as possible?Cooperation or defection?
When a subject chose a small investment he was aware of being vulnerable, since there was no guaranteethat others would have done the same.
Two group investmentsare particularly relevant: the social optimum indicating the optimal amounta cooperativegroup as a whole should invest, and individualistic optimum indicating the optimal amount for a group of noncooperativepeople.
Social optimum provides higher payoff to everybodybut is more risky, since a single defector can eam a lot exploiting the small investment of the others .
Subjectshad all the necessaryinformation to calculate these solutions.
Miscalculation of the social optimum brings to a result called nai:vesocial optimum- It indicates that subjectsare cooperatingbut without perfectly optimizing how muchthey can earnfrom the market.
In this study, after the lOti, 15* and 20* rounds of this game,the group members participated in a round table-like discussion.
The purposeof the discussionwas to reach an agreementto establish cooperation.
Indicating with X a round of the task and with C a communication period, the experiment has the following structure: Communication conditions Twelve groups participated in the experiment.
Different communicationconditions were designedfor them in the 3 communication periods.
In the first stage of the study 3 groups communicated F-t-F and 6 groups used a non anonymouselectronic mailing list.
In the second stage 3 groups played a F-t-F gamethe day before the experiment and then participatedin the experimentwith communication supportedby a non-anonymous electronic mailing list.
FIRSTSTAGEOF THE STUDY In the first stage,conditions I and II are analyzed.
The study aimed to see if trust breaks down when electronic communication replaces F-t-F communication and individuals face a task characterizedby high degree of vulnerability.
Results Some recurring aspects describe groups' behavior in condition I.
First, after the first communication period stable cooperation emerged.
Second, at the end of each communication period groups reached a unanimous agreement even if somesubjectsshow skepticism about the optimal@ of the decision.
Third, groupsgot always locked in a ndive social optimum during the first communication period.
Only two groupswere capableof finding the social optimum and implemented the right strategy after the second communication period.
This indicates that subjectshad overcomethe vulnerability intrinsic in the task and had insteadestablished trust-basedcooperation.
Subjects had the possibility to discuss for 30 minutes in each communication period.
Communication was supported by an electronic mailing list resembling important features of a traditional F-t-F round table: messages were not anonymousand everybody could read everybody else's messages.Messageswere recorded in a file for the analysisof communicationprotocols.
This condition differed from the previous one to the extent that subjectswere exposedto a special treatment the day before the experiment.
The treatmentconsistedof playing a 45-minute game aimed to elicit socialization through ingroup collaboration.
In this game the three groups competedagainsteachother to build the best tower out of paper accordingto somepre-definedcriteria.
Also in this condition some recurring aspects characterize group behavior.
First, cooperation never succeeded despite of several attempts to define an agreement during the communication periods .
However every agreementwas systematically disregarded: immediately after communication,a few subjectsbroke the covenant,triggering a snowball-like defection of the rest of the group.
2 notice that group investment always gradually rose after a communicationperiod.
The deceitful behavior of early defectors is a concrete example of opportunism, here referred to as "electronic opportunism" to empha&e that interactions occurred electronically.
Electronic opportunism was highly profitable for early defectors who made large investmentstaking advantageof smaller investors.
The second commonality is that communication had a decreas*mg impact on eliciting cooperation because individuals experienced disenchantment and frustration about the group's trustworthiness.
Frustration increased also becausethe flow of communicationgot very chaotic as lime passed.
Third, groups were better in problem solving than in condition I in terms of number and quality of solutions genera&L In fact groups communicating by mailing list generated and explored more solutions .
Also, 4 out of 6 groups did not get locked in de naive social optimum during the first communication period.
However, in condition II only 2 groups were able to deploy the social optimmn solution in a non unanimous agreement.
Lack of trust and skepticism weakened individual intentions to respectany agreement.
On average group investment was much higher than in condition I, indicating the breakdownof trust in the groups.
The lack of need to take turns permits several threads to be discussedat the sametime, causing the focus of the discussion to be lost.
But it also meant that one can avoid responding to questions and ignore messagesbecause of the lack of physical presence which usually compels responses.
The breakdown of traditional rules of communication makes discussionnearly unintelligible.
Analysis of video tapes and communication protocols revealed some factors that could be responsible for the differences observed between the two communication conditions.
Participation in the communication periods was very different when subjectsusedan electronic mailing list.
This technology does not provide support for rules of sequentiality and turn taking that govern F-t-F communication .
Sequentiality permits the discussion to gain coherence.
In de mailing list participants received a multitude of messageswhose topics were rarely in sequence.
Cheapcoordination refers to mechanismssuch as informal division of labor and leadershipthat often takesplace in Ft-F settings.
In condition I a cheap division of labor characterized group problem solving.
Analysis of video tapes revealed that different sub-groups were engaged in different activities: some did calculations, others explored alternative solutions, others explained the current strategy to those who showed skepticism or doubts about the strategy to adopt.
The decomposition into sub-groups emerged by evolution rather than by design .
In condition II this coordination never emerged.
This explains why subjects came up with the solution individually, exploring solutions and doing calculations alone.
Ultimately, individual problem solving made it harder to reach-an agreementbecauseeverybody wanted to impose her or his own solution onto the others.
Moreover, informal leadership of one or two subjects emergedin condition I.
Leadership is related to the effect known as "first advocacyeffect" .
First advocacyeffect says that the first advocate is likely to gain leadership attribution by group members.
That person's proposal is more likely to be implementedas group solution.
Analysis of communication protocols shows that in condition I the first solution was indeed generally deployed in a group agreement.
In condition II first advocacyeffect was almost absent.
Many solutions were simultaneouslydiscusseduntil the end of the communication period.
Then subjects engagedin a confused last minute voting that made it very hard to define the agreement.
Norms and conventions represent a cmcial aspect of the groups' life.
In both conditions I and II subjectsengagedin the definition of norms.
However, norms assumedvery different connotations.
In condition I groups stressedfrom the early minutes of the first communication period the need to respect cooperation, even in the face of possible defection.
Conversely,in condition II groupspostponedthe discussion of norms to the end of the first communication period.
Bad timing of social norms establishmentmight have increasedthe senseof vulnerability.
At the end of the communication period subjects experienced high anxiety becausethey wanted to reach some agreement.
In condition I the subjects never threatened.
After the first communicationperiod they did not need to reassert social norms once cooperation emerged.
In condition II, the existence of electronic opportunism enhanced the need to establish norms.
Aggressive expressions of disappointment , mistrust and blame dominated the second and third communicationperiods.
The norm of cooperationwas not the only norm to be violated.
SECONDSTAGEOF THE STUDY The previous results indicate that F-t-F communication elicits trust when the group is engaged in a task characterizedby high degreesof vulnerability.
However, when the group's relationships alreadycarry a sort of group identity we could expect that cooperationmight more easily emerge even if communication occurs electronically.
Group identity, commonvalues and history are recognized as prerequisitesfor long lasting trust-basedcooperation.
Thus social circumstances might have a large impact on the use of a computer-based medium of communication.
The second stage of the study investigated this hypothesis by introducing F-t-F socialization before groups engagedin electronic communication.
Results In condition III, subjectsdemonstrated firm willingness to come to an agreementfrom the first communicationperiod in marked contrast to subjects in condition II.
Analysis of communicationprotocols suggeststhat cooperationfell not becauseof electronic opportunism,but becausethe groups experienced diiculties in understanding the final agreement.In one case,for instance,the group split in two sub-groups, each cooperating, but using different agreements.
After the second communication period all groups overcame communication problems and reached stable cooperation.
On average, the second and third communication periods lasted respectively 18 and 5 minutes, in spite of having 30 minutes available, since participants quickly convergedto the agreement and asked the experimenterto continue with more investmentrounds.
A post-experimentquestionnaire confirmed that the F-t-F treatment had successfully achieved some degree of socialization.
On average4.3 subjects/groupreported that it stimulatedgroup identity and 3.6 of them thought the rest of the group experienced the same feeling.
Also 4.6 subjects/groupreported that prior F-t-F positively affected cooperationduring the experiment.
Interpretation Resultsare highly informative about the possible effects of F-t-F socialization before a text-basedtechnology, like an electronic mailing list, is usedfor communication.
Groups that had established socialization and perhaps trust were able and willing to overcome difficulties due to the communication technology.
The content analysisof messages exchangedby the mailing list indicated that groups recognized a sort of group identity.
Behaviors such as answering each others' questions, frequent use of the pronoun "us" rather than "anyone" or "you", and emphasisgiven to the concept of "our interest" were very common.
This finding contrasts what was noticed in condition II, where subjects'behaviors resembledthat of competitorsin a marketrather than that of membersof a group.
Frequentuse of "`anyone" and "you", emphasis on "`my payofl' versus "your payofp' and statements such as "loyalty is not a requirement" conveyed the absence of group identity in condition II.
The argument here is that the existenceof group identity affectsthe task's interpretation to the extent that the sametask can assume different naturesaccording to the social circumstances.
In condition III subjects stated that "the game's goal is to maximize group payo#" and "our task is toflgure out how to reach even individual payoffs".
This boosted disagreement rather than convergencetoward a consensus.
Somethreadsinvoked cooperation- But others seriously undermined cooperationproposing sabotages and stating the impossibility of reaching consensus.
Conversely, a lower number of threadsthat decreasedover time characterized communication in condition III.
Individuals cooperated to make the discussion more intelligible.
This facilitated the convergence toward the agreement.
Respect of social norms si.ym/s trusiwotthiness.
Like in condition I, subjectsshowed the need to establish social norms from the first minute of communication.
They sent messageslike `Yhe group must cooperate".
Then ,cooperationwas taken for granted once the agreementwas reached.
There was no need to enforce the agreementby threats.
Also, in condition Ill subjects never showed disappointment or frustration about the difficulties in using an electronic mailing list, nor expressedaugerfor de initial faihue of cooperation.
This behavior contributed to diffirsmg confidence &out cooperation.
Subjects showed concernsfor the norm of fairness,especially after the initial breakdown of cooperation- This behavior preserved the group corn dissolution.
Instead, in condition II breakdown of cooperation and electronic opportunism created the breakdoun of social norms> provoking threats,flaming and bhrffs .
CONCLUSION A potential source of teamwork's failure is the perception of vuhterabiity due to the risk of individualistic or deceitful behaviors of teammembers.In thesecasesestablishmentof trust is the prerequisite for action.
The greaterthe risk, the greaterthe needfor trusting relationships because people do not rake great risks with those they do not trust Communication plays a central role in forging trustiug relationships.
However, when communication occurs electronically, in particular in text-based formats, the perception of vulnerability can increase.
As a consequence, teammembersfail to developtrust This study sheds some light on the impact of electronic versus F-t-F communication on trust development, with a specific focus on the issue of trust in teams of -&augers.
Two main conclusionscan be drawn.
The first stageof the study reveals that factors such as intelligible communication,cheapcoordination and early establishment of collaborative norms are mainly responsible for the successful emergence of trust in R-F context When communication is supported by an electronic mailing list thesefactors appearfragile or even absent.
This causesthe breakdown of trust and, ultimately, of cooperation.
Therefore, a first conclusion is that electronic communication might turn out to be inappropriate to support teamworkwhen trustworthiness.
The needto verify whether the technology is the only causeresponsiblefor the breakdown of trust led to the secondstageof the study in which F-t-F socialization is introduced before individuals use the electronic mailing list.
The study showsthat trust can be achievedwhen team membershave an initial F-t-F contact.
Various elements signal that trust is in place: existenceof group identity, style of use of the technology,respectof social norms.
Several research avenues could follow up these results.
From the technical standpoint, design of future communication technologies should take into account the role of the factors revealed to be necessary for the development of trust.
For instance, the study emphasizes the importance of intelligibility of electronic communication.
Intelligible communication reduces risks of misunderstandings and encourages participation.
Applications more advanced and more structured than mailing lists could support better intelligibility.
Visualization of the communication threadsmight improve intelligibility and reduce the rigidity implicit in text-based forms of communication.
A different question regards the appropriate use of actual group technologies when a team's members need to establishtrust before engagingin collaborative activities.
It might be that reluctance toward groupware could indicate lack in the group trustworthiness or reliability.
Although collaborative activities do not always imply risks of opportunistic or deceitful behavior like in a social dilemma described above, social norms play a crucial role in coordinating group behavior.
To avoid risks of delays, uncertainties or internal conflicts, social norms should be discussed beforehand.
Socialization facilitates definition of social norms in many ways.
After establishingpersonalrelationships, individuals are usually more comfortable in revealing personal opinions, preferencesand concerns .
Such disclosure brings to the surfacepotential obstacles,making it easierto foreseedifficulties and negotiate appropriate social norms.
Moreover, socialization supports the establishment of the group identity and the existenceof group identity enhances the respect of norms .
As a consequencecomputersupported collaboration could be improved by planning ahead one or more face-to-face meetings to support socialization.
JVeneedto analyzewhat the impedimentsto socialization are when people rely on computer-based media of communication.
Also, we need to investigate whether a different or more intensive use of these media could overcometheseimpediments.
Zand, D. E. Trust and Managerial Problem Soving.
Olson, J. S. and Teasley, S. Groupware in the Wild.
LessonsLearned from a Year of Viial Collocation.
Globalwork bridging distances, culture and time.
Mintzberg, H. The Structuring of Organizations.
Potion to make@itab'bd copiesofall or pti ofti matgal for Pmonal Orhsm~m useis grantedwithoutfre pro\ided thattbe copies m no*madeor cktrhted for profit or 00~er~i~ dmbge, the cop,,right notk the title Ofthepublicationandits &appear, andnoticek gvrn *at mPYri&t is by permission of theACh& Inc TOcopy otb&, to rqublish, to PM onserms or to rediibn~ to lists,rquirs sp~~c permission and/orf5e.
Nohria, N. and Eccles, R.
Dawes, R. M. Social Dilemmas.
Sally, D. Conversation and Cooperation in Social Dilemma.
Covenantswith and without a Sword: Self-Governance is Possible.
Social Impacts of Electronic Mail in Organizations: A Review of the Research Literature.
The problem of human machine communication.
12.Hutchins, E. Organizing Work by Adaptation.
P. Group Discussion and First Advocacy Effect in Computer-Me&tedand Face-to-Face Decision Making Groups.
