Serendipity, a trigger of exciting yet unexpected discoveries, is an important but comparatively neglected factor in information seeking, research, and ideation.
We suggest that serendipity can be facilitated through visualization.
To explore this, we introduce the Bohemian Bookshelf, which aims to support serendipitous discoveries in the context of digital book collections.
The Bohemian Bookshelf consists of five interlinked visualizations each offering a unique overview of the collection.
It aims at encouraging serendipity by:  offering multiple visual access points to the collection,  highlighting adjacencies between books,  providing flexible visual pathways for exploring the collection,  enticing curiosity through abstract, metaphorical, and visually distinct representations of books, and  enabling a playful approach to information exploration.
A deployment at a library revealed that visitors embraced this approach of utilizing visualization to support openended explorations and serendipitous discoveries.
This encourages future explorations into promoting serendipity through information visualization.
Magnetic Resonance Imaging  and Computed Tomography  technology advancements mean there are a larger and larger number of images for radiologists to examine for diagnosis.
However, the way of interacting with these images has changed little since the advent of the scroll wheel on the computer mouse.
Our research focuses on scrolling through a stack of images , and how scrolling interaction might be improved.
We designed an abstracted task to run on lay subjects with several different types of computer mice, including a mouse with a touch surface.
Computer aided detection is trying to help save radiologists valuable time by suggesting potentially anomalous areas.
These regions are visually annotated in a task that already requires lots of visual attention.
Therefore, we also looked at using vibrotactile feedback instead of visual annotations; the mice used in the study all had pager motors below the top surface.
Preliminary results show that, across all the mice, the vibrotactile feedback along with the visual annotation was faster than either was alone.
Additionally 10/12 of the subjects preferred having both feedback types together over either alone.
We hope that by diversifying the ways that radiologists can scroll, and by having ways to communicate information to them non-visually, we can make their workflow more efficient.
In particular, Post-Doctoral Fellow, Christophe Bortolaso from Queen's University, that organized Minute Madness.
Mark it in your calendars!
