Monitoring occurs when users return to previously viewed web pages to view new or updated information.
While tools exist to support web-based monitoring, we know little about the monitoring activities users engage in and the nature of the support needed.
We have conducted 40 semi-structured interviews in order to better understand the types of information users monitor and the characteristics of different monitoring activities.
Using the data collected during the interviews, we characterized monitoring as an activity within six web information tasks: Browsing, Communications, Fact Finding, Information Gathering, Maintenance, and Transactions.
The results of our study have been used to provide general, as well as task specific, recommendations for the design of monitoring tools.
Previous research has offered conflicting views on whether monitoring is an independent information seeking task or whether it is an activity within several task types .
We hypothesize that monitoring is an activity within several web information tasks and that in order for monitoring tools to be effective, the interface, the tool functionality, and the information delivery mechanisms must be appropriate for the task type.
To better understand web-based monitoring, we conducted 40 semi-structured interviews among four sample populations: technical students, non-technical students, technical workers, and non-technical workers.
The primary contribution of this paper is an examination and characterization of users' web-based monitoring behaviours across the following tasks: Browsing, Communications, Fact Finding, Information Gathering, Maintenance, and Transactions.
The results of this study have been used to develop recommendations, both general and task specific, for the design of future web-based monitoring tools.
In the next section we present an overview of the related work in the area and current monitoring tools.
We then describe the research questions motivating this study and outline the methodological process.
The results section presents a characterization of participants' monitoring activities by task type, followed by the implications of these findings.
We then conclude with our future work.
Web-based monitoring occurs when users return to previously viewed web pages to view new or updated information.
The increasing availability of web-based services and content allows users to monitor a variety of information and recent research suggests that this is becoming a dominant web activity .
In response, tools to support web-based monitoring are being developed by online content providers, commercial developers, and the research community.
While there are a variety of monitoring tools available, we know very little about the monitoring activities users engage in, their behaviour during these activities, and whether the design of current tools effectively supports web-based monitoring.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
The rate of user revistation on the Web has been studied extensively .
The results of these studies suggest that revistation is a common and important web activity.
Two of the most common motivations for revistation are re-finding previously found information  and monitoring web pages for new and updated information .
The work presented in this paper is focused on monitoring Various aspects of monitoring have been studied across different research communities.
These studies have focused primarily on the theoretical study of monitoring in the context of research and library based information seeking.
Choo, Detlor and Turnbull  conducted a more general study of information seeking behaviour on the Web.
They characterized conditioned viewing as one of four types of information seeking, which was comprised of three viewing modes: browsing, differentiating, and monitoring.
Within the HCI community, Morrison, Pirolli, and Card  defined monitoring as "Repeated visits to specific websites to update information.
The search is not triggered by a particular goal; it is a routine behaviour".
This research seemed to suggest that monitoring is synonymous with browsing, which is a serendipitous information seeking task with no particular goal in mind.
Other research has examined collaborative document monitoring , awareness displays for information monitoring  and custom web notifications .
However, little research has been conducted examining the types of information users monitor and how they perform their monitoring tasks.
A number of web-based monitoring systems have been developed; however, published evaluations of these systems have been limited.
URL-Minder   was an early web-based monitoring service that notified users when registered web pages were modified.
WebCQ  and WebVigiL  are both server based monitoring systems that allow users to monitor web pages for general or specific changes to a website.
More recently, monitoring tools have been appearing as browser extensions and desktop widgets.
Mac OS X recently introduced Dashboard Web Clips , which allows users to monitor snippets of web pages by clipping regions of interest .
Tools such as the Morning Coffee  Firefox extension offer enhanced bookmark-like functionality to assist users with their habitual monitoring routines.
RSS is a technique used for monitoring syndicated content and feeds can be accessed through a variety of tools, including RSS readers and aggregators.
Classification of Web Information Tasks or to make a decision.
Browsing is a serendipitous task in which there is no specific information goal other than perhaps for entertainment purposes or to see what is new.
Information exchange tasks consist of Transactions and Communications.
These are tasks in which the user's goal is to exchange information in a web-based setting.
Transactions consist of tasks in which an online action takes place, such as banking or an online purchase.
Communications consist of tasks that facilitate web-based communication, such as email and web-based publishing .
Information Maintenance tasks consist of visits to web pages with the goal of maintaining web resources.
Such tasks include ensuring that content appears as it should and that hyperlinks are correct.
This research was motivated by an earlier field study in which we examined information seeking behaviour on the Web .
Based on previous research , we had anticipated that monitoring was an independent information seeking task.
However, during the pilot study it became apparent that monitoring activities overlapped with a variety of other tasks.
For example, it was very difficult to distinguish between monitoring and "re-Fact Finding" or "re-Browsing".
As a result, monitoring was omitted from the field study.
It was clear that further research was needed to define the nature of web users' monitoring activities.
To better understand monitoring and its role within the Classification of Web Information Tasks, we proposed the following research questions: RQ1: How does monitoring fit into the Classification of Web Information tasks?
Is monitoring an independent information seeking task or an activity within a task?
RQ2: What are the general characteristics of monitoring activities?
RQ3: What are the characteristics of each monitoring activity, by task type?
We hypothesized that monitoring is not an independent information seeking task, but instead an activity within each web information task.
Web information tasks are the set of tasks in which users engage in on the Web to acquire, consume, and distribute information.
We are using the Classification of Web Information Tasks  shown in Figure 1, to categorize monitoring activities.
The classification consists of three information goals: information seeking, information exchange, and information maintenance.
Information seeking tasks consist of Fact Finding, Information Gathering, and Browsing.
These are tasks in which the user's goal is to change their state of knowledge .
Fact Finding consists of tasks in which the goal is to find a specific piece of information.
Forty participants were recruited to take part in hour long in situ semi-structured interviews.
Semi-structured interviews were chosen because they allow in-depth exploration of users' behaviours and habits while offering researchers a good balance of control in a casual environment.
All interviews were audio recorded and conducted by the same researcher.
An interview guide was used to keep the interview on track and to help maintain consistency and reliability in the data .
Using the transcripts, each reported monitoring activity was coded for task type  based on the participant's description of the activity and the information being monitored.
In order to develop a characterization of the different monitoring activities, the transcripts were also coded for the previously mentioned attributes .
Ten participants were recruited from each of the following sample populations: technical students, non-technical students, technical workers, and non-technical workers.
While users with strong technical backgrounds  do not reflect typical web users, we expected that they would be more likely to have sophisticated monitoring behaviours.
This is a demographic that is often regarded as early adopters of new technology and may well be predictors of future users.
During the interview, participants were asked to describe up to three work/school monitoring activities and three personal monitoring activities.
For each activity, participants were asked to describe the goal, the type information being sought, and the following attributes: 1.
2. navigation mechanisms used  duration of the monitoring activity .
Our goal was to interview participants in situ in order to study participants' monitoring behaviour in their natural environment.
With the exception of four participants, all participants were interviewed while seated in front of their computer.
This allowed participants to demonstrate how they engaged in their monitoring activities using their own browser and tools, which may have helped reduce inaccuracy due to self-reported data.
While we did not aim to capture a complete picture of participants' monitoring behaviour, we did capture a piece of their behaviour.
It is important to note that participants, particularly those who were interviewed in their workplace, may have been hesitant to discuss personal monitoring activities.
For instance, many participants felt the need to qualify some of their monitoring activities with statements such as "on my lunch break" and "download music legally".
We hypothesize that participants may have felt the need to qualify their behaviour in case the interview was overheard by coworkers.
While future work is needed to study monitoring behaviour from a more objective and quantitative perspective, this study does provide an initial exploration into participants' real world monitoring tasks.
Additional data on whether user login or search queries were required; the type of follow-up activities; and whether the activities were work, school or personal were also gathered but are not reported in this paper.
At the end of the interview, participants were shown two existing monitoring tools.
They were asked if they could see themselves using the tool and to describe their impressions of the tool.
The audio recordings from all forty interviews were transcribed by an individual not associated with the study or Figure 2.
This supports our hypothesis that monitoring is not an independent information seeking task but instead an activity within web information tasks.
Figure 2 displays the breakdown of all reported monitoring using the categorization of web information tasks.
The five monitoring activities that did not belong to a single category consisted of a combination of different monitoring activities .
We next present a characterization of monitoring within each of the web information tasks.
For each task type, Table 1 displays: the use of navigation mechanisms, the anticipated duration of the monitoring activity, and the frequency of the monitoring activity.
The most common responses are highlighted in the table.
Monitoring activities were categorized as Browsing when participants reported they were monitoring information to see what was new or to stay up-to-date.
Browsing was the most common type of monitoring activity, accounting for 42.8%  of all reported monitoring activities.
Participants reported that it was a way of relaxing or taking a break.
Participants reported that they most commonly navigated to pages they monitored using bookmarks  and typedin-URLs .
Browsing monitoring differed from many other monitoring activities in that participants reported they often  visited several websites within a single monitoring activity.
Four participants also reported using an aggregation tool, such as the LiveJournal friends list or personalized homepages .
Five participants described particular navigational rituals when conducting their monitoring activity.
For example, one participant described how she categorized her bookmarks  into folders, such as daily, weekly and RSS, on her browser toolbar.
Each morning she would access the pages in her "daily" folder from top to bottom and once a week she would complete a similar ritual for her "weekly" sites.
Participants stated they would cease short term monitoring activities when they became bored or tired of the activity.
Short term iterations tended to start and stop, depending on the participant's interest in the activity.
Participants reported that they most commonly navigated to pages they monitored using bookmarks  and typedin-URL .
Almost three quarters  of Fact Finding monitoring was categorized as long term.
In contrast to Browsing monitoring, participants indicated that short term monitoring activities would end once the desired information appeared or when the information was no longer being updated.
One third  of all Fact Finding monitoring was conducted on a daily basis and 23.8% of Fact Finding monitoring did not occur with any regularity, but instead occurred when a participant was motivated by a particular event.
For instance, some participants reported they only monitored the weather if there was a weather event forecast while others stated they would monitor their grades after an exam.
While only four monitoring activities occurred continually throughout the day, three participants reported they felt compelled to continuously engage in the activity.
For instance, one participant described how often he checked for a decision on his graduate school application:
Participants reported that a little under half  of all Browsing monitoring was conducted on a daily basis followed by every couple of days .
While most participants were relaxed about the frequency of their Browsing monitoring, some participants reported they tended to be somewhat compulsive about the activity.
For instance, two participants described their news reading behaviour and use of Facebook as addictions:
RSS feeds are frequently used for syndicating news websites and blogs and have the potential to support Browsing monitoring since these types of websites are often viewed during Browsing tasks.
Only eleven participants mentioned RSS during the interview and over half  stated that they did not find RSS useful.
The most commonly cited reason for disliking RSS was the lack of pictures/details and "too much information coming at you", although three participants reported they would consider using RSS if it were to be improved.
Of the 11 participants who mentioned RSS, three reported they had heard of RSS but did not know what it was or how to use it.
Only 2/11 participants reported they were satisfied with their use of RSS to complete their Browsing monitoring.
Monitoring activities were classified as Information Gathering when participants were gathering updated information for research or decision-making purposes.
Information Gathering was the third most common type of monitoring activity and accounted for 10.4%  of all reported monitoring.
The most common monitoring activity was keeping up to date on research literature , followed by monitoring of business commodities  , and employment opportunities .
Participants reported that they most commonly navigated to pages they monitored using bookmarks , search engines , and auto-complete .
Participants reported that 77.8% of their Information Gathering monitoring activities were long term tasks.
Two of the Information Gathering monitoring activities, looking for new employment and looking for new housing, were categorized as short term.
Participants reported these tasks would end once they had reached their goal.
Interestingly, one employment monitoring activity was categorized as a long term task because the participant reported that he anticipated that this task would continue indefinitely.
However, at this point, the task may become more of a Browsing monitoring activity.
Finally, two Information Gathering monitoring activities were labelled as short term iterations.
For example, one participant reported he would monitor iPod forums to conduct research before purchasing a new iPod accessory.
Monitoring activities were categorized as Fact Finding when participants reported they were monitoring specific or factual pieces of information, such as updated snippets of information or the appearance of a new file.
Fact Finding was the second most common type of monitoring activity, accounting for 24.3%  of all reported monitoring.
One participant described the difference between a Browsing and a Fact Finding monitoring activity ; he reported that Browsing monitoring was more of a superficial sweep of "what's new" while the Fact Finding monitoring was strictly a scan for number .
The most common Fact Finding monitoring activities were checking for new assignments/grades/notes , weather , status  , and factual sports information  .
Monitoring activities were characterized as Transactions when participants reported they were monitoring information that would either initiate a new online transaction or was the result of a previous transaction.
This activity differs from most other monitoring activities in that the exchange of information is often a one-to-one relationship, meaning that the information has been dynamically created for a specific user by an information provider.
The most common monitoring activities were checking online account balances   and online purchases .
Participants reported that they most commonly navigated to pages they monitored using bookmarks  and autocomplete .
Participants reported that most  of their Transactions monitoring was long term and these were typically banking related monitoring activities.
Finally, over a third  of Transaction monitoring occurred on a daily basis, as part of a daily routine.
While only a small number of Maintenance tasks were reported, participants reported that they most commonly navigated to pages they monitored using bookmarks  or the page was their homepage .
All monitoring tasks reported by participants were categorized as long term monitoring tasks.
Participants reported that 42.9% of their Maintenance monitoring activities were conducted continually throughout the day.
In addition to the previously presented monitoring tasks, participants also described five tasks  that did not fit within a single task category.
These remaining tasks were categorized as: Fact Finding & Browsing ; Fact Finding & Information Gathering ; Fact Finding & Communications ; and Fact Finding, Browsing & Maintenance .
One combined monitoring activity was described by a participant, who worked for the university's computing services, as monitoring the university's online computer store for several reasons: to see what was new and new product specials ; to monitor the price of a particular product, perhaps waiting for a sale ; and to make sure there were no errors on the page .
Monitoring activities were categorized as Communications when participants reported they were monitoring a web page for new or incoming communications.
Only 6.4%  of the monitoring activities were categorized as Communications.
All participants were email users and only some chose to report email as a monitoring activity.
While true of all reported monitoring activities, the percentage of Communications monitoring reported is not necessarily representative of all Communications monitoring that occurs on the Web.
The only non-email monitoring activity was reported by a teaching assistant who monitored a bulletin board for new postings from students as it was the primary method of communication between her and her students.
Participants reported that they most commonly navigated to pages they monitored using bookmarks  and through an email notification tool .
All Communications monitoring was long term in nature.
Participants reported they engaged in this activity continually throughout the day  or daily .
Our motivation in conducting this research was to determine how monitoring fits into the Classification of Web Information Tasks.
The results of the interviews do support our hypothesis that monitoring is an activity that occurs within each web information task.
Browsing was the most common type of monitoring activity, followed by Fact Finding, Information Gathering, Transactions, Communications, and Maintenance.
We also observed that some monitoring activities were a combination of different tasks.
We were also motivated by the need for a better understanding of how users conduct their web-based monitoring activities.
While there were notable differences in the types of information being monitored, the characteristics  of the different monitoring tasks were often similar, with some exceptions.
Previous research  has examined the use of web browser navigation mechanisms across task type and found that while typed-in-URLs were the most common way to initiate a new task, the choice of navigation mechanisms was dependant upon the task at hand.
For instance, the Google toolbar was most commonly used during Fact Finding and Information Gathering and bookmarks were most commonly used during Browsing and Transactions.
Monitoring tasks were categorized as Maintenance when participants reported they were monitoring a web page for the purpose of maintaining it, such as checking for spelling mistakes, layout problems, or accurate content.
Only 4.0% of all reported monitoring activities were classified as Maintenance.
The most common activity was monitoring university pages to ensure the content was accurate and that there were no errors or spelling mistakes .
However, the participants in our study reported that bookmarks were the most common navigation mechanism, across all task types.
This seems to indicate that it is not only task type which impacts the choice of navigation mechanism, but also whether the task is a monitoring activity.
Therefore, despite the recognized issues associated with bookmarks , our research indicates that bookmarks are still a popular navigation mechanism, especially during monitoring activities.
This supports a previous finding that monitored websites are often bookmarked .
Participants reported that the majority of all monitoring activities were long term tasks, meaning they would continue indefinitely, and this ranged from 75% of Fact Finding monitoring to 100% of Communications monitoring.
While short term monitoring tasks were not extremely frequent, they were most common during Fact Finding, Information Gathering, and Transactions.
Short term monitoring tasks had very different motivations behind their cessation.
Within Browsing, participants reported that the task came to an end simply because they lost interest, while short term Fact Finding monitoring came to an end when the anticipated information became available.
Finally, participants reported that Information Gathering monitoring concluded upon the completion of a particular goal.
Monitoring activities were most commonly performed daily.
Fact Finding monitoring was also conducted as the result of a particular event and Communications and Maintenance monitoring often occurred continually throughout the day.
Participants reported that their monitoring routine was impacted by external factors, such as the end of business hours and the time change between the East Coast and West Coast.
Two participants reported that they set reminders in their calendars to remind them to engage in the monitoring task on a monthly basis.
However, participants reported that once the information arrives, the compulsive activity will cease.
Therefore, this is not a monitoring activity that needs to be mitigated but instead needs better support so that users can feel comfortable that they will be immediately notified of any changes on the web page.
Long Term: Three participants reported compulsively monitoring for entertainment purposes, such as news and sports websites .
In contrast to short term monitoring, there is no end for this activity, although participants stated that they were trying to cut down on the activity since it was encroaching on their schoolwork or research.
While serious Internet addictions have been studied in the Psychology literature , more research is needed to investigate if and how web browser tools can help users achieve a better balance between productive and non-productive  web use.
I would say that is my most frequent task  I'll check my e-mail and take a quick glance when I get home at night or in the afternoon and depending on which day it is, what time my classes are, I'll go to doing that and it usually takes importance over my homework which is stupid, I've got to change that.
While we did not explicitly set out to monitor the compulsive behaviour that sometimes accompanies monitoring, we observed some participants for whom this was a compulsive activity.
Five participants, all of whom were from the student demographic, reported at least one monitoring activity that they described as a compulsion or an addiction.
Even participants for whom monitoring was not a compulsion reported they often conducted some monitoring activities more frequently than was needed.
We were able to categorize monitoring activities described as a compulsion into two categories: short term and long term.
While this is an area that requires further research, the properties of these two types of monitoring activities provide different implications for new monitoring tools.
Short Term: Two participants reported compulsively monitoring a website while awaiting new or updated information.
At the end of the interview, participants were shown two brief screen capture videos introducing two Firefox extensions, each of which supports a particular monitoring task.
The first tool introduced was ForecastFox , which allows users to monitor a region's weather through a series of icons positioned in a region of the web browser .
The second tool introduced was Update Page Checker , which notifies users through a small icon in the status bar when a previously tagged web page has updated.
Participants were informed that these were freely available Firefox extensions and that they had not been developed by the researcher involved in the study.
After viewing the screen capture, participants were asked if they could see themselves using the tool and to describe what they liked and disliked about the tool.
Using these two tools to frame our discussion, participants reported several barriers to their use of monitoring tools, which included: accuracy, loss screen real estate, method of notification, tool functionality and setup effort.
Therefore, we have developed general recommendations to help mitigate these factors.
These recommendations apply to all types of monitoring activities.
Accuracy: Participants articulated two dimensions to accuracy: accuracy of the notification and accuracy of the data.
Monitoring tools that use "push" notifications must be consistently accurate in their notifications .
Monitoring tools that rely on third party data, such as ForecastFox, will not be used if the user does not have confidence in accuracy of the data.
Therefore, it is important that the third party data used is known as an accurate source.
Where possible, tools should allow users to choose their preferred data source.
Loss of Screen Real Estate: Six of the study participants expressed concerns with the size and location of the ForecastFox tool.
They stated that their web browsers were already cluttered and that they did not want to accommodate any further icons or toolbars.
Therefore, monitoring tools and notifications should remain relatively inconspicuous within the main browser window and appear only as needed.
Method of Notification: There are many factors to consider when designing a method of notification for monitoring tools, such as push vs. pull, privacy concerns, and the rate of notifications.
Seven participants expressed some discomfort with the pop-up notification displayed by the Page Update Checker tool.
Participants felt the pop-ups had the potential to be annoying or distracting.
Monitoring tools should be quick to install and adding or editing a monitoring task should be simple for all users.
In terms of short term tasks, users need to be able to easily quit monitoring a site.
Participants stated that even if a task was expected to last indefinitely, they were still not willing to spend much time configuring the tool.
The results of our study suggest that task dictates the type of information being monitored.
This means that a variety of monitoring functionality is needed to better support the range of monitoring activities that exist.
We have capitalized on our finding to develop the following set of task-specific design recommendations.
Browsing monitoring was characterized by the monitoring of web pages in order to see "what was new".
This is a monitoring activity that is difficult to support.
Users can quickly become overwhelmed by the amount of new information appearing on news websites and blogs, which was one reason why some participants reported they choose not to use RSS.
One new approach for RSS is personalized homepages, such as those offered by Google, Yahoo, and Netvibes .
These tools offer a more minimalist approach to RSS by simply displaying links to the newest articles.
Users also have control over the layout and organization of the content on the homepage.
While tools can employ learning techniques to predict or anticipate a user's interests, Browsing tasks by nature are often serendipitous.
A user may simply be keeping up to date with what is going on in the world with no particular topic of interest.
Therefore, it may be difficult, if not impossible for tools to accurately predict what is of interest to users engaging in a Browsing monitoring activity.
Also, with the exception of pages that update infrequently or unexpectedly, notifications of updated content are not appropriate for Browsing monitoring tasks.
Based on the results of our interviews, we hypothesize that the key to supporting Browsing monitoring is not through notifications or updates of new content but instead through providing an awareness of a web page's update activity.
For instance, a small icon or menu item could provide users with a graphical or textual metered view of updates to a particular webpage.
Since we observed that bookmarks are commonly used during monitoring activities, this information could also be integrated within the bookmarks list.
For instance, recent versions of both Firefox and Safari offer RSS functionality embedded within the bookmarks.
Fact Finding monitoring was characterized by the monitoring of specific pieces of information.
The choice of push vs. pull notifications is task dependant.
Push notifications are not appropriate for monitoring activities where the web pages update frequently.
Instead, widgets that allow users to monitor the rate of recent updates would be more appropriate.
This particularly applies to Browsing monitoring tasks, which is addressed in more detail in the following section.
Functionality: The type of functionality required in a monitoring tool is specific to the type of monitoring activity being supported.
In the next section, we discuss the type of functionality needed to support each monitoring task type.
However, all monitoring tools should be sophisticated enough to ignore vacuous updates, such as updated ads.
Setup Effort: The effort involved in installing and configuring monitoring tools was often cited as a reason why participants did not currently use any monitoring tools.
The results of our interviews indicate that in order to support Fact Finding monitoring, it is not enough for a tool to notify users that the content on the page has changed, even if the change is significant.
Therefore, the functionality provided by the Page Update Checker tool demonstrated during the study may not be appropriate for Fact Finding monitoring activities.
We hypothesize that in order to effectively support Fact Finding monitoring tasks, tools should  allow users to easily identify the factual information they would like to monitor,  notify users when that information has been updated, and  facilitate the delivery of this updated information.
Based on participant responses during the interviews, there are several options for notifications.
In particular, participants suggested emails containing updated information or a discrete notification within the web browser.
While it may not be feasible or appropriate for the notification to display the updated information, the notification should communicate which web page has changed and facilitate easy access to the updated information.
For instance, a user clicking on the notification could be either transported to the location on the web page where the updated information resides or the updated information could be delivered directly to the user through a small window or pop-up.
Tools must be flexible enough to reflect a range of individual differences and task variations by allowing participants to customize features such as the method of notification and the frequency of the updates.
Information Gathering monitoring was characterized by the monitoring of new content in order to support an ongoing research-based task.
While not reported in the previous section, participants reported that 38.9% of Information Gathering activities required search queries to access the updated information.
Therefore, tools to support Information Gathering monitoring may benefit from using stored queries and notifying users when new content is available.
This is a service that is currently available from some content providers, such as digital libraries, but it is content and site specific.
Since Information Gathering tasks tend to occur less frequently, overt notifications would only serve to interrupt an unrelated task.
Therefore, email may be the most appropriate form of notification for this monitoring activity.
Communications monitoring activities were characterized by the monitoring of web pages for new and updated communications.
Communications monitoring is fairly narrow in scope  and appears to be well supported by current email notification tools.
Transactions monitoring was characterized by the monitoring of web pages either in anticipation of, or following, an online transaction.
Future research is needed to determine whether users have an interest in tools to support this monitoring task.
Maintenance monitoring was characterized by the monitoring of web page changes with the intent of maintaining the information on the web page.
While this was one of the lesser reported monitoring activities, participants who did engage in Maintenance monitoring articulated several requirements for supporting this activity.
Unlike Fact Finding and Browsing, this is a monitoring activity where it may simply be enough to know that the page has changed.
Therefore, a discrete notification of a page change , may prove useful for Maintenance monitoring tasks.
As evidence, one of our participants reported after the study that he had begun to use the Page Update Checker tool for a Maintenance monitoring task.
One final consideration for the support of Maintenance monitoring is that users must be able to access a page as typical users do.
As stated by one participant:
We conducted a set of semi-structured interviews in order to determine:  if monitoring is an independent information seeking task or an activity within several tasks;  the general characteristics of monitoring activities; and  the characteristics of each monitoring activity, by task type.
Previous research suggested that monitoring may be synonymous with Browsing or an independent information seeking task; however, the results of our study indicate that it is indeed an activity within each web information task .
While the general characteristics of monitoring  did not differ greatly across tasks, there were discernable differences in the types of information being monitored.
The implications of our findings suggest that very different functionality is required to support different information monitoring activities.
To this end, we have developed recommendations that provide insight into how monitoring activities may be more effectively supported.
We are currently developing a small set of monitoring tools whose design has been guided by the findings gathered from this study.
This will allow us to validate our guidelines as well as to study how the introduction of a monitoring tool changes users' behaviour on the Web.
