MOSOCO is a mobile assistive application that uses augmented reality and the visual supports of a validated curriculum, the Social Compass, to help children with autism practice social skills in real-life situations.
In this paper, we present the results of a seven-week deployment study of MOSOCO in a public school in Southern California with both students with autism and neurotypical students.
The results of our study demonstrate that MOSOCO facilitates practicing and learning social skills, increases both quantity and quality of social interactions, reduces social and behavioral missteps, and enables the integration of children with autism in social groups of neurotypical children.
The findings from this study reveal emergent practices of the uses of mobile assistive technologies in real-life situations.
Taken together, these tools go beyond the teaching of basic social skills and tackle such broad social issues as how situational contexts evolve in ongoing social interactions .
The Social Compass curriculum is a behavioral and educational curriculum identified as the best social curriculum for social skills training.
It uses social stories and paper-based visual supports for teaching children with autism social skills .
The minimal social skills required for a basic and complete social interaction are addressed by six core lessons from the Social Compass curriculum: eye contact, space and proximity, start interaction, asking questions, sharing interests, and finishing interaction .
Each Social Compass lesson is composed of eight steps and is conducted in groups of both students with autism and neurotypical  students.
First,  the teacher introduces the social skill to be learned and  its related visual support.
Then,  the teacher reads a social story that helps students connect the visual support, the social skill and the social situation.
Later,  the teacher demonstrates how the skill is used in social contexts, and  students rehearse the skill in pairs.
Next,  students role-play to practice the skill in four scenarios and  self-rate their performances.
Finally,  students are encouraged to practice the newly learned social skill in different real-life social situations.
Autism is characterized by social skills impairments .
Children with autism exhibit problems when initiating and terminating interactions, learning the interests of others, and joining social groups .
Direct instructions for skill acquisition are an effective way to teach them social skills, helping to cope with these social challenges .
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Although the Social Compass curriculum has been successfully used during social skills activities in classrooms , there are still open questions as to how students might generalize their newly learned social skills to situations outside the classroom.
However, there is currently limited support for this kind of mobile, dynamic instruction.
To offset this challenge, we explored the use of mobile and augmented reality technologies to provide anytime and anywhere support for students practicing social skills in their daily lives.
In this paper, we first describe the design and implementation of the Mobile Social Compass , a mobile assistive application that extends the Social Compass training and supports real-life social situations .
Then, we present the results from a deployment of MOSOCO.
Finally, we close discussing with directions for future work.
Interactive technologies have the potential to provide a wide variety of support to children with autism.
For example, interactive visual supports  help children with autism manage their schedules , remediate their speech and language disabilities  and provide feedback on their pronunciation .
Other projects have focused more directly on the development and practicing of social skills.
Both games  and multitouch displays  have been developed to engage children with autism in social activities and enable novel forms of social expression.
These entertainment-based assistive technologies also help children with autism learn how to work with others, be patient and understand emotions .
These research projects have made the compelling argument that children with autism are more willing to initiate play and to interact appropriately when using entertainment-based assistive technologies.
However, there is limited evidence of a sustained improvement in their social skills following the use of these tools.
To cope with this challenge of sustainability of skill development, the StoryTable project focused on the use of storytelling to encourage socialization and enable practicing of appropriate social skills .
This research has shown that support during social engagements increased appropriate expression of emotions and responses to peer questions by children with autism .
However, most of these assistive technologies are often available only for use inside classrooms or during group therapies.
Children with autism still struggle when generalizing what they learned to real-life situations outside the classroom .
The MOSOCO system available assistive technologies.
One of the main challenges in this context is mobility.
Although mobile systems have been theorized as an effective educational method enabling anytime and anywhere social skills practicing and learning , mobile assistive technologies that support socialization and social skills practice for children with autism in this context are scarce.
Some mobile applications for encouraging and supporting socialization of NT children have been proposed , others have explored other domains, , but none of these solutions have been used to support the socialization of children with autism.
These related efforts open new research questions around how mobile assistive technologies for encouraging socialization and learning and practicing of social skills improve the quality of interactions of students with autism and their NT peers.
Additionally, the lack of exploration of tools for both children with and without autism opens questions around whether these tools might foster integrated social groups.
In light of the related literature, this work has three contributions.
First, although many other researchers have explored the use of assistive technologies for social skills practice in classrooms , we examine the usability and usefulness of socially assistive technologies in real life situations outside classrooms.
Second, we present a mobile assistive tool that could be useful to other researchers in designing and evaluating mobile assistive technologies for use in real-life situations.
Third, the results of our deployment study reveal how new social practices mediated by MOSOCO can improve the quality of interactions and social skills in generalized settings.
MOSOCO is a mobile augmented reality application inspired by previous research on the Social Compass curriculum  .
In our previous work, we focused to analyze interactions among students, which led to design insights.
Those insights, along with the Social Compass curriculum, inspired the design and development of MOSOCO.
MOSOCO facilitates practicing social skills in real-life situations, guiding students through the six fundamental social skills of the Social Compass curriculum.
Figure 3: Students using MOSOCO during recess  two students making eye contact  Learning and tagging PIP's interests features to encourage them to make eye contact, maintain and don'ts .
These suggestions mimic appropriate spatial boundaries, reply to conversation verbal support available from teachers during the Social initiators, share interests with partners, disengage Compass classroom activities and can be used to practice appropriately at the end of an interaction, and identify the skills .
MOSOCO monitors skill completion potential communication partners.
MOSOCO runs on an to mimic teacher support further.
For example, the system Android smartphone wirelessly connected to a server.
If MOSOCO infers that eye contact was not life social situation with visual support--mimicking the properly achieved, it shows a warning notifying that a Social Compass curriculum that augments social stories social misstep has occurred alongside a picture and textwith paper-based visual supports.
Some common social missteps MOSOCO was designed with both individual and group observed in our data include students using an inappropriate features in mind, augmenting each individual student's tone of voice , avoiding eye contact or social skills, needs, and capabilities, and enabling staring, invading personal space, and interrupting or synchronized group interactions and shared experiences.
Once student using the system , visualization of MOSOCO detects that both students have made eye student progress in the form of stars that can be earned, an contact, it emits a sound and highlights the next step.
After each interaction, students complete self-report forms When they first start MOSOCO, students are instructed to to grade themselves on the six practiced social skills.
They find a suggested PIP.
MOSOCO suggests the PIP by select thumbs up or thumb down on the interface, showing the partner's name and photograph .
If no social missteps were to the suggested PIP, both students are automatically detected directly by the system, students earn stars based on paired up, indicating that they have started an interaction.
Students may also manually pair themselves master the different skills.
Finally, after the interaction and with another student.
By receiving this information through a personal device, each student gets direct assistance and reinforcement for practicing their social skills, similar to the kind of human prompting and reinforcement they might receive during classrooms activities.
Meanwhile, every activity is logged in the background, enabling automatic report generation for teachers to measure student progress.
Weekly interviews were recorded and conducted with the participants across each study phase.
Interviews were faceto-face and semi-structured, and students were divided in three groups .
Interviews generally lasted between 15 minutes to half an hour, in keeping with the short blocks of time available to talk with school students.
During pre-deployment, students were asked about daily routines and general communication practices.
During deployment, students were asked to discuss how the use of the system went during that particular week, comment on how MOSOCO impacted their interactions and social groups, and encouraged to tell stories and discuss what they found interesting, surprising, or different that week.
At the end of the study, the teaching staff and students completed surveys about their experiences with MOSOCO and took part in a 60-minute group interview.
Unlike in the previous interviews in which the students were broken into small groups, in this final interview, all students met together.
Recorded interviews and videos were transcribed.
MOSOCO was deployed in a public school in Southern California during regularly scheduled lunch and recess breaks.
From this group, we selected three students with autism who demonstrated minimal social skills but otherwise demonstrated age-appropriate functioning; for each of them, we invited three NT students to serve as their PIPs .
This ratio of NT students mimics the school population.
The evaluation included three stages: predeployment , deployment  and postdeployment .
During pre-deployment, students participated in the standard Social Compass curriculum in the classroom, which included direct instruction from trained specialists and paper-based tools.
Researchers then installed MOSOCO and gave a training session on the system to the students and teachers.
During the deployment phase, the students used MOSOCO during the Social Compass class and during their breaks.
Finally, during post-deployment, the students participated in no lessons, and the system was not available to them.
To meet the regulations of the school and the university research ethics board, students enrolled in the study were confined to a private playground area during recess and lunch breaks .
This area  was separated from the rest of the playground by cones but incorporated common landscape elements  and traditional school playground items .
All field notes, interview and videos transcripts were inspected together using a mixed-methods approach.
Researchers first analyzed the data for evidence of whether MOSOCO supported the needs of students.
Researchers used open coding  and multi-phased affinity analysis  to uncover emergent themes from the interview data, in particular in relation to uses of the system.
We then developed a coding scheme focused on student social experiences.
This coding scheme was cross-analyzed during discussions among the research team to validate and refine its categories and properties.
A quantitative analysis was conducted to estimate the time students spent in different interactions and social groups as well as the number of social missteps committed.
Using our coding scheme, the research team coded the recorded videos for interactions, behaviours, and social missteps.
Finally, a single t-test was used to compare students with autism social missteps and behaviours, and an independent sample t-test was conducted to compare the number of physical, verbal and total of interactions using and not using MOSOCO, of both students with autism and NT students.
The data presented a normal distribution.
During the three weeks of intervention, all of the students mastered the features of MOSOCO and the smartphone itself.
This allowed them to explore uses for both the smartphone and MOSOCO, sometimes circumventing the prescribed lessons.
For example, at the end of the third week, students started to skip practicing of some of the more basic skills in MOSOCO, shortening interactions to earn more stars while competing with other students.
Oh, and then you get a point or something like that?
Make it more game like."
Even though all of the phone's buttons were deactivated, Student 5  closed MOSOCO's application and launched other applications.
He then taught this skill to other students who began occasionally to listen to music, select different ringtones, take pictures, and play games with the GPS.
So I hit it so I could test it.
Its cool; it also tells you your speed."
Overall, students positively received MOSOCO, finding it useful, fun, and helpful.
Students showed excitement while using the system, and learned how to use it with minimal training in less than an hour.
At the beginning of each session, they typically ran to the area where the phones were stored to start using them.
I was very comfortable... Im always waiting for this part of the school day."
When discussing what they learned specifically, students referenced the six fundamental social skills .
Yeah I think it would be helpful for kids that are still learning ."
During the deployment phase, the smartphone and MOSOCO evolved from a novel artifact and a toyish application to a true assistive support and means for social skills learning and practicing outside the classroom.
Overall, the use of MOSOCO positively impacted student interactions with each other.
Students learned the basic steps of a proper interaction, how to avoid and identify missteps, and how to help others interact.
While students with autism continued describing wanting to practice newly learned social skills, NT students adopted mentoring behavior.
They described feeling responsible for assisting the practicing of social skills with the students with autism and helping them to improve their interactions.
I practice with  eye contact and all those things."
When children with autism would get stuck in a step, NT students would help them to stay on task.
This mimics the physical prompting given by teachers during classroom lessons.
Both NT students and those with autism repeatedly expressed that MOSOCO helped them to improve the quality of their interactions.
This reduction can be attributed to greater student awareness and improved ability to identify social missteps using the prompts provided by MOSOCO.
Additionally, the system augmented understanding of the usage of specific social skills given particular situations.
In addition to reducing missteps for students with autism, MOSOCO supported NT students in learning how to be more understanding and permissive if such missteps were presented.
NT students developed new strategies for handling the social missteps instead of mocking or teasing the students with autism as they had done before.
Of course, for young children, encountering this kind of difference can still be challenging, as exemplified by the student below who describes being understanding most of the time but resorting to antisocial behaviors at other times to handle social missteps.
This large difference warrants further investigation with a larger sample.
These behaviors may have been limited by the interest in and engagement with the smartphone and MOSOCO.
Percentage of students' number of interactions: Children with autism  and NT children  Students with autism struggle to make eye contact when interacting with others , a problem one might imagine could be exacerbated by concentration on a mobile device.
However, all students agreed that with MOSOCO they never had problems making eye contact during an interaction.
Yes you have to communicate with somebodys eyes I guess."
Before the use of MOSOCO, students said that is very common to end up being alone because their partner walked away without saying anything.
Now you know how to end the conversation..."  Students made references to their interactions before using MOSOCO, highlighting that this application serve as a milestone for improving their social behavior.
We had less way less blanks ."
Beyond just understanding the anatomy of a proper interaction, students learned about the implications of not maintaining socially acceptable distances.
Students also learned that one of the main goals of social interactions is to know the personality of your interaction partners .
They began to recognize the need for multiple conversation topics and to develop new relationships through these conversations.
The reminders then solidified these directions during interactions.
In this work, we were interested in two types of interactions.
First, given that MOSOCO is largely about helping students with autism communicate with peers, we were interested in investigating how their one-on-one interactions can be assisted or improved by mobile assistive technologies.
Second, we were interested in how communication patterns amongst students influence social groups through interactions mediated by MOSOCO.
Student-Student Overall, the number of interactions between students increased 56.73% when using MOSOCO  .
Surprisingly, we observed less time spent not interacting with others for students with autism during use of MOSOCO , NT students spent more time alone  .
We hypothesize that this result could be related to the interest of NT students in interacting with the smartphone, like other youth their age .
The large differences in these initial comparisons warrant further detailed exploration.
Although in our observations, NT students interacted physically with other students less while using MOSOCO , students with autism interacted physically more with MOSOCO .
Likewise, students using MOSOCO displayed substantially, but not significantly, more verbal interactions than without .
These preliminary results warrant further detailed exploration with a larger sample to understand the potential trends we see in these non-significant comparisons.
However, these initial results imply that MOSOCO may be better at supporting conversations than physical games, which is in keeping with the goals of social skills training in schools.
Students' highlighted that after the use of MOSOCO they got to know their partners better, knowing their interests and dislikes.
Additionally, we observed conversations that were qualitatively more intimate during the deployment than in the pre-deployment condition, an effect that could be in part due to the greater familiarity the students had with one another having been in class together for weeks.
With MOSOCO we observed that students with autism learn new and traditional strategies for starting an interaction, even though it has been reported that children with autism find it difficult to properly start a conversation , read others body language  or join a group of children playing .
Students expressed that MOSOCO helped them to understand body language and recognize invitations for starting an interaction.
This result warrants further investigation with a larger sample size as well as a more detailed observation of the types of engagement and the potential ramifications of use of MOSOCO on those activities.
Group Interactions Social skills used during one-on-one interactions also bled over into groups.
In particular, students exhibited new strategies for joining a group of children already playing.
Before the deployment of MOSOCO, the strategies were fairly ad hoc and tended to encourage socialization with known classmates: "I just look around for one of my friends."
This motivation enabled students to flow more easily between groups or to enter large groups without explicitly requesting to do so.
What could be happening here is that MOSOCO is providing students a ticket to talk.
MOSOCO provides the ticket for them so that it is easier to start conversations and talk with each other.
This kind of social integration was not seen during our baseline data collection nor reported by any staff members prior to that.
Moreover, this change did not go unnoticed by the students with autism who told us during interviews that now they can join groups more easily.
Students universally reported that before using MOSOCO they had clearly defined social groups of friends with a sort of social protocol dictated by the social group's leader for admitting new members.
These social protocols, typical of school circles, tend to demand from an individual an attempt to be integrated into the group.
However, after using MOSOCO, we observed that students with autism learned new strategies for creating and entering a predefined social group.
Additionally, making group integration a more straightforward process allowed students with autism to enjoy topics of conversation and the company of classmates rather than just the execution of an activity .
Appropriately designed assistive technologies can play a crucial role in improving social learning and social skill practice in real-life social situations for students with autism and their NT peers.
The exploration of 12 students' use and experience with MOSOCO throughout its deployment provides a set of emergent practices of the use of assistive technologies in real situations complementing classroom activities.
Our results demonstrate that MOSOCO is easy to use and helps students practice their social skills.
In our evaluation, use of this tool reduced students with autism social missteps 56% and behavioral issues 98%, increases the number of interactions and their quality 52% of both students with autism and NT students.
We found out that instead of the smartphones pulling children out of interactions, students were motivated towards social interactions and used the system without additional prompting by teachers.
This behavior occurred because both students with autism and NT students were interested in sharing what they discovered, practicing the newly learned social skills and earning the rewards designed into MOSOCO.
By freeing students from teachers' prompts, MOSOCO also allowed students to discover other functionalities of the smartphone that played a positive role in improving student's interactions.
A deeper and bigger study is needed to explore this sort of assisted independence and its relevance to longterm MOSOCO use.
Additionally, our results indicate that using mobile assistive technologies in real-life social situations have an impact on children's social groups.
But open questions remain as to how social group dynamics are currently changing due the use of an assistive technology that mediates topics of conversation, with which potential users more likely choose to interact, and the creation and transformation of their existing social groups--an analysis in this direction is currently in progress.
Future work should also focus on use of tools such as these outside of schools with interaction partners who have limited knowledge of the tools and lessons.
Additionally, the experience of teachers, other school staff, and parents in setting up and using such tools for students should be explored with new tools built to support these activities if necessary.
The deployment and evaluation of MOSOCO exposed tensions around its use outside classrooms and contributes important implications for the design of assistive technologies in the future, especially those destined for use in real-life situations and in mobile contexts.
Our results indicate that students were highly interested in earning stars so assistive technologies should incorporate the potential for game-like interactions to earn points and rewards.
Also, we noted that social cues play an important role for helping students stay on topic when interacting with peers.
However, social cues were sometimes triggered at inappropriate times, as the application was highly unaware of the topic of conversation.
Context-aware tools with voice recognition capabilities will enable the application to recognize the conversation context and react accordingly.
There are some limitations to this work.
First, the design of MOSOCO is based on the application of one particular classroom-based social skills training.
Use of this tool in schools in which the Social Compass curriculum is not currently the norm would broaden our understanding of its general applicability.
Likewise, open questions remain in exploring other assistive technologies based on a different social skills training techniques in this context.
Finally, as in any deployment study, perfectly controlled conditions are not possible, and some effects may be related to the sustained engagement of the students in the Social Compass curriculum over the course of the study rather than to tool use alone.
Also our study is limited by the small number of participants.
With the current sample, it's not possible to derive findings that can extend across larger populations.
We want to clarify that our effort centered on acquiring a vast and detailed understanding of the practices of a few individuals across the multitude of experiences of a shared playground.
Therefore, the significance of our results lies on the qualitative nature of the inquiry and analysis.
We leave open for future work the study of the impact of MOSOCO with a bigger sample or in another context.
Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders 
Berg, S., Taylor, A. and Harper, R. Mobile phones for the next generation: Device designs for teenagers.
Promoting generalization of mands for information used by young children with autism.
Blake, R., Turner, L., Smoski, M., Pozdol, S. and Stone, W. Visual recognition of biological motion is impaired in children with autism.
Boyd, L., Mcreynolds, C. and Chanin, K. The social compass curriculum: a story-based intervention package for social skills.
Carmien, S., Dawe, M., Fischer, G., Gorman, A., Kintsch, A. and Sullivan, J. F. Socio-Technical Environments Supporting People with Cognitive Disabilities Using Public transportation.
Fails, J., Druin, A. and Guha, M. Mobile collaboration: collaboratively reading and creating children's stories on mobile devices.
Social interaction skills for children with autism: a scriptading procedure for beginning readers.
Kuniavsky, M. Observing the user experience: a practitioner's guide to user research.
Libby, S., Powell, S., Messer, D. and Jordan, R. Spontaneous play in children with autism: a reappraisal.
Mcarthur, D. and Adamson, L.B.
Joint attention in preverbal children: autism and developmental language disorder.
Monibi, M. and Hayes, G. R. Mocotos: Mobile communications tools for children with special needs.
Designing collaborative, constructionist and contextual applications for handheld devices.
Piper, A.M., O'Brien, E., Morris, M. and Winograd, T. Sides: a cooperative tabletop computer game for social skills development.
Smith, T. Discrete trial training in the treatment of autism.
Strauss, A. and Corbin, J.
Basics of qualitative research: techniques and procedures for developing grounded theory.
Using social stories to teach social and behavioral skills to children with autism.
Designing for interaction immediacy to enhance social skills of children with autism.
Soute,I., Kessels, A. and Markopoulos, P. On the design of camelot, an outdoor game for children.
Teaching social skills to people with autism.
Fell, H., Cress, C., MacAuslan, J., and Ferrier, L. visiBabble for reinforcement of early vocalization.
Gal, E., Bauminger, W., Pianesi, F., Stock, O., Zancanaro, M., and Weiss, P. Enhancing social communication of children with high-functioning autism through a colocated interface.
Gonzalez-Lopez, A. and Kamps, D. M. Social skills training to increase social interactions between children with autism and their typical peers.
Gray, C., Social stories and comic strip conversation with childs with asperger syndrome and high functioning autism.
In Asperger syndrome or highg-functioning autism.
Hailpern, J., Karahalios, K., Dethorne, L., and Halle, J. Vocsyl: Visualizing syllable production for children with ASD and speech delays.
Hayes, G.R., Hirano, S., Marcu, G., Monibim M., Nguyen, D.H., and Yeganyan, M. Interactive visual supports for children with autism.
Hendrix , K., L., van Herk, R., Verhaegh, J., and Markopoulos, P. Increasing children's social competence through games, an exploratory study.
Hirano, S.H., Yeganyan, M. T., Marcu, G., Nguyen, D. H., Boyd, L., and Hayes, G. R. Vsked: evaluation of a system to support classroom activities for children with autism.
Visual strategies for improving visual communication.
Practical support for school and home.
Improving the quality of communication and social interactions for children with autism spectrum disorders through multi-touch tablet applications.
In clinical aac research conference 2010.
