We present experimental work that explores the factors governing symmetric bimanual interaction in a two-handed task that requires the user to track a pair of targets, one target with each hand.
A symmetric bimanual task is a twohanded task in which each hand is assigned an identical role.
In this context, we explore three main experimental factors.
We vary the distance between the pair of targets to track: as the targets become further apart, visual diversion increases, forcing the user to divide attention between the two targets.
We also vary the demands of the task by using both a slow and a fast tracking speed.
Finally, we explore visual integration of sub-tasks: in one condition, the two targets to track are connected by a line segment which visually links the targets, while in the other condition there is no connecting line.
Our results indicate that all three experimental factors affect the degree of parallelism, which we quantify using a new metric of bimanual parallelism.
However, differences in tracking error between the two hands are affected only by the visual integration factor.
2D or 3D navigation  can be performed effectively with a symmetric assignment of roles to the hands.
Unlike asymmetric two-handed interaction, which is well explained by the KC model, factors governing this second class of symmetric bimanual tasks have not been articulated as well in the research literature.
Without better empirical data, there is little scientific knowledge to guide the design of interfaces that incorporate symmetric interaction techniques.
In this paper, we investigate how factors such as attention, task difficulty, and visual integration affect performance in a symmetric bimanual task.
Of particular interest is whether symmetric bimanual tasks are fundamentally different from asymmetric bimanual tasks.
At this point, it is important to note the difference between task assignment and task performance.
Even if the task assigned to each hand is identical , it is plausible that the combined task will not be performed in a symmetric and/or parallel manner.
Under some conditions, it may be natural to perform a symmetric bimanual task in a sequential manner, moving one hand followed by the other, rather than moving both at the same time.
The task could also be performed asymmetrically in the sense that one hand's performance could result in greater errors or poorer temporal performance than the other.
Note that we distinguish between symmetric and parallel performance.
It is possible for bimanual performance to be sequential in nature, but nonetheless symmetric in the terms of error rate and/or time taken to perform each hand's subtask.
Conversely, performance could be parallel  and yet asymmetric in terms of error and time measures.
This raises the question of whether humans always perform symmetric tasks in a symmetric, parallel manner regardless of task difficulty, attentional demands, or visual integration of the sub-tasks assigned to each hand.
Do users switch to a more sequential and/or asymmetric interaction style as these factors change?
Our results suggest that even when users are given a task with identical, symmetric role assignments for each hand, they do not always perform the task in a parallel, symmetric manner.
Several promising two-handed interaction techniques have been described in the interface design literature .
A solid theoretical basis for the design of such systems exists in the form of Guiard's Kinematic Chain theory  and experimental studies in the humancomputer interaction literature  that have explored Guiard's theory as well as additional factors influencing cooperation of the hands when each hand is assigned a different, asymmetric role.
Also, divided attention, task difficulty, and the lack of visual integration can all affect the degree of parallelism exhibited when performing the symmetric bimanual task.
These results suggest that under some conditions, existing models of bimanual interaction  may apply to tasks with a symmetric assignment of roles to the hands.
Kelso, Southard, and Goodman  explore a two handed tapping task with targets of disparate difficulty for each hand .
They find that while the hands move at different speeds to different points in space, times to peak velocity and acceleration are highly synchronized.
Thus, in a sense, performance is symmetric and parallel even though the task assignment is not completely symmetric.
Marteniuk, MacKenzie, and Baba  describe a similar experiment to Kelso et.
From both their own data and a reanalysis of Kelso et.
In a more recent study, Jackson, Jackson, and Kritikos  find that in more complicated "reach and grasp" bimanual task, kinematic measures of performance are unaffected when each hand performs movements of identical or different levels of difficulty.
They find that movements of both hands are scaled to a common time duration, whereas movement velocity and grip aperture are scaled independently.
Hence, their data seems to support the findings of Kelso et.
In a symmetric circle drawing task, Swinnen, Jardin, and Meulenbroek  report a distinct asymmetry in performance.
Interestingly, they find that the dominant hand leads the non-dominant hand during the task.
This is in contrast with Guiard's KC model, which postulates that the non-dominant hand precedes the dominant hand in the performance of asymmetric tasks.
They also report that attentional cueing affects the size of the asymmetry: the amount of asymmetry  increases when subjects are told to monitor the dominant hand, and decreases when subjects are told to monitor the non-dominant hand.
Preilowski  explored a two-handed steering task using hand cranks, each of which controls one degree-offreedom of a cursor.
After practice, normal subjects can steer the cursor  without visual feedback, whereas patients with damage to the anterior commissure cannot.
His focus however, was not on the symmetry/asymmetry and parallel/sequential issues per se.
In short, there appear to be many unresolved issues regarding symmetric bimanual tasks and exactly how these differ from, or when they may be preferable to, asymmetric assignments of roles to the hands.
Prior studies have not quantified potential factors that may drive symmetric bimanual performance.
The psychology and motor control literature are also inconclusive as to how bimanual tasks that assign essentially symmetric roles to each hand are performed.
There are several examples of symmetric two-handed interaction techniques in the literature.
These include twohanded map manipulation , a two-handed "bulldozer" metaphor for 3D navigation , and symmetric rectangle and line editing .
They showed that two different bimanual rectangle editing techniques resulted in superior performance to a unimanual technique.
However, they found no difference between the bimanual technique that consistently assigned identical tasks to each hand  and another technique that fluidly switched between asymmetric and symmetric task assignment.
Casalta and Guiard  found that in a rectangle editing task, symmetric task assignment resulted in better performance, as well as increased bimanual parallelism, than an asymmetric task assignment.
This result suggests that for some tasks, a symmetric assignment of roles to the hands can result in better performance than an asymmetric role assignment.
Their mapping of the degrees-of-freedom results in a technique that supports both symmetric and asymmetric use of the hands.
For example, the user may zoom on a particular location by "pinning down" that location with one hand and "stretching" the map with the other hand; or conversely, the user may perform a more coarse zooming operation by moving both hands in opposite directions.
Balakrishnan and Kurtenbach  explore bimanual camera control and object manipulation.
They report that in a 3D object docking task, subjects invariably adopt a symmetric style of interaction even though they could have adopted a asymmetric style of interaction to reduce the number of degrees-of-freedom that need to be controlled at once.
We chose a bimanual target tracking task for two main reasons.
First, the standard target docking or selection task that is widely used in motor behavior studies is unsuitable for our purposes because the only way to vary the difficulty of the task is to change the size of the target and its distance from the starting point.
A large part of the task is therefore simply getting to the vicinity of the target; only at the last phase of the task does the size of the target affect performance.
Hence, task difficulty does not apply uniformly throughout the task.
In contrast, the task difficulty in a tracking task can be made to apply uniformly throughout the task , providing us with a rich set of data.
Second, to the best of our knowledge, apart from Preilowski , bimanual target tracking has not been studied in the literature.
Thus, the present study contributes to the literature in the task aspect as well.
Note that this tracking task is not intended to necessarily be representative of any particular symmetric bimanual user interface.
Rather, we use this task as an experimental instrument to explore factors that can influence bimanual performance.
Participants tracked targets with both hands.
There were two main conditions that varied the level of integration of the visual stimuli:
Participants were told to track the left square with the left cursor, and the right square with the right cursor.
The two targets moved around the screen in a pseudorandom fashion, with the constraint that the movements of both targets were symmetric in the sense that they each moved the same amount in a given direction at a given time.
The distance between the targets, and amount of movement at each time step , were kept constant for a given trial .
The background color of the screen was black throughout the experiment.
Integrated target - A single red rectangular  target appeared centered on the screen .
Instead of two cursors, a straight white line was drawn between the positions of the left hand and right hand cursors .
Participants were told to match the position, orientation, and length of the white line with that of the red rectangle.
The rectangle moved around the screen in the same pseudorandom manner as the targets in the Separated condition.
Essentially, the end points of the red rectangle were the same as the center points of the two targets in the Separated condition; henceforth we will refer to these as the "target points".
From the motor domain perspective, both Separated and Integrated conditions are identical in that the same motor actions are required to track the target.
In the visual domain, however, they differ in that the Separated condition could be perceived as being two separate tasks whereas the Integrated condition could be perceived as being a single, integrated task .
The attentional demands of the task were manipulated by varying the distance between the target points.
In the 100 pixel or Singular Attention condition, both target points  were visible in the participant's focal visual field.
Thus, the participant only had to attend to a single area of on the screen at any one time.
In the 840 pixel or Divided Attention condition, it was impossible to attend to both target points at the same time.
This resulted in the participant having to divide attention between two areas of the screen.
The difficulty of the task was manipulated by varying the speed at which the target moved.
Two speeds were used: Slow , and Fast .
The Left and Right hand cursors are used to track the Left and Right hand targets, respectively.
The distance between the centers of the targets are kept constant for a trial at either 100 or 840 pixels.
The Left and Right cursors control the position, orientation, and length of the line.
The cursors themselves are not shown.
The user tracks the red rectangle with the line.
The length of the red rectangle is kept constant for a trial at either 100 or 840 pixels.
None of the text in this diagram is displayed during the experiment.
The Slow speed conditions will result in more accurate tracking than the Fast speed.
While accuracy is an important measure of performance in tracking tasks, the primary goal of this study is not to evaluate tracking performance per se.
Rather, we are interested in how the experimental manipulations of visual integration, attentional demands, and task difficulty affect the level of parallelism and symmetry exhibited by the user when performing a symmetric bimanual task where each hand is assigned identical functional roles.
Two-handed performance can be considered to occur symmetrically, or in parallel, or possibly both .
In the present discussion, we say that the two hands exhibit symmetric performance if the average root mean square  tracking error exhibited by the hands over the course of a trial have equal values - that is, if the difference in tracking error between the left hand and the right hand is statistically indistinguishable.
Note, however, that this measure of symmetry ignores bimanual performance in the time dimension: the user might exhibit performance which, for example, adjusts only the right hand, and then only the left hand.
By contrast, our measure of parallel bimanual performance does consider time, by quantifying the simultaneous magnitude and direction of movement of each hand, using a new metric that is discussed later in this paper.
By distinguishing symmetrical performance from parallel performance, our analyses take into account two different interpretations of bimanual performance, allowing us to produce a more complete characterization of our experimental results.
Accordingly, we further hypothesize that: H4.
The Integrated visual stimuli conditions will be performed more symmetrically than the Separated conditions.
The Singular Attention conditions will be performed more symmetrically than the Divided Attention conditions.
The Slow speed conditions will be performed more symmetrically than the Fast speed conditions.
The Integrated visual stimuli conditions will be performed with greater parallelism than the Separated conditions.
The Singular Attention conditions will be performed with greater parallelism than the Divided Attention conditions.
The Slow speed conditions will be performed with greater parallelism than the Fast speed conditions.
A within-subjects repeated measures design was used.
All participants performed the experiment for both the Separated and Integrated conditions.
For each condition, participants performed 7 blocks of trials.
The first block of trials was considered to be practice trials and was excluded from the data analysis.
Therefore, a total of 6 blocks of trials were used in the analysis.
Each block consisted of 1 trial for each of the four combinations of attention and speed conditions.
The presentation of these four trials within each block was randomized.
Each trial lasted for 45 seconds.
Participants were allowed breaks between trials.
The experiment consisted of 384 total non-practice trials, as follows: 8 participants x 2 visual integration conditions  x 6 blocks of trials for each integration condition x 2 attention conditions  per block x 2 speed conditions  per block = 384 total trials of 45 seconds each.
For each participant, the experiment was conducted in one sitting and lasted about one hour.
No button presses were required.
The target then begin to move in a pseudorandom fashion for 45 seconds at the speed fixed for that trial.
At the end of 45 seconds, the screen went blank for 2 seconds, and the next trial's stimuli were presented.
The movement trajectories were precomputed and the same set of four trajectories  was used for all the blocks in both the Separated and Integrated conditions.
The use of a fixed set of trajectories allowed for a fair comparison between the conditions.
The average RMS error for each hand per trial was computed, resulting in two RMS error metrics: RMSrh for the right hand average RMS error, and RMSlh for the left hand average RMS error.
In addition a compound metric, RMStot = RMSlh + RMSrh, was computed to represent the total RMS error per trial.
The overall mean RMStot for our experimental conditions is shown in Figure 2.
Repeated measures analysis of variance with RMStot as the dependent variable was conducted on the data.
Overall, there was no significant difference between the two visual integration  techniques .
Thus, using RMStot as the performance measure, hypothesis H1 is not confirmed.
A significant effect was found for the speed  factors , with Slow speed resulting in superior performance, thus confirming hypothesis H3.
The only other significant effect was an Attention x Speed interaction , indicating that when tracking at the faster speed, divided attention has a greater effect.
RMSlh as the dependent variable showed a significant difference between the two visual integration conditions .
As the slopes in Figure 4 show, the RMSlh measure was significantly higher than the RMSrh measure for the Separated conditions, but did not differ significantly for the Integrated conditions.
This result indicates that poor visual integration causes performance to become asymmetric, confirming hypothesis H4.
Thus, hypotheses H5 and H6 were not confirmed.
In order to analyze the level of parallelism exhibited by the two hands, we need an appropriate measure of parallelism.
One such measure is the "Integrality" metric introduced by Jacob et.
They proposed a means of quantifying parallelism  in the time domain, based on whether movements in the dimensions of interest occurred simultaneously at each time step.
This measure, however, classifies a set of movements as parallel as long as they moved by any amount during a time period.
The relative magnitude and direction of movement in each dimension of interest is not taken into account.
Masliah  has proposed the m-metric to quantify coordination in multi-degree-of-freedom docking tasks.
The m-metric takes into account the magnitude and direction of movement of each dimension of interest when computing simultaneity.
The metric as originally proposed is only applicable to docking tasks.
Here, we adapt it to measure parallelism in a tracking task.
This results in a number between 0 and 1, where 1 means the cursor is perfectly tracking the target and 0 means the cursor is not following the target at all.
The average of all Parallelism measures over the duration of a trial thus results in a bounded measure between 0 and 1.
Values closer to 1 indicate that both hands are simultaneously reducing their errors by the same amount , whereas values closer to 0 indicate that the hands are working in a sequential manner.
This metric not only considers if motion of the two hands is simultaneous, but also takes into account the magnitude and direction of any simultaneous motion.
Thus, movements that occur at the same time but which do not contribute towards the accurate completion of the task are given much less weight in the metric.
We feel that this results in a more meaningful measure of bimanual parallelism.
We analyzed our experimental data using this new parallelism metric.
Figure 5 shows the mean parallelism values for each condition.
Overall, parallelism was not very high, at 0.31 units.
There was a significant effect for the two visual integration conditions , with the Integrated conditions exhibiting 12% more parallelism than the Separated conditions, thus confirming hypothesis H7.
Hypothesis H8 was also confirmed by a strong significant effect for the two attentional factors , with Singular Attention conditions showing more parallelism than the Divided Attention conditions.
Hypothesis H9 was confirmed by a significant effect for the two speed factors , with Slow conditions showing more parallelism than the Fast conditions.
In a navigation task such as steering through a 3D environment , visual flow occurs across the entire display window in response to two-handed movements, so the focal visual field can provide sufficient feedback.
A problem might arise in a bimanual interface using two cursors that may become widely separated, unless some secondary feedback in the focal visual field can be provided.
For example, the map navigation example of  employs separate cursors for each hand, but the continuous visual flow of real-time feedback from the map moving, expanding, or shrinking provides sufficient feedback.
If only two separate cursors were provided, our results suggest that the user's ability to control symmetric bimanual actions could be compromised.
From a theoretical perspective, given that our results show a slight general asymmetry in the performance of symmetric bimanual tasks, it is possible that existing theoretical models of asymmetric bimanual interaction  could apply to symmetric bimanual tasks as well.
However, since we also found that the level of symmetry does not easily degrade when task difficulty is increased or attention is divided, it is likely that performance in symmetric tasks also differ fundamentally in some aspects from asymmetric tasks.
For example, our data clearly indicates that for symmetric tasks there is no tendency for the human motor system to devote more resources to the dominant hand when attention is divided.
By contrast, previous work by Peters  shows that when independent, asymmetric tasks are assigned to each hand, there is a tendency to devote more resources to the dominant hand.
To the best of our understanding, the effect of task difficulty and visual integration on the performance of asymmetric bimanual tasks has not been explored.
As such, we cannot draw any conclusions as to whether symmetric and asymmetric tasks differ along these factors.
Clearly, more research is needed to quantify these differences and thus build better models that account for both symmetric and asymmetric bimanual tasks.
The work presented in this paper is a step towards a more comprehensive understanding of symmetric  two-handed interaction, including a better understanding of under what conditions symmetric, parallel action of the hands is possible.
We have presented experimental work that explores issues surrounding symmetric bimanual action.
We also introduced a new metric, adapted from the coordination metric of Masliah , which quantifies the extent to which movements of the hands occur in parallel.
The analysis of our data using this parallelism metric showed that increasing task difficulty, divided attention, and lack of visual integration can all cause the user to adopt a more sequential style of interaction.
Overall, our data showed a slight asymmetry  with respect to RMS tracking error, with the left hand having 8% higher error than the right hand.
We also found that a lack of visual integration results in significant asymmetry between the hands.
Attentional demands and task difficulty, however, did not affect the level of symmetry in performance .
Taking the symmetry and parallelism analyses as a whole, we see that decreased parallelism does not  cause performance as measured by RMS tracking error to become more asymmetric.
In other words, parallelism is not a requirement for performance to be symmetric.
From a practical viewpoint, although we used a bimanual tracking task as an experimental instrument to explore issues that can affect bimanual performance, and not necessarily to be representative of any particular symmetric bimanual user interface, the results can nonetheless yield design insights for symmetric bimanual interfaces.
For example, our finding that lack of visual integration does not lend itself to symmetric interaction suggests that for a symmetric task like two-handed rectangle editing  it would be not be good design to merely display the corners of the rectangle .
Also, our finding that dividing attention results in highly sequential performance suggests that symmetric tasks where the two hands are not operating nearby in the focal visual field should be avoided.
We thank Bill Buxton, George Fitzmaurice, Gordon Kurtenbach, Russell Owen, and Jade Rubick for advice and assistance in various forms throughout the course of this work.
We also thank all those who participated in our experiment, and Alias|wavefront and Microsoft for supporting this collaborative research study.
The design of a GUI paradigm based on tablets, two-hands, and transparency.
Manual and cognitive benefits of two-handed input.
ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, 5, pp.
Bimanual movement control: Information processsing and interaction effects.
Quarterly J. of Experimental Psychology, 36A, pp.
Measuring the allocation of control across degrees-offreedom.
Attentional asymmetries during concurrent bimanual performance.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 33A, pp.
Constraints in the performance of bimanual tasks and their expression in unskilled and skilled subjects.
Quarterly J. of Experimental Psychology, 37A, pp.
Possible contribution of the anterior forebrain commissures to bilateral motor coordination.
Intermanual transfer, interhemispheric interaction, and handedness in man and monkeys, in Brain Circuits & Functions of the Mind: Essays in Honor of Roger W. Sperry.
Between limb asynchronies during bimanual coordination: effects of manual dominance and attentional cueing.
Timing and coordination of repetitive bimanual movements.
Quarterly J. of Experimental Psychology, 34A, pp.
Serial organization of motor skills in left- and righthanded adults.
Two pointer input for 3D interaction.
ACM Symposium on Interactive 3D Graphics, pp.
In search of the "magic carpet": Design and experimentation of a bimanual 3D navigation interface.
Journal of Visual Languages and Computing, February.
