This paper presents the design, implementation, and evaluation of an interactive tabletop system that supports co-located meeting capture and asynchronous search and review of past meetings.
The goal of the project is to evaluate the design of a conference table that augments the everyday work patterns of small collaborative groups by incorporating an integrated annotation system.
We present a holistic design that values hardware ergonomics, supports heterogeneous input modalities, generates a memory of all user interactions, and provides access to historical data on and off the table.
We present a user evaluation that assesses the usefulness of the input modalities and software features, and validates the effectiveness of the MemTable system as a tool for assisting memory recall.
Evaluative studies show that episodic recall decreases dramatically over time in small groups .
Cognitive scientists postulate that memories are triggered by means of retrieval cues and that the most effective cues are those stored in context with the experience being remembered .
The primary function of the MemTable is to encapsulate the content of small group discussions while they are happening, and organize this content for searching and browsing at subsequent times.
The system supports colocated meeting capture with digital and physical tools: keyboards, image capture, paper-based note taking, audio recording, drawing on screen, and laptop screen sharing.
It utilizes the potential of a large multi-touch surface to allow workgroups of 4 to 6 people to simultaneously capture, discuss, and recall information relevant to their discussions.
An extensive number of tabletop systems have been developed in research labs  that demonstrate the utility of bridging physical and digital boundaries for co-located collaborative work.
MemTable began with a simple proposition: What if the environment we work in was capable of having a memory?
Vannevar Bush's design for the Memex or "memory extender"  in 1945 presented the notion of personal histories shared with others through a memory desk.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Our research suggests that an integrated meeting capture environment is a meaningful context for utilizing technologies that support simultaneous physical inputs.
In order to support historical capture and review MemTable contributes several novel elements: adaptable menus that link content to each individual, an extensive tagging system, on and off the table review applications, and unique archiving strategies for each input modality.
Overall we emphasize an integrated design approach to support extended use.
We consider critical ergonomic elements of the hardware, user interface design for seamless archiving, and integrating the history with existing collaborative tools.
We describe the hardware and software design and present an analysis of twenty-four user evaluations and conclude with observations for researchers developing collaborative applications with recall functionality.
MemTable has enrolled users and builds a historical visualization specific to that group, incorporating the system into their digital work processes.
The PHD is a tabletop system that allows users to explore tagged digital archives of media in order to provide material for storytelling.
MemTable incorporates a similar notion of "who, what, when" approach to the retrieval of information, while also supporting the creation of the material in the archive.
Systems that support creative design that informed the MemTable are Shared Design Space  and Pictionarre .
We corresponded with the designers of these projects in order to build on their research.
Shared Design Space emphasizes the importance of a large screen space, combining virtual and 2D drawings in the same space, and using the Anoto Pen as a precise input for drawing in tandem with a multi-touch screen.
Pictionare incorporates a high-resolution camera, multiple keyboards, and allows users to build digital collections of creative design inputs.
MemTable merges many of the modalities supported by both projects in a more ergonomic and integrated environment.
It adds audio logging capability, an interactive timeline which tracks "who, what, when", and the ability to review data off the table via a Google Wave application.
During the last forty years a variety of technologies have been developed to support the collaborative generation and archiving of digital information.
MemTable builds on the history of tabletop design, meeting support systems, and memory augmentation and visualization software.
We based our research on guidelines provided by these fields to develop a meeting support platform that is integrated with the work patterns of a small group.
Pierre Wellners DigitalDesk , integrated paper based information from the environment seamlessly with a computer by using a camera system to capture and recognize information.
Wellner presented a vision of an office where the surfaces adapt to existing paper based practices and augment their function.
Jun Rekimoto and Masanori Saitoh expanded the possibilities for interaction by introducing hyper-dragging in the Augmented Surfaces  project.
Bill Buxton's research on bi-manual input at Xerox and Alias/Wavefront with projects like the Active Desk , introduced a rear projected surface where users can draw and use their hands to manipulate data in more natural ways.
Systems that have incorporated smart surfaces into collaborative offices and design studios for brainstorming, meetings, and presentations during the last ten years include the iRoom , IteracTable , Designer's OutPost , DiamondTouch  and other interactive brainstorming environments .
Commercial systems include Microsoft Surface , The Philips Entertainable , and the SMART Table .
The two closest systems in motivation to the MemTable are the Philips LiMe Table  and the MERL PHD  .
The CaptureLab  system developed at the University of Toronto in 1988 had eight personal workstations, which could switch control of a larger vertical screen.
Researchers reported that the scribe rotated frequently, especially when users were given feedback about participation.
Mantai noted that it is necessary to build software to support human communication and group dynamics in meeting support systems.
The Session Capture and Replay System , and the Intelligent Collaborative Transparency System , focused primarily on developing workspace awareness by recording the histories of asynchronous activity in small workgroups.
The Dynamo  cooperative sharing system supported the public exchange, display, and archiving of files during ad hoc meetings.
Group awareness systems , and behavioral feedback systems  demonstrate effective methods of providing feedback to groups through visualizations of the historical data.
Endel Tulving, a scientist who devoted his career to the study of memory, introduced the distinction between "episodic memory"  and semantic memory .
His theory of "encoding specificity" postulates that memories are retrieved from long-term memory by means of retrieval cues.
Evaluative studies show that episodic recall decreases dramatically over time in small groups .
Memory Augmentation software such as the Remembrance Agent , iRemember , and capture software like Evernote  have contributed techniques to assist with the retrieval problem that is the motivating factor behind the MemTable software.
Temporal visualizations such as History Flow , and PostHistory  demonstrate effective visual means of understanding and interacting with digital histories.
The need for a more comfortable table to work at on a daily basis, a larger more collaborative space for groups of 4-8 people, and open hardware that can be modified mandated that we build our own physical platform.
Although we had access to platforms like Microsoft Surface, we found that the physical form factor did not accommodate multiple people and artifacts at the same time.
Based on prior research, system guidelines for tabletop displays , and our observations from previous groupware development, we set the following design goals for the MemTable project: 1.
Support heterogeneous types of input during group meetings for different contexts and user styles.
Protect the privacy of users by only recording explicit actions.
Design the interface to be efficient and consistent as possible, with a minimal number of steps to input and recall information from the system.
Support the coexistence of physical and digital content as much as possible.
Record the context of events: who, what, and when something is created and modified for subsequent recall.
Prioritize the ergonomic, spatial, and social aspects of the hardware design over technical features.
Integrate the content generated at the table with existing personalized software accessible offline.
We noted that:  people use the larger tables as the primary places for meetings and discussion,  physical artifacts are almost always included in meetings and are often a primary means of communicating  people typically utilize the edges of tables more than the center  the use of personal laptops is ubiquitous throughout the workplace  the role of the scribe is usually not assigned.
A key difference between the MemTable layout  and other surface computing systems is that all the components for sensing  are housed in the middle of the table and calibrated to not conflict with the legs of the users.
This was accomplished by installing a clear acrylic housing around the projection area, and adding a border around the surface to accommodate the projectors underneath.
The system runs on a quad core shuttle PC running Windows Vista located under the table.
All communication is formatted in XML socket format similar to the TUIO protocol, with separate ports and identifiers for each hardware input.
We developed a set of classes for each widget on the table with Flex 4 as and Adobe AIR desktop application in order to use vector graphics and animation for the interface.
A detailed description of the software implementation is available online .
We found that this arrangement was robust and has natural ventilation.
This eliminated the need for additional fans, and enhanced the auditory recording capabilities of the table.
The centered sensing and projection works well when combined with chairs, footrest, a workbench height, and an eight-inch border.
Our intention is to demonstrate initial guidelines for an appropriate table that meets industry ergonomic standards.
It is likely that in the next five years these displays will not require projectors or cameras because the sensing will be embedded in a large LCD.
On a scale from 1 to 7 from uncomfortable to comfortable users in our evaluation rated comfort at 6.1 with a STD of 1.2.
Each pad has three unique pages with color and brush selection at the bottom of the page.
As users take notes they are recorded in the history of the system.
The Anoto system refreshes at 70 hertz and records with an accuracy of 360 dpi.
This outperformed all other drawing technologies we tested.
The input modalities supported by our system are intended to accommodate heterogeneous styles of collaboration.
The system supports simultaneous drawing, audio annotation, text entry, image capture, and screen capture.
All inputs generate an input element with pinning , locking , and tagging  options.
Items can be scaled, rotated, and thrown across the table to other users with bi-manual gestures supported in standard surface computing applications.
One benefit of the overhead camera was that objects on the table were consistently in focus and users could choose to include the projected screen or have it fade during the image capture.
However, even at the highest resolution of the camera, written text sometimes remains blurry.
The pocket size camera allowed users to take pictures of each other and take close ups of objects for documentation and scanning purposes.
Basic cropping and annotation functions were provided in the image elements .
The most immediate benefit of saving a history is recalling information from a previous meeting during a subsequent meeting.
Research on memory recall  indicates that users rely on both temporal and semantic methods of association.
The MemTable supports semantic searching and temporal browsing with a timeline.
Changes in position, size and content of items are recorded in the database every 30 seconds.
Recall elements are oriented to the position of the reviewer.
Searching for items brings up a results panel on the right of the timeline.
Selecting the item will change the position of the cursor in the timeline.
During development of the MemTable it became evident that users in our lab wanted a record of the meeting they could review and edit from their personal computing devices.
We choose Google Wave  as our platform because of its development API, real-time collaborative editing support, and integration with Gmail.
Audio and drawing clips are played using a flash gadget.
Users can search the wave for tags, and add tags to previous meetings.
If an entry is modified in the Wave application it is updated on the MemTable server.
Detailed implementation details of the database design and tagging integration are available online .
Participants were interviewed during the initial meeting and at subsequent intervals of one week, one month and three months.
Eight of the participants completed an online survey to assess the usefulness of the Google Wave applications six months after their initial meeting at the table.
All groups were presented with a version of the following general scenario: Four people in a small design group are meeting over the course of the next 16 weeks to develop a plan to renovate a building in their community and turn it into a restaurant.
The group consists of an architect, a chef, a designer, and a food planner.
Each week they meet to make progress on their project and resolve issues such as floor plan layout, food choices, financial implications, and decor choices.
At the end of the 16 week period, they plan to review and evaluate the merits of contents of their discussion and collaboratively agree on an investment plan.
There was a high variance of experience with touch tables; users rated their experience from 1  to 7 .
The groups had a 4.2 mean with a 2.5 standard deviation.
Groups were divided into three categories to reduce any bias introduced by the technology or the facilitators.
Two groups used only paper-based tools to meet at the table, and the technology remained off during their study.
Two of the groups were trained to use the table for twenty minutes, and introduced to all available tools.
Each individual chose a role  and was given a dossier with pertinent information specific to their role.
We used a location in the community that would be familiar to all the participants to help catalyze the group discussion.
We also gave groups a hypothetical budget of 400K to allocate, blue prints of the building layout, sample menus, and laptops with a connection to the Internet for searching and screen sharing.
Individuals were given an Active Badge , a device worn around the neck with an accelerometer, radio, and microphone designed to assess group dynamics such as who is talking when, how loud, and to whom they are talking.
We observed that the groups liked the scenario and were animated during discussion.
Data from video transcriptions of the meetings, user surveys, and active badges verifies this observation.
We present the results of the study in order of the objectives.
54% used it to record thoughts as others were speaking.
50% used it to arrange content.
50% used it to alter content for others.
47% used it to refer to a previous point.
38% used it to compare alternatives in discussion.
5% used it because they lost interest in the discussion.
Users were also asked to rate the usefulness and the amount they actually used the inputs during the meeting.
Ratings are based on a scale of 1 to 7 from "not useful" to a 7 being "very useful".
Many users reported that the interface reminded them of an mobile phone on a larger scale.
Pinning was considered less useful to groups that generated less content than to groups with more content on screen.
Tagging was only used by 43% of the users and generally occurred only at the end of a session.
Locking and pinning were differentiated in the text elements where feedback was given about active status but were occasionally misused in drawing and photo elements where no feedback of the editing status was indicated.
The follow up studies consisted of asking participants to answer questions after meetings about key events.
An assistant who was not present during the sessions consulted the videos and database before choosing the questions.
The groups were asked seven questions about each session, the accuracy of their answers was rated by the assistant where 1 could not be remembered, 3 is remembered vaguely, 5 is remembered some details, and 7 is remembered accurately.
This is not a substantial enough difference to make claims about accuracy, however the general trend of the groups who recalled with more accuracy was to do so with significantly more descriptive details about the content of the meetings.
Groups using the table wrote an average of 27 words in their responses, and groups in the paper-based study wrote an average of 14.5 words.
In general, participants enjoyed using the table and 85% said they would return to use it for subsequent meetings.
Participants suggested the following: remove on screen keyboard and only support physical keyboards, share laptop screens on an additional vertical surface, include a timer to improve meeting efficiency, increase the screen resolution, and include a touch based internet browser on the table surface.
Over time the frequency of use of the Google Wave application decreased.
Only eight of the participants reporting using it for recall purposes after the second meeting.
These participants also used the table for other purposes after the user study.
Participants who used both systems reported reviewing more content with the Google Wave application than on the table and requested the ability to send items from it to the current session on the table.
Factors such as Google's decreased support for the Wave platform and its frequent emails to participants about Wave updates were sited as reasons some users chose not to use the platform.
Users rated the application as useful 5.8  but 67% indicated that the platform needed to be used universally by all participants to be beneficial.
Personal menus and capture elements were used frequently.
Advanced features such as tagging, cropping, locking, and pinning were used selectively but rated as useful.
Users indicated they had sufficient space to use the screen and collaborate with others.
Features that connect laptops to the tabletop were rated as the most useful.
Features that require more time to review were the least useful.
Modality choices were diversified among groups.
As hardware for sensing simultaneous inputs becomes more pervasive and displays approach higher resolutions we will see larger surfaces integrated into our environments that are capable of supporting collaborative work.
The significance of these applications will depend on the human factors supported by the platform and how content is saved and integrated for future use.
The MemTable provides an initial evaluation of a system that emphasizes the social, ergonomic, and historical aspects of a meeting support system.
We argue that for a platform to be adopted and broadly utilized it should incorporate appropriate ergonomic hardware, support heterogeneous physical and digital inputs, and integrate memory storage and recall.
Bush, V. As We may think.
Buxton, W., Fitzmaurice, G. Balakrishnan, R. & Kurtenbach, G. Large Displays in Automotive Design.
A Use of Drawing Surfaces in Different Collaborative Settings.
In Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Computer-Supported Cooperative Work CSCW  250- 256.
Deitz, P. and Leigh, D. DiamondTouch: A Multi-User Touch Technology.
In Proceedings of the ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology UIST , 219-226 7.
JM DiMicco, KJ Hollenbach, A Pandolfo, W Bender.
The arrangement of the personal menus on the MemTable resulted in an unexpected formality during the digital meetings.
Users stayed near their personal menus and listened more to other group members.
Note taking was visible to all users and this sometimes catalyzed the discussion.
The general trends that indicate the benefits of the MemTable to small groups were an increase in the amount of captured information, a greater distribution of the role of the scribe, and significantly more detail reported when recalling key events from meetings.
Our research is limited by the constraints of our scenario and the population enrolled in the MemTable.
Testing the system in the context of workgroups with mission critical planning and recall needs, or communities with transient populations but clear missions  would provide more concrete data about the factors required for long term integration and memory recall.
Brad Johanson , Armando Fox , Terry Winograd, The Interactive Workspaces Project: Experiences with Ubiquitous Computing Rooms, IEEE Pervasive Computing, v.1 n.2,  67-74 11.
Gross, T., Stary, C. and Totter, A. User-Centered Awareness in Computer-Supported Cooperative WorkSystems: Structured Embedding of Findings from Social Sciences.
Haller, Michael, Leithinger Daniel , Leitner Jakob , Seifried Thomas, Brandl Peter , Zauner Jurgen, Billinghurst Mark, The shared design space, ACM SIGGRAPH  Emerging technologies 14.
Hartmann, B., Morris, M.R., Benko, H., and Wilson, A. Pictionaire: Supporting Collaborative Design Work by Integrating Physical and Digital Artifacts.
Designing for collaborative creative problem solving.
In Proceedings of the 6th ACM SIGCHI conference on Creativity & cognition.
Hollemans, Gerard, Bergman, Tom, Buil, Vincent, Entertainable, Multi-user multi-object concurrent input, Philips Research Laboratory, UIST  55-56 17.
Hunter, Seth, Maes, Pattie: "MemTable: Contextual Memory in Group Workspaces",  MIT Thesis.
Izadi et al., Dynamo: a public interactive surface supporting the cooperative sharing and exchange of media.
The designers' outpost: a tangible interface for collaborative web site.
Kyffin, S., Living Memory Project Brochure, Philips Design.
Li, D. and Li, R. Transparent Sharing and Interoperation of Heterogeneous Single-User Applications.
Mantei, M. "Capturing the capture concepts: a case study in the design of computer-supported meeting environments".
Manohar, Nelson , Atul Prakash, The session capture and replay paradigm for asynchronous collaboration, Proceedings of the fourth CSCW,  149-164 24.
Jun Rekimoto , Masanori Saitoh, Augmented surfaces: a spatially continuous work space for hybrid computing environments, Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems: the CHI is the limit , p.378-385, 27.
Rhodes, Bradly The Remembrance Agent: http://www.remem.org/ 29.
Sharing and building digital group histories.
Towards the Next Generation of Human-Computer Interaction based on an Intergrated Design of Real and Virtual Worlds.
System Guidelines for Co-located, Collaborative Work on a Tabletop Display.
European Conference ComputerSupported Cooperative Work, .
New York: American Psychologica Association and Oxford University Press.
Tulving, E. Episodic memory: From mind to brain.
Vemuri, S., Schmandt, C., Bender, W. iRemember: A Personal Long-term Memory Prosthesis.
Wibowitz , Mathew Jonathan Gips , Ryan Aylward , Alex Pentland , Joseph A. Paradiso, A sensor network for social dynamics, Conference on Information processing in sensor networks,  38.
