In contrast to more formal knowledge structures, like taxonomies or ontologies, tagging does not rely on a predefined vocabulary.
As a consequence, tagging is very lightweight and is therefore very popular among users of such sites.
The resulting structures, however, commonly known as folksonomies, are highly chaotic and idiosyncratic .
Despite the chaos inherent in social tagging, empirical studies have shown that this functionality supports learning processes .
Beyond that it has been suggested that some form of consensus emerges among the users in such environments .
One important aspect of tagging environments is their collaborative character.
An important goal users have is to share the resources they collect for themselves, or discover resources they are interested in.
It has therefore been suggested that users imitate others' tag assignments and that thereby consensus emerges .
For example, when looking at the properties of the overall network structure made up of tags and resources, it can usually be observed to have small world properties, such as low average path length or high degree of clustering, as compared to random graphs, and scale free properties, meaning that the distribution of tags or the degree of tags follows a power law .
These characteristics can be found in many social, biological and engineered networks , and in human language , which suggests that consensus emerges.
Designing tagging systems in such a way that they support emergence of consensus, is of considerable practical relevance.
Finding and re-finding resources on the Web are one of the most important activities of Web users.
As an increasing amount of information can be found on the Web, effective indexing systems are crucial.
From our point of view, these systems will be effective to the degree that they facilitate sensemaking processes in which meaning emerges through collaborative categorization and emergent consensus .
The reason for why this consensus emerges is less clear.
Social Tagging is a recent widespread phenomenon on the Web where people assign labels  to Web resources.
It has been hypothesized to support collaborative sensemaking.
In this paper, we examine some of the cognitive mechanisms assumed to underlie sensemaking, namely social imitation.
In line with the semantic imitation model of Fu et al., we assume that implicit processing can be understood as a semantic reconstruction of gist.
Our model contrasts this process with a recall of tags from an explicit verbatim memory trace.
We tested this model in an experimental study in which after the search task students had to generate tags themselves.
We exposed their answers to a multinomial model derived from Fuzzy Trace Theory to obtain independent parameter estimates for the processes of explicit recall, semantic gist reconstruction and familiarity-based recall.
A model that assumes all processes are at play explains the data well.
Similar to results of our previous study, we find an influence of search intentions on the two processes.
Our results have implications for interface and interaction design of social tagging systems, as well as for tag recommendation in these environments.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Most formal models of tagging behavior also assume some form of imitation.
Especially, generative models assume imitation by such mechanisms as preferential attachment.
These models assume that tags in these environments draw people's attention and are therefore explicitly processed.
We have recently presented results from experiments employing search task in a tagging environment that suggest this is not always the case, but rather implicitautomatic processing plays a role when incidentally processing tags .
When later asked to recognize the tags they had encountered, users drew both on an explicit representation of the verbatim trace, as well as an implicit familiarity-based inference process.
This means that some of the tags were recognized by the users not because they had a vivid remembrance of the experienced tag and its study context but because of an undefined and somehow unconscious familiarity with the tag.
This called into question generative models that attribute imitation only to explicit tag processing, but suggests that implicit-automatic processing plays a role as well.
Implicit-automatic processes, like judgments made as a result of a general feeling of familiarity can certainly have many causes.
For example, Fu and colleagues  present a model of semantic imitation.
In this model, the authors suggest that implicit processing can be understood as a semantic reconstruction of gist.
Users don't necessarily remember explicit tags, but instead reconstruct their meaning and then choose appropriate terms.
The present paper therefore has two purposes.
The first one is to refine our understanding of implicit processing in tagging by extending our previous model.
In line with the semantic imitation model, we extend our multinomial model with a reconstruction of gist.
The model contrasts this process with a recall of tags from an explicit verbatim memory trace and a recall involving an implicit familiaritybased mechanism.
The second purpose is to extend the applicability of the model to a situation where users generate tags .
The multinomial model and the empirical results we present in this paper give a fresh look on prior research in HCI, and have practical significance for the design of tagging systems.
For example, using a generative model that analyzes tag assignments on a word-level,  conclude that users are more likely to copy personal tags rather than tags of the community, thereby challenging the significance of social imitation.
However, when considering semantic imitation , it is likely that imitation processes for community tags were underestimated by these authors.
Similar arguments have been made by Fu et al.
Similarly, our model reframes work on interaction techniques and memory in tagging.
By differentiating between explicit-verbatim and implicit-semantic imitation we will explain effects of click-to-tag vs. type-to-tag on tag production obtained by .
Our cognitive analysis of tagging behavior is also related to the work of  who found that distinct tagging patterns  lead to folksonomies with distinct qualities.
Finally, our model has practical significance for recommendation in tagging.
As  argue, community influence can be used to shape the emergence of the tag vocabulary through recommendation mechanisms.
Our model allows for differentiating between memory processes that mediate the community's influence, thereby giving a richer understanding of the effect of design choices.
Three recent generative models have been introduced which capture the dynamics of social tagging as a result of individual user activities.
This means that the probability of reintroducing a tag is dependent on the number of times a tag has been used in the past.
There is no notion of memory decay in the Halpin model.
Consequently, information value of a tag can vary between 1  and 0 .
For a new tag assignment, the YuleSimon Model chooses an existing tag from the folksonomy with a certain probability.
The memory process then weighs recent tags more strongly than older tags by means of a power law function.
Thirdly, the model of Dellschaft & Staab  has introduced an aspect of the user's individual memory, her active vocabulary.
A tag-assignment is either based on the imitation of popular tags, or on the retrieval of a word from the user's own memory.
The probability for the latter process is determined a priori and is proportional to the occurrence frequency of the corresponding word in the Web corpus.
Generative models are usually being validated with data taken from the Social tagging environment Del.icio.us .
Taken together, these models assume that tags are processed explicitly when using tagging systems.
When users then generate tags themselves, they draw on a verbatim trace of the tags when retrieving from memory.
This assumption, however, can not be taken for granted.
Rather, an implicitautomatic mechanism is also postulated to work independently when retrieving from memory.
Therefore, we assume that both explicit-controlled and implicit-automatic processes underlie users' tagging behavior.
We experimentally tested this assumption in prior work , where firstly, participants conducted a tag-based information search and secondly, were tested on their memory for the tags in form of a recognition test.
We applied a multinomial model to analyze the participants' responses and to measure parameters for explicit and implicit processes involved in tag processing.
The results supported our assumptions.
The parameter estimates appeared to be independent from each other and implied that both explicit-controlled as well as implicit-automatic processes have an impact in processing tags.
Therefore, we concluded that both implicit and explicit mechanisms have to be considered by generative models.
Summing up, implicit models assume that tags trigger automatic processes activating semantic information in form of mental categories.
When users generate tags themselves, they apply tags, which verbalize the previously activated categories.
Our own approach is based on the dual-process account of human memory .
In the present paper, we extend our initial model in  by including a parameter for semantic imitation.
This should enable us to assess the degree to which semantic imitation influences tag processing as compared to other implicit processes  and explicit retrieval.
We then apply the model to the active production of tags, and test it in an empirical study.
In the next section we will present this model and the study we conducted, and elaborate on the explicit and implicit processes during tagging.
As an alternative to explicit imitation on the word level, Fu and colleagues have suggested semantic imitation as a main mechanism of imitation in social tagging.
In their model, tags are assumed to act as cues that automatically prime users for certain topics included in a resource.
Beyond that, tags draw the attention of different users to similar topics and therefore, support convergent sensemaking processes .
The semantic priming process is an effortless spreading activation operation on a semantic network in the users' memory.
The result is an activation pattern among nodes of the network that arouses a mental concept used to infer a resource's topic.
This tag-based topic inference process corresponds to the conceptualization of implicitautomatic processes in dual-process memory accounts.
The influence of semantic priming during a tag-based information search has recently been supported in an empirical study .
They found that tags are more likely to be chosen if they are strongly associated with the desired information goal.
Based on these internal associations users implicitly make predictions on the value  of tags: the more a tag primes an information goal the higher the user's tendency to select this tag is.
Fast/automatic processes on a semantic network and elaborate/controlled word-processing in an episodic system lead to implicit and explicit memory representations, respectively.
They support different memory retrieval operations during the generation of words, e.g.
Implicit representations maintain semantic aspects of words and enable the reconstruction of a word's or a group of words' gist.
However, they abstract from a word's perceptual features, i.e.
Based on an implicit representation, a person can remember the gist of what has been read, but she or he will fail in recollecting the verbatim form that has verbalized this gist .
An explicit representation on the other hand is a deep memory trace of the studied word, encompassing the word's meaning, its physical surface and aspects of the context in which the word has been perceived.
Consequently, the explicit representation not only allows reconstructing the gist but also the concrete, verbal referent, i.e.
In the situation of assigning tags to resources, implicit and explicit representations of tags encountered should support qualitatively different kinds of imitation: a verbatim and a semantic imitation.
Models of Cattuto , Dellschaft and Staab  or Halpin et al.
To the contrary, the model of Fu et al.
Thirdly, the impact of users' intentional states and a particular lexical attribute of tags on memory processes were observed.
In order to investigate implicit and explicit processes during the imitation of tags, the participants of our study conducted an information search  and afterwards, were instructed to describe previously encountered resources  by own words and/or by tags experienced in phase 1.
To analyze the participants' word productions, a multinomial model  was applied that is based on the Fuzzy Trace Theory , a dual-process memory account, and is a modification of an MM developed by .
According to the FTT, word production can be driven by a recollective or a non-recollective memory retrieval.
The recollective retrieval is a direct access to an explicit representation, called verbatim trace, which leads to an effortless and errorless access to a previously experienced word.
Therefore, the recollective retrieval of tags is assumed to support a verbatim imitation of other users' tags.
The non-recollective retrieval consists of two consecutive operations: the activation of the gist trace and a subsequent, implicit judgment process.
Activating the gist trace is a meaning-based operation that reconstructs the concept denoted by a previously read word and yields a set of words indexing different aspects of the concept.
Finally, the familiarity-based and implicit judgment process selects one of the reconstructed words for output.
This two-step process often results in the production of a word that is semantically highly related but not physically identical to a previously studied word.
Hence, the non-recollective retrieval of tags is supposed to underlie the semantic imitation of tags.
We expected both mechanisms to substantially contribute to participants' tagging behavior .
Question three was, can implicit and explicit processes be influenced by intentional and lexical variables.
Finally, in our previous study  we found that users' intentions interact with implicit memory processes.
Based on our prior work we expected an influence on the second component of implicit imitation, measured by J .
As a lexical variable, we varied the connectivity of words, which is an index for the amount and density of internal associations activated by a word.
This variable has been analyzed by Nelson et al.
Therefore, we expected an influence of tags' connectivity on the parameters J and R .
In order to measure the parameters D, R and J, an adapted multinomial model  for the FTT, originally developed by , and the so-called RTTT-paradigm , which is tailored to the MM of the FTT, were applied.
Both techniques are described in the next two subsections.
In the following, the adapted MM will be denoted FTT-MM.
Equation 1 summarizes the assumptions of FTT, Pi = Di + Ji , where Pi represents the probability of correctly reproducing a studied word i, Di the probability of the direct access to the explicit representation, Ri the gist-based reconstructive and Ji the implicit judgment process.
Referring to equation , the retrieval of a word is either based on a word's verbatim trace or by the gist's reconstruction and a subsequent meta-cognitive judgment.
The technique to measure these three parameters will be described in the next section.
Three research questions were addressed in this study: First, we were interested in the transferability of the results obtained in our prior study , where we dissociated explicit and implicit processes during the passive recognition of tags, to the active generation of tags.
We expected a dissociability of explicit and implicit processes, measured by the parameters D and J, respectively .
The original procedure consists of a learning phase R  and three consecutive test phases T1, T2 and T3.
In phase R, the participants study a list of words.
Immediately following the last study word and after each phase Ti, the participants solve simple multiplication problems for one minute.
These distractor tasks are administered as buffering activities to empty short-term memory.
In each phase Ti, a free recall test is conducted with the instruction to write down as many words as can be remembered from phase R. In this study, phase R was an incidental learning condition.
The participants were instructed to make use of a learning environment providing information about artistic photographers and examples of each of the photographers' works.
Additionally,  tags and  keywords were assigned to each photo, which had to be considered by the participants to understand the meaning of the photo and to select appropriate resources.
That way, the participants incidentally learned tags and keywords.
The distinction between terms labeled as usergenerated tags and terms labeled as expert-generated keywords was initially motivated by work of  who found that people rely on superficial cues to evaluate information quality.
Therefore, the keywords were included in the current research design to provide a reference level for the parameter estimates.
As mentioned above, two different groups of participants searched for photos under different intentional conditions: one group made use of the environment to find decorative posterprints  and the second group looked for photos that could be used as illustrative examples for a presentation in a seminar course .
Similar to the original RTTT-paradigm, the learning phase and each test phase were followed by the one-minutedistractor-task of solving simple multiplication problems.
During each learning phase, the participants were presented all photos of phase R and were asked to describe them with several words, where it was irrelevant whether they used own words, or tags and keywords of phase R.
For the sake of clarification one example is provided.
In T1, the participant has access to the explicit representation of a word  and therefore, recalls the word.
In this example, the explicit representation is no longer accessible in the next test phase T2 , but the participant can reconstruct the word's semantic features by virtue of the gist trace .
Because of a positive outcome of the meta-cognitive judgment process, the word is selected for output in T2 .
Additionally, the participant again stores an explicit representation of the word just recalled  and therefore, succeeds in retrieving the word in the final test phase T3.
The result of this sequence of cognitive states is the response category CCC.
21 such equations are derived from figure 1.
By implementing them in a likelihood function, the parameter space ={D1,D2,R,J} can be identified .
The RTTT-paradigm yields relative frequencies of different response patterns that are modeled in form of the FTTparameters D, R and J.
For each word that was incidentally learned during phase R the following eight response categories can be observed: CCC, CCN, CNC, NCC, CNN, NCN, NNC and NNN, where C represents recalling and N not recalling the word in any of the test phases Ti.
For instance, the abbreviation CCN stands for the response category that a word has been recalled in the first two phases but not in the last one.
By means of the experiment the empirical probabilities of the eight categories in the whole sample of participants are gathered.
The FTT-MM, applied to model the probabilities of the eight categories in the experiment, is shown in figure 1.
It is a simple stimulus-response cognitive architecture: the box at the far left represents the stimulus S, in our case a photo presented in phase R, and the boxes at the right side are the eight response categories.
The paths of circles represent different sequences of latent, cognitive states leading to the eight response categories.
The letters within the circles are the FTT-parameters representing the probability of each state occurring in the paths between stimulus and response.
All these parameters, except D2, have already been described with respect to their psychological reality.
D2 is the conditional probability of retrieving the explicit, verbatim trace of a word in test phase 2 or 3, given that this process has already occurred in the test phase before.
In other words, D2 is the probability that an explicit representation is also retrievable in the next test phase.
The FTT-MM includes this parameter to provide a better data fit.
However, the unconditional probability D1 is more important for our research questions about explicit processes.
39 adults participated in this experiment.
There were 20 females and 19 males from the Karl-Franzens-University Graz and from the Graz University of Technology who either received a theater coupon or course credits for participating in the experiment.
The two different groups  were equal in their experience with social tagging.
For phase R of the RTTT-paradigm we constructed an environment providing information about six visual artists  and presenting twelve photographs .
Users could browse a site with short paragraphs that characterized each photographer.
Below these descriptions, two links  led to the artist's work.
Each photo was presented on a single site of the social-environment Picasa  with four expert-generated keywords below and four user-generated tags at the right side of the photo.
Taken together, the environment included twelve relevant resources, described with a total of 48 tags and 48 keywords.
The tags and keywords were selected from a pool of words.
This pool was gathered in a pre-study where ten participants were given the twelve photos and were instructed to describe them with words spontaneously coming to their minds.
This resulted in a pool of 290 words, from which 96 were assigned to four different lists.
Two lists were high  and two lists were low  in terms of connectivity.
The connectivity-indices of words were taken from .
Then, they started the information search  for all six artists.
The sequence of the artists was randomized for each participant.
Immediately following phase R, the distractor task was administered .
Afterwards, the first test phase T1 was conducted: all twelve photos of phase R were presented randomly on a computer screen and the participant was asked to describe each photo on a sheet of paper.
Participants could choose any words they liked, either words that easily came to mind, or tags or keywords experienced during phase R. Then the participants turned to the next photo by pressing a key on the keyboard.
After the last photo-presentation in T1, the participant continued the distractor task.
The second test phase T2 was followed by the third and last distractor task, which was followed by T3.
The instructions asked the participants to find interesting photos of six visual artists.
First, they were told to carefully read through the description of an artist and then, to look at both photos and select one of them.
For their decision, they should consider both the photo and the assigned tags and keywords.
The instruction also informed them that art experts had created the keywords and that users who had used the environment for a similar task had created the tags.
Participants of the leisure-condition were told to look for photos that could be used as poster-prints.
Participants in the profession-condition were instructed to search for photos to prepare a presentation in a university course.
They were instructed to look for resources, which they found more representative for an artist.
The research design was a mixed 2x2x2 factorial design to estimate the parameters of the FTT-MM for tags and keywords with high and low connectivity under the leisureand profession-condition.
The independent variables were  "intention"   "word-class"  and  "connectivity" .
The dependent variable was the parameter space ={D1,D2,R,J} under the eight different conditions, estimated by the equations of the FTT-MM.
The compromise-power analysis yielded a critical level of 2crit = 5.98 for the model test.
The data were collected in individual sessions under controlled conditions.
One entire session lasted on average 55 minutes.
Participants were instructed verbally and in written form.
In phase R of the RTTT paradigm, participants received an introduction to the task and were informed how to make use of the photo-environment and about the relevance of and differences between keywords and tags.
The relative frequencies of the eight response categories under the eight conditions appear in Appendix B. Parameter estimation and hypothesis testing were conducted using the software multitree .
Testing a hypothesis proceeded in two steps.
First, the data-fit of the full model was evaluated by means of the chi-square goodness-of-fit statistic, G2, which is a measure for the divergence between the empirical data and the data predicted by the model.
If G2 is below a critical chi-square value, in our 2crit = 5.98, the data-fit can be regarded as acceptable.
To test a hypothesis about the equality or inequality of two parameters, in a second step, these parameters are equated to each other, resulting in a sub-model with one additional degree of freedom .
Finally, the G2 of the sub-model is subtracted from the G2 of the full model, and this difference is compared with the critical value 2crit = 3.84.
At first, we describe the results for the one-step retrieval process grounded on the explicit, verbatim trace.
Figure 2 shows that the D1- and D2- parameters are constant across the conditions and thus, seem to be independent from word class  and connectivity .
If the D1- and D2- parameters of the upper diagram and the corresponding parameters of the lower diagram in figure 2 are equated to each other, the resulting sub-model still fits the data well  = 3.77, p = 0.99.
This pattern is in line with our prior work where we obtained stable values for parameters, representing explicit retrieval during recognition.
As already mentioned, we put more attention on the D1- than on the D2- parameter, since the former stands for the unconditional probability of accessing the verbatim trace in T1.
D2 represents the conditional probability for the same memory process in the next test phase.
As can be seen, the estimates for the D2- parameter are unequally higher and express the low probability of loosing access to an explicit representation from test phase Ti to a subsequent one Ti+1.
On average, the probability of directly accessing the verbatim trace  of a previously experienced tag amounts to D1 = 0.22.
Since in prior work  we have obtained similar estimates for intensively processed keywords, we conclude that the retrieval process assumed to underlie verbatim imitation is relatively strongly pronounced and involved in the creation of tags.
Regarding the non-recollective retrieval process, the description of the results starts with the first step of this two-step operation, represented by parameter R. The estimates of R seem to vary both between keywords and tags as well as between high- and low-connectivity words.
The corresponding statistical-inferential test is in accordance with this interpretation, which reaches significance  = 3.75, p = 0.053.
This pattern suggests that firstly, connectivity has an impact on reconstructive processes and secondly, keywords are represented by stronger gist traces than tags.
Referring to  this outcome can be attributed to differences in the intensity of semantic processes: keywords appear to be more strongly involved in the inference of a resource's semantic content than tags.
Nevertheless, figure 2 shows that even in case of highly connected tags, the reconstruction of tags is an important element of the MM and explains a substantial amount of variance of users' verbal behavior.
On average, the estimate of R is 0.16, and we conclude that this memory process that is deemed to support semantic imitation significantly contributes to the creation of tags.
Two points are immediately apparent: first, values of J are a function of word-class and connectivity and second, the estimates' variance is much larger than for the other parameters.
As a consequence, descriptively observable parameter differences do not reach significance but allow for directed and specific hypotheses of future studies.
Interestingly, figure 2 points towards an interaction between connectivity and word-class that is only partially in line with our expectations.
While for keywords, high connectivity increases the probability of selecting a studied and reconstructed word, just the opposite seems to be true for tags.
As already mentioned, there is a large overlap between the parameters' standard errors and consequently, this result lacks statistical confirmation.
In the near future, modifications of the current FTT-MML should help to improve the accuracy of the estimates and to validate the current descriptive pattern.
In the light of the current results, a word's connectivity has the potential to influence the familiarity of a perceived tag and thus, to influence the probability of imitation.
However, whether high or low connectivity is conducive to an increase of imitation can't be decided on the basis of this experiment.
The evaluation of the fit of the MM for the professiongroup revealed a completely different picture.
In contrast to our expectations, it was in no way suited to account for the data under the profession-condition.
Therefore, we do not report the estimated parameters and conclude that users' intentions have a strong impact on implicit and explicit memory processes.
We strive to develop a modified FTTMMP that can also explain data under the profession condition.
The relative frequencies  imply that under this condition explicit-verbatim processes leading to the category CCC are involved to a smaller extent.
The modified model could therefore provide a better fit by emphasizing semantic reconstructive processes.
Such a model would be plausible if semantic processes were stronger engaged during a professional assignment than during a leisure activity.
This is an empirical evidence for the importance of generative tagging models that take imitation both on a word and on a semantic level into account.
This result may reframe the work of Rader & Wash .
Their regression analysis revealed that personal information management is more predictive for tag-choices than the imitation of other users' tags.
However, their operationalization of imitation was restricted to verbatim imitation.
We assume that a regression analysis would result in a higher weight for the predictor "imitation" if gist-based reconstruction would also be considered.
Our results strongly support hypothesis 3.
The outcome that the FTT-MM explained participants' verbal behavior under the leisure- but not under the profession-condition is well in line with the assumption that users' intentions affect their cognitive processes in terms of implicit and explicit mechanisms.
Finally, referring to hypothesis 4, the connectivity turned out to be an influential variable.
Because of the interaction with word-class, further studies are necessary to investigate whether an increase or a decrease of a tag's connectivity is conducive to a verbal imitation behavior.
Finally, in the present study we observed a result that is consistent with a study of Gerjets & Kammerer  who found that during information search, the evaluation of information quality affects search behavior.
In the current study, the simple manipulation of the labels "keyword" vs. "tag" was associated with different cognitive processes: even if there were no objective quality differences between tags and keywords, the latter word class was more intensively processed by semantic memory operations leading to stronger gist traces.
According to research question 1, we see our hypothesis confirmed: explicit and implicit processes during the generation of tags appeared to be dissociable.
While the parameter D1  did not vary across different conditions, the parameter J was affected both by connectivity and word-class.
The fact that independent variables differentially influence parameters, points towards the phenomenon of independence between and therefore, dissociability of cognitive processes.
Referring to the second research question, the results are also in accordance with the respective hypothesis 2.
Our initial motivation with this research was to check some of the assumptions of whether social tagging involves collaborative sensemaking processes.
In this paper, we focused on some of the more basic cognitive assumptions behind this idea.
Secondly, we found some evidence for semantic reconstructive processing which may be the basis for semantic imitation, and hence provide a basis for sensemaking.
How, then, could we design environments to further support sensemaking?
The dual-process perspective we have taken allows us to derive some practical design recommendations.
For example, the prevalent use of tag clouds that visually encode the number of times a tag has been used in the environment by text size, are likely to impact mainly explicit-verbatim processes , rather than semantic elaboration.
While prior work in this area has mainly looked at performance in information search, our results suggest that these layouts would also impact long-term memory  and thereby facilitate collaborative learning processes.
This would also be in line with FTT research showing a higher R parameter in semantically ordered lists of words .
Additionally, proving the assumption that semantic processes are stronger engaged during a professional assignment than during leisure activity could imply differential effects of semantic and "perceptual" tag clouds, which encode tag frequencies.
Finally, our work suggests that different characteristics of words play a major role in implicit-familiarity processes during tagassignments.
Particularly, the connectivity of tags shows the potential to enhance word imitation even if tagging is strongly driven by gist-based reconstruction.
It could be taken into account by the Log of WordNet connectivity .
These and other properties can be taken directly from the WordNet database .
Secondly, interaction paradigms in tagging will likely have an influence on sensemaking processes.
The dissociation between recognition and recall performance found by Budiu et al.
In "click-to-tag" recognition was stronger, possibly because it relies on a verbatim memory trace.
Implicit semantic processing is likely to be impacted to a greater extend by the "type-to-tag" interaction.
This relationship between interaction techniques and memory answers Budiu et al.
The latter supports the exchange of concepts but not the usage of identical words.
This is also related to recent work of  who have found two types of tagging  that lead to different folksonomies.
We assume that describing is associated with verbatim and categorizing with gist-based processes.
We have presented a multinomial model and an experimental procedure that allows to systematically examine these interventions and their effect on different memory processes.
We feel such understanding will help us understand some of the more basic mechanisms of collaborative sensemaking and provide a way to design social tagging environments so that they enable a more effective indexing of information on the Web.
