This paper describes VideoDraw, a shared drawing tool, and the process by which it is being designed and developed.
VideoDraw is a prototype, videobased, tool that provides a shared "virtual sketchbook" among two or more collaborators.
It not only allows the collaborators to see each others' drawings, but also conveys the accompanying hand gestures and the process of creating and using those drawings.
Its design stems from studying how people collaborate using shared drawing spaces.
Design implications raised by those studies were embodied in a prototype, which was in turn observed in use situations.
Continued research studying the use of VideoDraw  will lead to a better understanding of collaborative drawing activity and inform the continued technical development of VideoDraw.
The use of these tools can in turn be studied, leading to a better understanding of the work activity and further design implications for improving the tool being developed.
Tatar  describes the methodology emerging from this research of integrating work practice analysis with tool design.
Recently, DIAL has been focusing on the activity that occurs when two or more people work using a shared drawing surface-what we refer to as shared drawing space activity.
DIAL's studies indicate that many computational collaborative tools do not support aspects of shared drawing activity that our focused observation reveals to be important.
We have come to view shared drawing space activity as encompassing not only the resulting sketches left on the paper, but also the talking, writing, drawing, and gesturing activity involved in creating and making use of those sketches.
This paper describes VideoDraw and illustrates how studying it in use has led to new insights into shared drawing activity as well as improvements in its design.
IDIAL is a working group consisting of designers, within the computer scientists, and anthropologists System Sciences Laboratory at Xerox PARC.
This paper expresses several insights that have arisen in DIAL meetings.
The members of DIAL at the time of this work were: Sara Bly, Francoise Brun-Cottan, Brigitte Jordan, Scott Minneman, Lucy Suchman, John Tang, Deborah Tatar, and Randy Trigg.
As new technology is developed to support collaborative work, it is important to understand how that technology can best be applied to help people accomplish their work.
Over the past several years, an interdisciplinary working group, known as the Designer Interaction Analysis Laboratory l, has been studying collaborative work activity.
The aims of this research are both to understand collaborative activity and to build tools to support that activity.
Permission to copy without fee all or part of this material is granted provided that the copies are not made or distributed for direct commercial advantage, the ACM copyright notice and the title of the publication and its date appear, and notice is given that copying is by permission of the Association for Computing Machinery.
To copy otherwise, or to republish requires a fee and/or specific permission.
We descri'be VideoDraw, a prototype shared drawing tool that embodies some of the design implications raised by these observations.
It uses video to create a shared "virtual sketchbook" Based on preliminary among colla.borators.
A3ill990 made in th.e drawing space.
These marks often do not make much sense when v,iewed by themselves afterwards.
It is through the process in time of creating anId referring to those marks that the group comes to understand what the marks mean.
The coordination in time among drawing, gesturing, and the explanatory talk is also an important resource for interpreting the marks.
The value of these timing relationships is further indicated by interactional difficulties observed in work settings where the timing was disrupted, as will be discussed later.
In face-to-face interaction, negotiating the use of a shared drawing surface also involves intricate relations in time 
Collaboramrs rely on a familiar sense of time and space to negotiate sharing a drawing surface.
The spatial arrangement between the coilaborators and the drawing surface is another factor that influences negotiating the use of a shared drawing surface.
For example, when using a wall-mounted chalkboard, the participants usually have to leave their seat and walk up to the chalkboard to work at it.
Alternatively, if the collaborators are working around a table with large paper sheets in their midst, everyone can easily reach the drawing surface.
However, some drawings may appear upside down or at odd orientations to some participants, a problem that does nut occur when viewing a chalkboard.
As will be discussed later, VideoDraw offers a different sense of spatial arrangement between the participants and the drawing surface.
In the course of these studies, we noted three aspects of drawing space activity that have design implications for tools to support that activity: 0 hand gestures are used prominently and productively, 0 timing relationships help the participants understand the drawings created, and 0 timing relationships and spat:ial arrangement help the participants neg0tiat.e the use of their shared drawing surface.
We observed that much of the group's collaborative activity involved hand gestures, and that these gestures accomplish substantive work: to act out a sequence of events; to refer to a locus of attention; or to mediate their interaction .
Furthermore, we noticed that these gestures are often conducted in relation to a sketch or object in the drawing space .
These observations indicate that it is important to convey hand gestures among collaborators, and to do so in a way that maintains the relationship between the gestures and their referents in the drawing space.
A schematic diagram of VideoDraw is shown in Figure 1.
In this configuration, VideoDraw allows two people to share a drawing surface.
It consists of video cameras aimed at the display screens of video monitors, interconnected as shown.
The participants use whiteboard markers  to draw directly on the surface of the display screen.
Figure 1: Schematic diagram of 2-person VideoDraw As each collaborator draws on the screen, the video camera transmits those marks and the accompanying hand gestures to the other collaborator.
Each collaborator can add to a sketch that appears on the display screen, and those additional marks and back to the other gestures are transmitted collaborator.
At all times, a complete image consisting of real and "video" marks is visible on all the collaborators' screens.
The collaborators can draw, erase, and gesture over the VideoDraw screens much as if they were sharing a pad of paper.
Video feedback between the two camera/display pairs is controlled by polarizing filters on the camera lenses and nearly orthogonal polarizing sheets covering the surface of each display screen.
Pictures of a 2-person VideoDraw configuration and a view of a VideoDraw screen as seen by the participant are shown in Figures 2 and 3.
If the stations are located in remote locations, additional communication links  between the collaborators may be desired.
Although the utility of VideoDraw is most clearly demonstrated in the context of supporting the shared drawing activity of people in physically remote locations, the insights emerging from studying its use have implications for collaborative work in general.
A prototype version of a 2-person VideoDraw has been operational for several months.
During that period, we have videotaped several informal uses and one extended use of the system.
In the observed informal uses, VideoDraw was set up within one room, as in Figure 2, and pairs of colleagues were invited to experience using it.
The participants typically worked on a small problem of their own choosing for 5-10 minutes.
Figure 4: Sclhematic diagram of VideoDraw connecting remote locaticms In the extended use of VideoDraw, the stations were placed in separate rooms and connected by an audiovideo  link.
Each participant not only had a VideoDraw station, but also a video camera and monitor conveying a frontal view of the collaborator's face and upper body.
Telephone headsets provided a full-duplex audio connection.
A schematic diagram of this setup is shown in Figure 4.
The participants worked on a user interface design task of their own choosing for approximately l-1/2 hours, and the session was recorded on videotape.
Hand gestures are often enacted with respect to sketches on the drawing surface to convey information.
Figure 5 shows how these hand gestures are conveyed in VideoDraw; one participant is gesturing to indicate an operation on an object in a proposed user interface.
The effectiveness of gestures of this type depends on maintaining the relationship between the hands and the sketches on the screen.
A sequence of actions can be enacted with respect to a drawing on the screen or specific locations on the screen can be pointed at, and those gestures and their referents arc communicated to the other collaborators.
Figure 5: Conveying gestures in VideoDraw Furthermore, Figure 5 shows that VideoDraw conveys gestures that may involve two hands and/or multiple fingers.
It also conveys a sense of 3dimensional activity.
DIAL's studies of drawing space activity indicated the importance of conveying hand gestures and their relationship to the drawing space.
DIAL's studies of drawing space activity showed that the collaborators rely on intricate relations in time among various activities.
For example, one problem observed in Colab, a computer-based collaborative tool, was that the computer sometimes introduced processing and transmission delays.
These delays could disrupt the timing relations between the group's dialog and what was appearing on the In the computer screens .
Figure 6 indicates how a collaborator can time a diectic reference with pointing at the object on the screen.
The collaborators can coordinate the timing of their activities much as they would be able to in familiar face-to-face settings.
In DIAL, we also observed that shared drawing activity is structured by the spatial relationships among the collaborators and the drawing surface.
In VideoDraw, each collaborator can see the drawing surface in a proper orientation, as if looking at a chalkboard together.
Anyone can also easily reach in to work on the drawing surface at any time , since each collaborator is positioned directly in front of a VideoDraw station.
VideoDraw allows both a common orientation to the shared drawing surface and easy access to it by multiple collaborators.
DIAL's studies noted that drawing space activity often involves more than one person being active in the drawing space at the same time.
While this concurrent activity might be considered to be a source of confusion for the collaborators, we found that being able to access the drawing space at the same time was actually crucial to their ability to smoothly negotiate their collaborative use of it.
I3y analogy to sharing an audio channel, people usually avoid speaking over each other's talk for an extended period of time.
The use of this problems is demonstrated by the resource encountered in using half-duplex audio connections, which only transmit one party's talk at a time.
In video lines and some overseas telephone teleconferencing facilities, half-duplex connections contribute to making it difficult to achieve smooth turn transitions.
Similarly, concurrent access to the drawing space is an important resource in negotiating the use of a Figure 8 shows two shared drawing surface.
It is instructive to compare VideoDraw with other collaborative media.
These systems make available much of the computing power of personal computer workstations to participants in a collaborative context.
However, as mentioned earlier, computers often introduce time delays that can disrupt group interaction.
Computers also do not effectively transmit hand gestures .
Furthermore, computational systems tend to dilute personal distinctions in drawing space activity , diminishing the identification cues that are available to the collaborators.
Smith 119881 explores how to provide some of these cues in a shared virtual world with a system known as SharedARK.
However, most conventional video conferencing systems focus on providing views of the participants or perhaps presenting images from one site to the other.
They do not offer an interactively shared drawing surface that both sites can work on, limiting the kind of shared work that can be accomplished.
More work is needed to explore how VideoDraw could be constructed with reduced bandwidth video technologies often used in video teleconferencing to transmit over long distances.
Using a live video image of a participant and.
One application enables participants to use their fingers to "draw" in space.
VideoDraw differs from VIDEOPLACE in that VideoDraw offers a sense of 3-dimensionality by using the actual video image, not a computational silhouette of the image.
In VideoDraw, the drawing surface is overlaid directly on top of the display surface, whereas in the demonstrated version of VIDEOPLACE the input  and output  were separated.
VideoDraw offers a different perceptual experience among the collaborators than VIDEOPLACE.
The fact that each participant's marks are actually made and presented on different surfaces results in some constraints in the use of VideoDraw.
Each participant can only erase marks made on his or her own screen, and cannot edit the marks of the other collaborator.
Several incidents where one collaborator requested that the other erase some marks were observed.
Also, because of the thickness of the glass screens on the video displays, th.ere is a noticeable amount of parallax between the marks drawn on the surface of the screen and the video image of the other participant's marks appearing on the phosphor of the screen.
This parallax sometimes made it difficult to correctly align marks between the participants.
On the other hand, these constraints can be used creatively by the participants.
For example, the marks drawn directly on the screen surface and the video marks appearing on the screen are of noticeably different intensity and resolution, as can be seen in Figures 7-8.
This dissimilarity sometimes leads to problems in being able to view a collaboratively constructed VideoDraw sketch as a single image.
In one of the observed sessions, where the participants were working on an architectural layout, the collaborators used this property to create two distinguishable drawing layers, much like separate sheets of tracing paper.
One participant drew the lines representing a first floor plan, while the other added the plans for the second floor directly over the first.
We are not posing VideoDraw as a replacement to these other collaborative systems.
Rather, we want to use VideoDraw to examine collaborative activity from a new perspective to identify what elements of shared activity are crucial to the interaction.
Our intent is to provide designers of collaborative systems with a clearer sense of the impact of their design decisions on how their systems will be used.
Understanding what aspects of VideoDraw help create this sense of co-presence will require further study.
A better definition of what co-presence is and how tools can provide or augment a sense of copresence among collaborators is needed.
By studying co-presence and how to provide it, we hope to understand collaborative activity better and refine the design of VideoDraw to support it more effectively.
VideoDraw is a novel tool to support collaborative drawing activity.
Its design incorporates studying collaborative work practice with developing the technology.
The design of VideoDraw came as a direct result of noticing some substantial resources being used in collaborative work activity  that were not being supported by existing computational collaborative tools.
Observing VideoDraw in use is helping us further probe collaborative work activity from a new perspective and reveal ways in which VideoDraw can be improved.
The development of VideoDraw is itself a demonstration of the value of integrating studies of work practice in the design process.
Based on studies of shared drawing space activity, we constructed a VideoDraw prototype that conveyed hand gestures, did not disrupt timing relationships, offered a new sense of spatial relationships, and allowed concurrent access to the drawing space.
Preliminary observations of VideoDraw in use indicate that it provides collaborators with an not found in enhanced sense of interaction conventional computer-supported collaborative tools.
In studying collaborative activity, DIAL has adopted the term "co-presence" to describe a sense of awareness among collaborators that facilitates group interaction.
Although we are only beginning to articulate the various dimensions of what this term means, we assert that a sense of co-presence among collaborators who are remotely located is enabled by making available to them resources that are used in face-to-face interaction.
Based on our observation of VideoDraw in use, we believe that it affords a heightened sense of co-presence compared to current computer-based collaborative tools.
The video image superimposed on the drawing surface appears to provide participants with a greater sense of awareness Seeing the marks on the of their collaborators, drawing surface and the video image transmitting the gestures and sense of space around those marks provides an awareness that helps the collaborators interpret the marks and negotiate using the shared drawing space.
We would like to thank the DIAL working group for the analysis and observations that made this work possible.
We particularly thank Charles Goodwin, Austin Henderson, Sara Bly, Lucy Suchman, and Deborah Tatar for critiquing previous drafts of this We also acknowledge Steve Harrison for paper.
Laboratory of Xerox PARC for fostering this research.
Bly, Sara A., "A use of drawing surfaces in different collaborative settings", in Proc.
Egido, Carmen, "Videoconferencing as a Technology to Support Group Work: A Review of its Failure", in Proc.
Goodwin, Charles and Marjorie Harness Goodwin, "Concurrent operations on talk: Notes on the interactive organization of assessments", IPRA Papers in Pragmatics, Vol.
CHI 90 Pmeeclings Cqonference on Computer-Supported Cooperative Work , pp.
M.antei, Marilyn, `*Capturing the Capture Lab Concepts: A Case Study in the IDesign of Computer Supported Meeting Environments", in Proc.
B., "A prot.otype ,futuristic technology for distance education",in Proc.
Stefik, Mark, Gregg Foster, Daniel G. Bobrow, Kenneth Kahn, Stan Lanning, and Lucy Suchman, "Beyond the chalkboard: Computer support for collaboration and problem solving in meetings", Communications of the ACM, Vol.
Aptil t990 Stults, Robert, Experimental Uses of Video to Support Design Activities, Xerox PARC Technical Report #SSL-89-19, December 1988.
Tang, John C., Listing, Drawing, and Gesturing in Design: A Study of the Use of #SharedWorkspaces by Design Telzms, Xerox PARC Technical Report #!SSL89-3 , April 1989.
Tatar, Deborah, "Using Video-Based Observation to Shape the Design of a New Technology", SIGCHI Bulletin, Vol.
Tatar, Deborah G., Gregg S. Foster, and Daniel G. Bobrow, "Conversations in and using Cognoter", in preparation.
