Like any taboo, simply sweeping away the issue  does not make it go away.
The examples above highlight some of the contexts in which scientists, designers and filmmakers have explored the implications of anthropomorphizing the humanmachine interfaee.
Some techniques, such as talking cars, have dissipated in response to users' distaste.
As Ben Shneiderman notes, a message that avoids pronouns altogether such as "To begin the lesson, press return" is preferable to "I will begin the lesson when you press return" .
However, as the field has matured, we are working with more sophisticated systems that involve graphics, full-motion video, sound and speech, virtual environments, and telepresence, as we collaborate with designers who come from traditions where anthropomorphism is not only accepted, but encouraged.
There are a variety of task domains in which representing the system in the interface runs up against this wall of resistance.
The design of multimedia authoring tools and content may be the fastest growing domain as these systems move off of our desktops and into our living rooms now that CD-I, CDTV, and other consumer devices are actually on the shelves of department stores.
With video on the computer screen, the human figure often plays a prominent role in the interface.
Recently, there has been a discernible increase in the gratuitous use of the human figure with poorly lipsynched talking heads or systems that fool the user into thinking that the system is intelligent.
Another task domain involves representing autonomous behavior in an information retrieval system or more general operating system.
While the human figure is not always necessary for representing agency as defined by Alan Kay  or Brenda Laurel , anthropomorphism can be a useful tool for designers if its strengths and In addition, a distinction weaknesses are understood.
While the act of delegating may make the user feel more in control than a system that implicitly forms a model of the user, the issues of representation and communication remain.
When delegating the task of filtering email, for example, to whom or to what are we delegating the task?
What is the nature of this entity and how do we communicate with it?
What is the nature of the distinction between delegation and agency and how does it affect representations in the interface?
The limits of direct manipulation and desktop metaphors are most evident when we leave our desktops altogether and enter the immersive world of virtual reality systems or the portable world of "personal digital assistants"  a highly anthropomorphic term now in vogue among Apple Computer's marketeers used to describe portable electronic calendars, organizers and cellular communicators.
Agency on the part of the system will need to be adequately represented while the conversational component of direct manipulation is enhanced.
Finally, it is difficult to discuss anthropomorphism without also re-examining the moral and philosophical issues associated with the debate.
At the philosophical level, we are constantly redefining what it means to be human.
As Sherry Turkle observes, "people have a stake in seeing themselves as different"  from machines.
The inability to distinguish between human and machine, the real and the constructed, or to be unable to "pull the plug" plagues many characters in science fiction.
According to Donna Haraway, "Late twentieth-century machines have made thoroughly ambiguous the difference between natural and artificial, mind and body, self-developing and externally designed, and many other distinctions that used to apply to organisms and machines.
She is currently Assistant Professor of Psychology at the State University of New Her current research interests York at Stony Brook.
Those who debate the value or evils of anthropomorphizing the interface are missing the point.
Certainly it's irritating to interact with a system that's superficially anthropomorphized or cute.
And in an electronic medium, where communication takes place over a channel much narrower than face-to-face, imitating a human being can be misleading.
But that is not a good reason to throw away all of speech and language as a communication modality.
There are classes of things that are done better with speech and natural language than with direct manipulation.
These things include delegating complex or redundant actions and doing anything that's not in the here and now.
When Sutherland  presented the first direct manipulation system, the idea was to enable people and computers "to converse rapidly through the medium of line drawings".
What makes direct manipulation work is NOT the fact that it's visually conducted, but it is conversational.
A conversational interface, whether it is visually or verbally conducted, results in a coherent sequence of behavior.
And when speech and language interfaces become more conversational, they will take their place along with direct manipulation in the interface.
We should stop worrying about anthropormorphism and work on making systems capable of behaving as coherent interactive partners.
Whether these partners are anthropomorphized or not, they should present their limitations frankly.
People are used to dealing with many categories of partners: friends, strangers, the hard of hearing, disembodied voices on the telephone, readers who will come along after they are gone, foreigners, children, and dogs.
This flexibility has been documented even among the very young; 5 year olds use more simple language when talking to 3 year olds than they do talking to adults .
It is this fundamental adaptability of human beings to their partners that makes the whole humardcomputer enterprise possible in the first place.
Susan Brennan a psycholinguist, received her Ph.D. in Cognitive Psychology from Stanford University.
She also holds an M. S.V.S.
Brenda Laurel has worked in the personal computer industry since 1976 as a programmer, software designer, marketeer, producer, and researcher.
Her academic background is in theatre, and she holds an M.FA.
In 1990, she joined Scott Fisher in founding Telepresence Research, a company to conduct research and development in virtual environments and remote presence technology and applications.
Brenda has published extensively on such subjects as virtual reality design, computer-based agents, and interactive jiction.
With more conventional systems, interfaces are conceived as ways of representing preexisting computational functionality to human participants.
In virtual reality, on the other hand, the interface - that is, a multisensory medium that aims to establish a sense of presence in a representational context is often a solution in search of a problem.
The questions that most VR designers wrestle with are What kinds of actions might one perform in this medium, and to what end?
How can activity be paced?
Without the familiar accoutrements of desktops, windows, or command lines, how can participants be constrained - that is, how does the world reveal its potential to a person, and how can a person be prevented from falling off the edge of the world?
In the same way that people and other animate beings provide such constraints in "real life" situations through observation, interaction, and dialogue, agents are an obvious and powerful source of such constraints in virtual worlds.
In virtual environments, as in scientific visualization systems with conventional graphical interfaces, the whole point is to represent information, theories, processes, and ideas in ways that are directly accessible to the senses.
The central premise of virtual environments is to replace sensory input from the physical world with technologically mediated sensory information, without disrupting the connections between sensation, perception, cognition, and emotion.
The aim is to enable people to respond holistically to such environments.
There is no place in the theory of virtual environments for a disembodied "system" as a source of agency, or collaboration; indeed, such communication, disembodiment forces its mirror image on the participant and precludes the possibility of holistic response.
In the sense that the dogma of direct manipulation prohibits the use of anthropomorphic or animistic representations for complex agencies that exhibit organicity and/or emergent intelligence, it also precludes our use of such agencies as tools for thought, creativity, or productive work.
It is not the notion of anthropomorphic agents that is the real obstacle to human empowerment through computers, but rather the straitjacket of interface orthodoxy and the persistent devaluation of any phenomenon which cannot be neatly measured in controlled experiments.
Every technology passes through an immature phase in which human and animal models are used as metaphors for design.
Lewis Mumford describes the process in his chapter on "The obstacle of animism" in Technics and Civilization : "the most ineffective kind of machine is the realistic mechanical imitation of a man or another animal... for thousands of years animism has stood in the way of...
The artificial intelligentsia have made the same mistake in their misdirected pursuit of human-like robots, natural language speech recognition to support interaction, and now human-like agents that magically maintain a user model and cleverly anticipate user needs like a perfect butler or secretary.
I believe that these scenarios are obstacles in the development of truly powerful and simple tools that will empower users through direct manipulation of objects and actions.
My sentiments are based on my reading of historical precedents and on empirical studies.
The talking automobiles and cash registers are gone, the human-like bank teller machines seem like anachronisms, and natural language interaction seems archaic and slow.
By contrast, the dynamic visual world of direct manipulation brings us powerful spreadsheets, effective simulations, lively videogames, intuitive data visualizations, convenient page layout packages, and engaging graphical user interfaces.
Users are empowered by having a clear predictive model of system performance and a sense of mastery, control, and accomplishment.
Empirical studies consistently find support for direct manipulation styles of interaction.
I call on those who believe in the anthropomorphic scenarios to build something useful and conduct usability studies and controlled experiments to compare their designs with direct manipulation.
Direct manipulation designs can often be improved, but they are a more appealing direction, as far as I am concerned.
I am sympathetic to human faces appearing onscreen if they are to represent human beings.
My objection is when the computer is portrayed as a human; such misrepresentations are deceptive, counterproductive, and morally offensive to me.
