Kaj Makela, Sara Belt, Dan Greenblatt, Jonna Hakkila  Nokia Research Center  Nokia Multimedia  College of Computing Itamerenkatu 11-13 Yrttipellontie 6 Georgia Inst.
In this paper, we present a study of user perceptions on mobile interaction with visual and RFID tags.
Although mobile interaction with tags has been proposed in several earlier studies, user perceptions and usability comparisons of different tag technologies have not been intensively investigated.
In contrast to earlier studies, which report on user studies with evaluating new concepts or interaction techniques, we take another approach and examine the current understanding of the techniques and user perceptions on them.
Our field study of 50 users charts currently existing user perceptions and reveals potential usability risks that are due to the limited or erroneous understanding of the interaction technique.
The use scenarios also include accessing information through interacting with a tag or using the tag for initiating some other information channel, e.g.
Bluetooth or internet connection .
Typically, interaction with a tag employs a physical gesture where the user  points at or touches a tag, which can be for instance an RFID tag recognized with a device integrated reader or a visual tag read with a camera .
Most of the research has so far focused on creating new concepts, or utilizing tags as part of a larger system, as opposed to specifically studying the interaction paradigm itself.
Typical for the existing studies is that they are often used as a proof of concept with only a small sample of users, often in a laboratory environment, with guided instruction prior to performing interaction tasks.
There exists very little data on how users would interact with tags without any specific instruction, their expectations of the technology, and their perceptions regarding interacting with these objects in public places.
In this paper we report on a field study with RFID and visual 2D barcodes, where 50 people were interviewed and asked to interact with the tags.
The goals of our study, conducted in `everyday life environment' was to assess the current knowledge or expectations people had with the tag technology, the intuitiveness of usage, social acceptability, and to predict any potential barriers to use.
Interacting with the physical world via a mobile handheld device is a relatively new paradigm, which has quickly emerged during recent years.
Integrating cameras, motion sensors, and radio frequency identification  or barcode readers into mobile devices has made new interaction concepts possible.
Tags utilizing different technologies have been introduced for interacting with physical objects in a variety of applications and uses.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
The study had a strongly exploratory nature, as it sought out to chart the general perceptions people had with interacting with RFID and visual tags.
In addition, we had the following hypotheses: 1.
RFID and visual tags are perceived similarly in terms of data storage and transfer.
The study consisted of semi-structured interviews accompanied by interaction tasks, which were carried out in two city centers in Finland, during summer 2006.
The study consisted of two phases, referred to in the following as A  and B , which had identical set-ups.
In addition, in study B some additional details were asked in order to verify assumptions made based on study A.
The interviews took place in an outdoor pedestrian shopping mall, a library, and a market place.
Participants were chosen from those present on the street, aiming to achieve a balance of male and female, with ages ranging from teenager to middle aged .
Participants' background information about mobile phone usage is presented in Table 1 .
During the interview, each participant was shown two posters, one employing an RFID tag and one a visual tag .
Participants were first asked about their familiarity with a particular tag technology, then given a brief easy-to-understand explanation of how the tag works, and shown the tags.
However, they were not told how to interact with it.
The participants were asked what kind of information they would expect to receive from the tag, and then given a properly-equipped mobile phone and asked to demonstrate how they would interact with the tag .
Answers to the interview questions, as well as observations on usage were recorded by the researchers.
In the study it was found that although the participants were enthusiastic and open towards the presented information acquisition methods, a large majority of the interviewed were not familiar with the concept of either the RFID or visual tag .
For some, RFID tags were known from security tags on clothing or compact discs, but they were not aware of their usage in the current context.
Few of the participants were able to associate the visual tag  to the barcodes used in product packages.
As the participants did not have prior experience on which to base their interactions with this technology, they applied a diverse range of mental models governing what kind of information the tags could store, and how that information could be transferred to their mobile phone.
For the visual tag, based on its printed nature most users deduced it was accessed with the camera.
Some users suggested taking a picture of the visual tag, while others pointed the camera at the tag and waited for it to register automatically.
The interaction techniques proposed for RFID tags included, for example, utilizing Bluetooth, manually typing up the visible URL to a mobile browser, reading the tag via an infrared port, calling a stored number to hear prerecorded information, and taking a picture of the visual icon.
There were also differing opinions with respect to the aesthetics of the two different types of tags.
Some people disliked the way the visual tag looked, saying that it was too official, vague or technological looking, while others praised it for its sleek look, and said that they thought it made the poster look cooler.
Based solely on the appearance of the visual tag, one participant claimed not to be able to use the visual tag because of not being "a mathematical person".
Interestingly, several participants thinking from the perspective of information producers preferred the visual tags because they were cheaper to create and caused less waste.
However, the reliability of the tags was found to be problematic.
Participants pointed out that, as the tags were accessible in public places, they were vulnerable to vandalism.
Visual tags could be visually manipulated and this way their content might be altered.
Also overlaying water and dirt affects their readability.
RFID can be ripped off or changed with other tags containing information or pointers to harmful material.
Also the perceived active nature of RFID tags caused concerns about picking up harmful information accidentally while passing the tag.
As an answer to our hypothesis, the study showed that the RFID and visual tags are perceived differently with respect their nature as data storages and the way they transfer data.
The RFID was conceived to have a more active nature and wider spatial range of functionality.
Also, taking a picture with a camera is considered to be familiar, but it does not directly imply that it is intuitive as an interaction method.
The camera was expected to work like a continuously sensing scanner rather than explicitly triggered reader.
For many of the participants the storage location and the nature of the content was not clear.
Many users correctly assumed that the tag would contain some band-related information, and some suggested specifically that it might contain an mp3 file.
The information was, in most of the cases, considered to be in the tag itself; it was not perceived as a reference to the actual information.
This was quite evident, as many of the participants did not even expect the mobile phone to contain web browsing functionality.
Implicit in many participants' responses was that the phone would read and just store the information from the tag for later use.
Thirty-one out of the fifty study participants preferred the interaction paradigm of the RFID tag, while fifteen preferred the visual tag .
The RFID swipe was viewed as being quicker, requiring less effort, and generally feeling more natural than explicitly taking the picture of a visual tag.
Those that favored RFID also liked that it did not require opening any additional application but the interaction was instant.
User perceptions on interacting with tags have not been extensively studied by earlier research.
If user studies on the interaction paradigm have been performed, they have typically been used for confirming the interaction paradigm selected for a certain application.
These studies have commonly employed only a small amount of people, and have typically been performed in a laboratory environment, university campus, or with IT students or professionals.
Often user studies are carried out to gain proof of concept, in the manner of approving and justifying the research and implementation.
The results gained this way often have a tendency to be positively biased and may not give realistic feedback on the usability risks of the design.
In our study, we concentrated on the perceptions `a man on the street' had about visual and RFID tags, and aimed to have a sample large enough for realistic and reliable understanding of the phenomenon.
The study results reveal that there are potential usability risks with the mobile interaction with RFID and visual tags.
Currently, the mental model that people have on the technologies is still very vague.
Characteristics that affected participants' interactions with the RFID and visual tags were their range of function and visibility.
The range of the RFID tags is typically less than 10 centimeters.
Due to this short range of function the user needs to be informed precisely of the location of the tag, although the tag itself does not need to be visible.
In the study, the RFID was attached to behind the poster and its location was indicated with visual icon.
The visual icon utilized  was not a commonly known indicator for RFID and did not therefore provide any previously known cues for interaction.
As the usage of RFIDs or other invisible near-field communication  becomes more common, it will be important to develop standardized visual cues, enabling users to easily recognize the presence of an NFC, and execute the known interaction method.
The interaction required for triggering the tag reading was not evident to the users.
Although participants had used cameraphones before and were used to the idea of snapping a photo, many expected the visual tag to be recognized by pointing at it with the camera, without initiating an explicit capture action.
This implies that the users expected the system to be able to detect the presence of a tag.
The semacode reader application used in the study required the user to trigger the tag reading.
However, it should be noted that there are existing applications able to detect the tag automatically.
Both of the tags were expected to contain direct, mostly textual information related to the band presented in the poster.
This leads us to assume that the device and application were considered as a "lens" to view their information content, being otherwise in an incomprehensible, encrypted form.
The users were surprised when the recognized identifier triggered a browser which then retrieved information from the internet.
They did not expect the identifier to act as reference or trigger for other applications.
In addition, the information display was expected quite often to be dependent on the proximity with the tag.
The tag was held in the scope of the device, either within the viewfinder of the camera or in the proximity of the RFID module even after the actual tag recognition occurred.
This observation also supports the concept of the device as a lens to view local information.
However, as the nature of the tag may vary in different contexts between local storage and a reference to the actual remote resource, it is challenging to provide a mental model fitting to each context.
As the study was conducted in two cities within a single country, it is therefore somewhat limited by the geographical and cultural environment.
In this paper, we presented a study of user perceptions on mobile interaction with visual and RFID tags.
The study was conducted for 50 participants in two Finnish cities as semi-structured interviews accompanied with interaction tasks.
In the study we found that the large majority of the participants were not familiar with the concept of either the RFID or visual tag and did not have clear knowledge of their application prior to the interview.
Together with the lack of prior experience, minimal visual interaction cues caused misconceptions and usability problems while interacting with the tags.
Their range of function and methods for accessing the data were often unclear and misconceived.
The tags were assumed to contain direct information in encrypted form in contrast to acting as references to networked data resources.
In the future, conducting a similar study in another regional location and culture would offer valuable insight into the stage of local development and the cultural variables affecting the usage of the tags.
In addition, the evaluation of metaphors and visual design of physical tags affecting the user's perception of the interaction with the tags would require further study.
Mobile Phones as Pointing Devices.
In Pervasive 2005 Workshop on Pervasive Mobile Interaction Devices .
The Design of Everyday Things.
Pradhan, S., Brignone, C., Cui, J. McReynolds, A., and Smith, M. Websigns: Hyperlinking Physical Locations to the Web.
Rekimoto, J., Ayatsuka, Y. CyberCode: Designing Augmented Reality Environments with Visual Tags.
Rohs, M. Visual Code Widgets for Marker-Based Interaction.
An Experimental Comparison of Physical Mobile Interaction Techniques: Touching, Pointing and Scanning.
Enhancing Bluetooth Connectivity with RFID.
Valkkynen, P. Tuomisto, T. Physical Browsing Research.
In Pervasive 2005 Workshop on Pervasive Mobile Interaction Devices .
