Xianghua Ding,1 Thomas Erickson,2 Wendy A. Kellogg, 2 Stephen Levy, 2 James E. Christensen, 2 Jeremy Sussman2, Tracee Vetting Wolf2, William E. Bennett 1 Dept.
IBM Enhanced Audio Conferencing  is a VoIPbased audio conferencing system that, like several other systems, provides a visualization showing who is present and their states .
This paper presents the first study of the use of such a system.
Drawing on log files collected over six weeks of use by over 1300 corporate employees, and interviews with 10 of them, we look at how and why various features of the system are used and what sorts of practices are supported.
Our findings shed light on the factors that drive the use of visual enhancements to audio conferencing, and suggest further research topics.
Our aim in this paper is to examine how participants in enhanced audio conferences actually use the new functionality.
To this end, this paper reports findings from a study of the reception of IEAC, a visually enhanced VoIP audio conferencing system that is tightly integrated with enterprise applications such as calendaring, directory, and instant messaging.
After discussing relevant literature and a describing IEAC, we analyze six weeks of log data to get an idea of the overall use of the system.
Next we use interviews to obtain more insight on how and why the features are being used, and the practices they support.
We conclude by discussing the findings, summarizing the factors that drive the use of the visual features of enhanced audio conferencing, and suggesting issues for future research.
Audio conferencing is becoming an increasingly important mode of collaboration.
While telephony has long served as a major means of collaboration across distances , the advent of Voice over IP  makes audio conferencing cheaper and more available.
As a consequence, there has been a recent spate of work on ways of enhancing audio conferencing, including SmartPhone , MeetingCentral , and our own system, IBM Enhanced Audio Conferencing .
There has been quite a lot of innovative work on the audioonly front.
Examples include Voice Loops , Thunderwire  and Mad Hatter .
However, audio-only systems are limited by a lack of visual cues to determine others' presence and availability, etc.
Problems include difficulties hearing speakers, identifying who is speaking, knowing who is listening, getting a turn to speak, etc.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
An obvious approach to addressing the problems with audio-only systems is to add a visual channel.
One approach is to add video.
Work in videoconferencing and media spaces has shown that video is valuable for coordinating activity, identifying speakers, and enhancing and personalizing social interaction by offering mutual awareness, media presence and people images .
However, video has barriers to adoption such as high cost , lack of mobility, privacy concerns, and scaling issues .
An alternative approach is to use visual abstractions, such as icons, to enhance audio conferencing.
The advantage of this more abstract approach is that it requires less bandwidth, and the visual information can be presented much more compactly, thus offering the potential for visually enhanced calls to be supported on mobile phones and other small screen devices.
On the other hand, this approach necessarily lacks the richness of video, and it is not clear whether the advantages afforded by video will carry over to this minimalist approach.
We divide visually enhanced audio conferencing systems into two categories: screen-oriented and voice-oriented.
The former emphasize data sharing and co-editing using techniques such as screen sharing, shared whiteboard use, synchronized presentation, and so forth.
Examples of this type of system include Sametime , Teamspace  and LiveMeeting .
Voice-oriented systems are focused on improving calling experiences, and while they use visual channels to enhance audio, they are designed so that use of a computer and its screen is generally optional.
Examples include the Enhanced Telephony prototype , Impromptu , and audio conferencing systems such as SmartPhone , Meeting Central  and IEAC.
For the purpose of this paper, we focus on voice-oriented enhanced audio conferencing.
One of the earliest examples is Moors' SmartPhone .
Moors suggested that audioonly conferencing was hindered by problems with control functions such as turn taking, and designed SmartPhone to include a visual display to allow callers to take turns, raise hands, and so on.
However, aside from reports of a few observations during an initial trial on an unknown number of users for an unknown period of time, no evaluation of the system's use is provided.
Significant differences in subjects' judgments of the ease of determining who was speaking, when to talk, and who was listening were found, with the graphical interfaces making the judgments easier.
In addition, users indicated a preference for the graphically-enhanced interfaces.
The project closest in approach to IEAC is Sun's Meeting Central .
Both use a shared visualization to provide presence and status information about the call's participants.
Drawing on the concept of social translucence , both systems explore ways of providing information to allow participants to conduct a call coherently and create and enforce conventions.
The Meeting Central work is notable for its extensive formative empirical work  that provides valuable documentation of problems with audio conferencing, and for the comprehensiveness of its shared visualization which in addition to showing presence and status information, permits users to engage in textual or voice backchannels, raise hands, vote, etc.
However, although Meeting Central has been implemented and deployed, we know little about how the Meeting Central visualization is used.
The first report on Meeting Central , reports preliminary user reactions from a limited deployment to three groups of 4 to 15 people - these consist of a few positive comments and feature requests.
Subsequent empirical work by this group has focused on particular aspects of Meeting Central's functionality: the reception of private voice chats and their use relative to private textual chat has been explored in a short paper , and efforts to enhance audio conferencing sound quality are evaluated in .
Although development has continued to expand the features supported by Meeting Central's  visualization , there are no further reports on whether or how the visualization features are used in everyday audio conferencing situations.
The gist of its functionality is this.
First, the assistant allows the user, in effect, to press three buttons to connect to his or her current conference call, without having to recall the call's number or passcode.
Second, for users with access to a computer, the IEAC meeting window shows who is on the call, who is speaking, and provides access to call-related functionality such as muting.
In somewhat more detail, IEAC works as follows.
A registered IEAC user dials a single number - using either a conventional or VoIP phone - and enters a single password .
This connects the user to the IEAC assistant which uses information extracted from the employee's corporate calendar  to offer the user a choice of conference calls, beginning with the current meeting.
Upon selecting a meeting by pressing "1", the user is transferred into the call .
If the IEAC user has also installed the meeting window, a visual component that runs on top of the corporate instant messaging infrastructure, it will pop up on the user's computer screen 10 minutes before the call's start.
Figure 1 shows the meeting window for a small conference call.
At the top is a menu bar that provides access to various preferences, help information, and functionality .
Next is meeting information taken from the user's calendar.
Jumping to the bottom of the window, we see a user information display area and a status line that shows the most recent event.
The central pane of the meeting window contains a social proxy for the conference call - a minimalist visualization that shows the states of the meeting's participants .
In consequence, the results of this study cannot be taken as an indication of how IEAC will fare when more generally deployed.
However, as Von Hipple and his colleagues have argued , studying "lead users" - those who are ahead of the curve in experiencing a new technology - can provide a valuable source of information on how the technology is being adopted and how to further develop it.
We used two approaches to study the deployment: we analyzed system logs, and interviewed IEAC users.
There were two sources of log data.
The first was the IEAC system log : it logged all calls, their durations and participants, and various low level events.
The second source was the meeting window server request log.
This log was generated especially for this study, and spans about six weeks from early June to mid July.
It captured requests sent from the meeting window to the server, resulting in a log of many  of users' interactions with the meeting window.
If an interaction required server access to proceed 
Occasional server crashes resulted in  gaps in both logs, but with the exception of the week of July 4th, gaps are short and few.
The interview protocol was iteratively developed through pilot interviews with 6 members of a cross-organizational team involved in overseeing the IEAC deployment.
The resulting semi-structured interview protocol covered three areas.
We began by asking about the informant's job, location and conference calling experience.
The majority of the interview was devoted to inquiring about the use of each of the functional elements of the meeting window, probing for specific examples for each function.
We ended by asking for feedback on how the system might be improved.
Because the focus of this study is on the ways in which users use the meeting window functionality, we restricted our sample to people who had used the meeting window recently.
We generated a list of 116 people who had used the meeting window in the last two days, and randomly selected 10 names from it.
Those who did not reply positively to the interview invitation were replaced with other random selections until we had arranged 10 interviews .
Because our informants were not local, we conducted all interviews using IEAC.
Interviews typically lasted an hour, and were conducted by two or three people, one conducting the interview, and the other taking notes; all were digitally recorded.
Attendees who are not registered IEAC users  show up as guests, as in the case of "Guest02."
In addition to showing presence information, the conference call social proxy shows who is `speaking'- or, more accurately, which line a signal is coming over - and displays a `speech bubble' next to the appropriate icon; the icon also changes to indicate if the user is on mute or has disconnected.
The conference call proxy also allows users to carry out actions.
Clicking on another user displays a locally cached picture, job title, etc.
IEAC is being gradually deployed within IBM.
Currently there are over 1,300 registered users of IEAC who can set up calls and use its functionality.
Those not registered can still dial in to IEAC calls, so the number of people dialing in is about four times that of the registered user base.
IEAC is being deployed via IBM's Technology Adoption Program , which allows any interested employee to try out systems under development.
This has two implications for our study.
First, it means that IEAC is being used primarily by non-researchers who constitute the vast majority of IBM employees .
Second, it means that IEAC users are self-selected: they learned of IEAC and requested to be included in the trial.
Figure 2 shows the calls per day handled by the IEAC system for the first 7 months of 2006 .
The steadily increasing usage corresponds to the gradual addition of users.
Although weekends are omitted, a weekly pattern with more calls midweek than on Monday or Friday is still visible.
The box towards the right end of the graph indicates the period during which IEAC meeting window server requests were logged.
Figure 3 shows the number of meetings in which at least one user did something that required the meeting window to make a special request to the server.
This provides a lower bound on the daily number of meetings in which the meeting window was used.
That is, the estimate is conservative because the meeting window could provide value without interacting with the server: the window pops up automatically 10 minutes before each meeting, shows participants arriving, speaking and departing, and allows its user to select participants' names to reveal their pictures and job descriptions, all without server requests.
If we compare the highlighted portion of Figure 2 with Figure 3, we see two things.
First, the meeting window is being used to access the server in only 15% - 25% of the meetings.
Second, Figure 3 shows a gradual decline from an average of around 400 uses of the meeting window per day in the first week, to around 200 per day in the last week, even though the total number of IEAC calls IEACis about the same.
We will return to these observations in the discussion; for now we will note that even 250 meeting window uses per day is a significant body of data on which to draw.
This means that a user used the meeting window to open another person's entry in the corporate directory.
About half the instances of directory use occurred just after the meeting started.
This means that a user opened or closed a "mini-calendar" which showed his or her upcoming meetings.
About a third of the time a calendar "open" event was followed immediately by an "open the meeting window" event, suggesting that the calendar was being used to manually launch the meeting window.
This event is logged when users use the meeting window to open a chat with another meeting invitee .
Chat showed no pattern relative to the meeting's start.
This happens when an identified user assigns a "guest"  an identity by right clicking their name.
About half the instances of "Set Identity" occurred immediately after the meeting's start.
A user can mute herself, another user or everyone else on the call.
Over half the instances of mute occurred in the first half of the meeting.
While we had expected that chat would be a common use of the meeting window, the even greater frequency of the directory and calendar lookups, and the relatively high frequency of the set identity function surprised us.
In summary, log data showed that the IEAC system is supporting around 1500 calls a day, that the meeting window is being used to access the server in 15% to 25% of these calls, and which functions invoked through the meeting window are most frequently used.
These data leave many questions unanswered.
Why are corporate directory lookups, viewing one's calendar, and setting others' identity so often used?
What is happening with respect to muting others, an action which seems potentially rude?
How is chat being used in meetings?
And, more generally, what value, if any, do users of the meeting window obtain?
The IEAC meeting window helped users get to their calls in two ways: it served as a reminder, and it also helped users decide precisely when they should join the call.
Our 10 informants, randomly selected from those who had recently used the meeting window, were generally heavy conference call users.
This is not surprising, since users of IEAC have voluntarily adopted it, and since, as a global and highly distributed company, IBM contains a large number of people who work remotely, including a substantial percentage who work exclusively out of their homes .
Of our 10 informants, 7 worked primarily out of their homes rather than offices , and 7  played technical rather than managerial roles.
It was not uncommon for our informants to report spending 4 to 6 hours a day on conference calls, with conference calls typically ranging from 5 to 10 people, though several reported occasional large scale calls ranging from 30 to 100 participants.
To give a sense of the informant we're refering to, we will designate informations by #-{T | M}{H | O}; thus 3-TH designates informant 3, an employee who plays a technical role, working primarily from home.
We occasionally quote our pilot inteviewees , all of whom are involved in managing IEAC's deployment.
We will discuss the findings from our interviews by dividing the conference call experience into three temporal segments: getting to the call; managing the meeting process; and facilitating the business of the call.
The automatic pop up of the meeting window ten minutes before a call was appreciated by most informants.
7-TH's comment is representative: "I *love* that it pops up ten minutes before my meeting, because I get so deep into my  that I'll lose track of time."
Another informant used this feature along with his calendar to create staged reminders: " IEAC reminds me ten minutes before  and I am like `OK, I've got like five minutes.'
Then  reminds me at two minutes.
So I realize, `OK, seriously, I really need to get ready to take the next call' kind of thing."
Once the meeting window pops up on users' screens, they will often monitor it to see when others join.
As 10-MO said, "If I'm joining a call and I look at IEAC, and nobody is in the room yet, I know everybody is running late, so maybe I don't have to rush too much... if I am running over  my own call, I don't have to rush to get into the next one when there is nobody else there either."
Similarly, 5MO remarked, "Sometimes if I'm late in joining a conference call ...
I do bring up the visualization ... for instance, I may have been on another call or I am doing something I need to finish, I can join the call ... 10 minutes late, I ... bring up  visualization to see who else has joined, ... or to find a critical time to join the call."
We experienced this phenomenon during the interviews, which we conducted using IEAC.
We typically dialed into the meeting about five minutes early because we didn't want our informants to have to wait for us.
However, many of them noticed our presence and immediately dialed in, apologizing for being late.
Others double-clicked on our names and IM'ed us to say they'd be a bit longer.
Almost all informants noted that IEAC made it easier to get to their calls.
Although joining a conference call may not seem difficult, frequent callers face a number of issues, including keeping track of multiple numbers and passcodes; remembering when to call ; and knowing when to dial in.
These difficulties are exacerbated when a user has back-to-back calls, when a prior call is running over, if a call is during non-business hours, or if the caller is traveling - all circumstances that are not uncommon in a globally distributed business.
As described above, the IEAC assistant automatically connects callers to their calls.
As this does not involve the meeting window, we will pass quickly over this, noting only that most of our informants stated that this was an extremely valuable function, some noting that the `single number' functionality was sufficient reason for them to use the system.
Once users have dialed into the call, the next stage of activity involves getting the meeting off to a good start.
This role is often taken up by the moderator, the person who sent the meeting invitation and thus set up the call.
Activites include deciding when to start, monitoring who is present, and managing sound quality.
The decision of when to start the meeting is often a function of how many people have arrived, or whether particular people have arrived.
The conference call social proxy allows participants to see who is present, who just arrived and who is late, rather than the moderator having to repeatedly ask "Who just joined?"
From my visualization, I know who is not here."
7-TH said, "Several times there has been a delay between when I see  popping up and when they actually announce themselves, so I could announce to everyone, `Here's so and so.'
As you know, on some of the calls, people might be late, especially with the Directors,  are coming from a prior call.
Someone might say `Where is so and so?'
In that case, I might know ahead of time that they are joining the call, and be able to say `Here they come'."
The conference call proxy also facilitates coordination via chat.
A typical use is for the moderator to open a chat with someone who has not yet arrived.
3-TH reported "Actually that is one thing that the visualization does help with: You can very easily figure out who is not on the call yet, you know, you have that whole list of people who are not here yet... if they were critical to the call, I would probably ping them and say, you know, `Are you joining the call?'"
Similarly, 6-TH said, "Let's say somebody hasn't joined the call yet and I'm expecting them to be here because they have accepted , then I select the name and double-click on it, and IM them directly from there to say `Hey, are you joining the meeting?'
Instead of having to go to look up  or whatever, so that is helpful."
By providing `communication handles' for all participants in the meeting, the social proxy makes coordination via chat a much lighter weight process; this is particularly useful because moderators are often dealing with multiple issues when starting a meeting.
Even when the content of the call is not confidential, people appreciate knowing who is there.
6-TH commented "You have different kinds of conversations with different groups of people, and if people can lurk without the visualization, it's always a concern: do you really know who everyone is there, right?
I may add some information that I'm willing to give to some people but not others, or I may even behave differently with some people than others."
Of course, as participants knew, the conference call proxy does not provide complete surety as it does not reflect the situation in which collocated groups dial in using a speaker phone.
The concern with who is present also explains why setting identity is among the most frequently used functions.
People who attend a call, but are not registered with IEAC, show up in the conference call proxy with the label "Guest."
Although this is not foolproof, as it relies on a person to assign the identity, it appears to be sufficient for normal purposes.
A number of our informants mentioned that they customarily assigned identities to guests as they showed up at the start of the meeting, which is consistent with the log analysis showing that about half the uses of "set identity" occur immediately after the start of the call.
In addition to ensuring that meeting participants are present and accounted for, good sound quality is important for a successful call.
While sometimes this is only amenable to a technical solution, often it can be socially managed.
Problems with audio quality may be due to a participant calling in from a noisy place, a poor cellular connection, or a participant who breathes heavily while hurrying through an airport .
The meeting window's social proxy supports dealing with audio quality problems in two ways: first, it makes it easier to detect the source of the problem; second, it provides a means of control.
Several informants reported diagnosing the source of annoying background noise by watching the conference call proxy and correlating the appearance of the `speech bubble' with the noise.
Once the noise was identified, the person could be informed, or if necessary, another person could mute him or her.
Muting another person is useful when the person is using a telephone without a mute function, when they are asleep, when the caller has temporarily left the phone , or when a person has put the call on hold .
About half our informants reported putting others on mute, or doing so and then IM'ing the person muted to tell them.
In addition to making sure that invited people are present, another reported use of the conference call proxy is to ensure that others are not present.
Sometimes, especially in large meetings, people are supposed to attend for one part of the call, and then leave.
7-TH said: "One thing I find interesting is that you can't hide...  you're on, you are on.
No sneaking in on a call.
While many informants weren't very concerned with confidentiality, those who were - for example consultants who assemble bids and vet contracts - were very concerned.
Once conditions necessary for the meeting to proceed are in place, the business of the call begins.
While IEAC's meeting window does not directly facilitate the discussion of content, it plays three roles in supporting the meeting: aiding speaker identification, providing a means of gathering ancillary information about participants, and serving as a ready to hand within-meeting backchannel.
As expected, given the difficulty callers have in determining who is speaking , our informants found the association of the speech bubble with a person's name very helpful.
6-TH said " most frequent time I look... is when I hear someone talking and either I don't recognize their voice, or I want to identify their voice.
So at the beginning of the meeting, I use it a lot - I identify people as they're joining the meeting.
Subsequent to that, I look at it kind of idly to see who's talking."
This is reinforced by the fact that several informants grumbled about the lag between speech and the appearance of the speech bubble .
Informants also reported that they used the meeting window to keep track of who was on the call.
The conference call proxy also helped callers remember who was in the meeting later.
Both 4-TO and 6-TH reported that they captured screenshots of the meeting window attendance list to include in their meeting notes.
Other informants reported keeping instances of the meeting window open after the meeting ended to remind themselves of the call, and of who had been present.
P-6 reported that he leaves the windows up "to make sure that I get the names right when I'm doing minutes of meetings."
It's nice to see what people look like; there are people I've worked with for years that I have no idea what they look like until  started putting pictures up."
10-MO: "I think it personalizes it.
In a lot of cases you end up having phone calls with people who you never met in person...you know, this call has been a perfect example, I've never met either of you, the odds of meeting you are pretty slim, and yet I feel like I have a better sense of connection to you and the work you are doing just by looking at the picture of each of you.
It makes it more personal; it is more human."
According to the meeting window server request log, the most heavily used function of the meeting window was to bring up the corporate directory page.
Although simply selecting a name provides a picture and brief job description , users often took the next step of bringing up BluePages, the corporate directory.
BluePages provides far more detail, including job descriptions, lists of projects, and the person's co-workers, management chain, and organizational location.
Most informants reported that they used it to learn "what people's roles are," "who they report to," or "where people `fit' or `belong' in the organization."
Why should people be so concerned about each other's roles?
Our data suggest that such ancillary information helps to interpret others' input.
Several informants reported checking out a person's directory information when his or her comments were interesting .
8-TH said "This person's talking and I get curious and look up who they are and what they do.
Sometimes, I am curious: OK, these people are weird, what motivations there are, who do they report to - that way, I get some perspective of where they are calling from."
In addition, people also determine what and how to speak based on their knowledge of their audience.
Some informants reported looking up people even before the meeting started, as a way to prepare.
While we expected informants to find the speech bubble useful, as it helps to determine who is speaking, we were surprised by the degree to which informants used the social proxy to obtain ancillary information about other callers.
About half our informants said that the pictures that appear when a participant's name is selected in the meeting window were important.
In terms of practical value, some commented that pictures served as memory aids.
In addition, some informants reported that the pictures allowed them to address another person by name, either on the call or when they finally encountered them face to face.
Some informants were quite passionate about the value of pictures, noting that they were especially important for those who worked from home.
As Figure 4 shows, chat - and specifically chat initiated by clicking on a name in the meeting window - is one of the most frequent uses of the social proxy .
We have already noted its role in managing the meeting process by permitting the summoning of latecomers, and as a means of informing others that they need to mute themselves.
Informants described a variety of backchannel chat behaviors, often noting that they preferred to privately consult a colleague than disrupt the meeting.
Sometimes the ability to speak privately was valued for saving face - for example, to avoid appearing as though one hadn't been listening or hadn't fully understood the conversation.
Informants also described tag-team behavior, in which chat allowed one person to act on another's behalf.
3-TH described playing a role as a backup to someone doing a presentation: "...so if someone asks a question that the presenter doesn't know the answer to I'll use  to find out the answer while they're still on the call."
In a less cooperative example, 1-TH describes how he used chat to `encourage' another person to provide him with information that he could tell he would soon be asked for: "So I'll ... ping the person that was supposed to respond to me  and hasn't yet.
Hey did you read my email?
Give me an answer now!
That would be good because probably in five or ten minutes I'm going to be asked a question and I'm going to have to ask you  anyway."
More generally, informants spoke of using chat during a call to make sure that they were "on the same page" as their colleagues.
4-TO: "I feel free with my management to express my opinion when it's just them and I, but when everybody's on the call it is best to reserve those opinions... a lot of time those will be the  conversations that will be going on ... conversation with my management to express that I don't agree with them."
Similarly, 5-MO said " It can be useful to be able to have a private discussion about the merits of what someone is saying, and to confer with team members... generally my habit in conference calls, especially if it is with multiple organizations ... there are things we talk about on the call, and then we use IM in trying to arrive at an understanding, or sharing info that can't be openly shared on the call."
It is useful to remember that meetings aren't just among people but among organizational units.
7-TH: "We've had a few cases where we had  folks on a call, and we were meeting with people in  who had to sign off on  requests.
We might have a few folks sending IM messages back and forth to answer questions, to be prepared to answer questions that  was asking, etc.
We'd IM back and forth to get info across, or to remind folks to ask specific questions."
Finally, the meeting window facilitates the business of the meeting, showing who is speaking, enabling users to gather information about others, and allowing users to coordinate with one another .
There is a seeming tension between the results of our log analyses and our interviews.
The people we interviewed are enthusiastic about IEAC, and report a multitude of ways in which the meeting window makes their daily lives easier.
On the other hand, the meeting window is only used to access the server in 15% to 25% of the calls.
Furthermore, over the six week study period, the number of uses of the meeting window per day has declined from an average of about 400 to 200.
These results are not as divergent as they seem.
One explanation for the limited use of the meeting window is, quite simply, that it isn't always useful.
As several informants noted, the conference call proxy is less useful in small recurring calls in which you know the other callers - once people have arrived, speaker ID, coordination and backchanneling are less important than in larger calls with strangers.
A second point is that, according to the system log, a maximum of 25-30% of those who currently dial in to IEAC calls are registered ; nonregistered users can participate in the audio portion of the call, but can not see or use the meeting window.
In spite of the fact that some moderators use "Set Identity,' on the average, only a minority of participants will be identified, and the social benefits of the proxy - seeing who is present, talking, etc.
It will be interesting to see if usage of the meeting window increases as the deployment continues and the percentage of registered users rises.
A third point is that many ways of using the meeting window -watching the arrival and departure of users, identifying speakers, and clicking on names to see pictures, etc.
There are a number of explanations for the decline in usage over the study period.
First, it may be that callers abandoning the use of the meeting window due to the lack of a critical mass of users, or for other reasons.
Several of our informants commented that the meeting window was less useful when there were few registered users.
However, there are at least three temporary factors that may have contributed to the decline.
One is that a significant change in the operation of the meeting window occurred during the study period.
Our interviews reveal a rich set of practices that are facilitated by IEAC.
The process of getting to the meeting is facilitated by the assistant, with its single number for all calls, and by the meeting window's appearance ten minutes before the call's start.
In addition, the meeting window's social proxy provides a new capability in allowing a notyet-dialed-in caller to `watch' as people arrive, and to thus gauge exactly when to join the call.
The conference call proxy is also important in managing the call and getting it off to a smooth start.
Call moderators find it useful in monitoring the arrival of participants, and its chat functionality provides a ready-to-hand means of summoning the tardy.
It also provides new ways to ensure that the conditions are right for the call to get under way.
However, as this also caused confusion, the pop-up behavior was disabled for nonregistered users in a new version that was gradually downloaded by the user population in July.
This shift eliminated uses of the meeting window by non-registered users.
A second temporary factor was occurence of a bug that caused intermitant failure of the meeting window to pop up automatically, meaning that users would have to manually launch it.
A third temporary factor is that the end of the second quarter occurred midway through the study period.
Quarter endings are characterized by large cross functional meeings, which  are those in which the meeting window is most useful for retrieving information about unknown participants.
That the decline was largely due to temporary factors is buttressed by a recent spot check of the meeting window usage rate that shows about 175 touches per day, for the eighth week after the end of the study period.
This represents a slight decline, but had the drop seen in the study period continued linearly, meeting window use should have ceased by this point.
The enthusiasm of our informants for the meeting window should not be a surprise.
Since our informants were selected from the set of people who had recently used the meeting window, our sample was biased towards frequent and active users, and this in turn means that they were likely to have meetings that included other registered users .
This selection method was deliberately chosen to provide a look at how the meeting window might be used when there is a larger percentage of registered users.
This highlights the fact that people benefit from understanding others' contexts, and that meetings are interactions between organizations, as well as individuals.
Finally, we were struck by the strong attachments our users, particularly remote workers, felt to pictures.
This may become increasingly important as remote work increases in quantity and frequency.
The results of our study leave us cautiously optimistic that there is a future for visually enhanced audio conferencing systems like SmartPhone , Meeting Central  and IEAC.
Our study indicates that the value of visual enhancements lies both in making activities that are already possible easier, and in enabling activities not previously possible in audio conferencing.
The ability of an individual to dial in at just the right moment by keeping an eye on the meeting window, or to open the corporate directory to find out more about the speaker making the `weird' remarks, or the ability of representatives of division X to use a private backchannel to coordinate their response to division Y, are all means of making the meeting process more effective.
These are examples of what Nardi and colleagues have termed `outeraction:' "communicative processes outside of information exchange, in which people reach out to others in patently social ways to enable information exchange" .
But while they have positioned outeraction vis a vis informal communications, we note that it also plays a role in the more formal meetings we report on here.
While conference calls seem formal, with their scheduled times and invitation lists, participating is not a simple matter of just dialing in and talking.
As this study has shown, a lot of work is necessary: from the basic logistics of restoring, managing, and retrieving call information, to more complex social coordination to ensure critical presence; from the creation of a desirable and confidential call environment, to the collective construction of face when different organizations interact.
All of this becomes more difficult as the number of conference calls increases, as people become more mobile and distributed, and as more organizations and strangers are involved in calls.
One of the most interesting lessons we take away from this research is how much work is going on behind the scenes - by moderators, individuals, and organizationally defined subgroups - to create a coherent and productive meeting.
This work raises a variety of other questions that are ripe for future work.
One area that seems ripe for work is to take a closer look at "formal" meetings.
While the field has by no means ignored more formal meetings , especially if they involve design or programming teams, it seems to us that there has been a very strong bias towards studying informal, unscheduled interactions.
We believe that the domain of `formal' meetings offers a rich terrain to explore.
In reflecting on our findings we see four factors that drive the use of IEAC's assistant and meeting window.
IEAC makes many currently possible things easier.
It eases the burden of remembering numbers and passcodes, makes meeting invitee's IM handles easily accessible, and facilitates seeing who is present.
It is easy to dismiss these as minor improvements, but we suggest that when considered in context - multi-tasking users, under time pressure, in a cognitively demanding situation in which errors are public and potentially embarrassing - they constitute a major shift in the caller's experience.
The conference call proxy makes control and coordination easier by making the state of the meeting visible, and by providing ready to hand channels through which communication and control are exercised.
This supports central control by the moderator , coordination among colleagues , and collective coordination .
We've been struck by the difference in experience reported by those who work full time out of their homes.
While there is a large literature on telework, much of it takes an organizational or managerial perspective , rather than asking how to support the individual.
In this vein, one might inquire about the role and importance of social cues like pictures, and ready access to profile information, on remote workers' ability to collaborate with their colleagues.
Finally, our interest in understanding and designing enhanced audio conferencing systems continues.
Both of these areas - formal meetings and home workers - offer interesting possibilities for driving the further design of enhanced audio conferencing.
