Lightweight spatially aware displays  are an effective approach for exploring complex information spaces within a tabletop environment.
One way of using the 3D space above a horizontal surface is to divide it into discrete parallel layers stacked upon each other.
Horizontal and vertical lens movements are essential tasks for the style of multi-layer interaction associated with it.
We conducted a comprehensive user study with 18 participants investigating fundamental issues such as optimal number of layers and their thickness, movement and holding accuracies, and physical boundaries of the interaction volume.
Findings include a rather limited overall interaction height , a different minimal layer thickness for vertical and horizontal search tasks , a reasonable maximum number of layers depending on the primary task, and a convenience zone in the middle for horizontal search.
Derived from that, design guidelines are also presented.
Multi-Layer Interaction; Spatially Aware Displays; Above the Tabletop; Tangible Magic Lens; User Study.
Information interfaces and presentation: User Interfaces - input devices and strategies.
With ever increasing complex information spaces, technology and user interfaces are required to explore them and to focus attention to the relevant information.
Magic lenses, first introduced in 1993 for graphical user interfaces , have been proven to be one promising solution.
Since then, they were made tangible as additional active or passive displays being used on tabletops , above tabletops , in the air  or as Mixed Reality lenses .
Typically, these setups include one or more larger  surfaces.
In this work, we will focus on tangible magic lenses in combination with horizontal displays .
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
For this purpose, the 3D space above the work surface can be divided into physically separated horizontal layers .
They can be explored by moving spatially aware lightweight displays through the "air" that constantly provide immediate visual feedback regarding current layers.
Until now, many of the aforementioned magic lens approaches present "cool" technologies and interesting interaction opportunities, whereas a careful investigation of the actual physical characteristics and limitations is still missing.
Few studies have addressed multi-layer interaction above tabletops, with  being a rare exception and focusing on pen interaction only.
Although multi-layer tangible lens interaction has proven to be a powerful tool for a broad spectrum of application domains, such as the exploration of spatial information spaces , information visualization , and collaborative face-to-face sketching and brainstorming , only little is known about appropriate boundaries for the physical interaction space, adequate amounts of layers, or minimum layer thicknesses - especially with respect to typical interaction tasks with layers.
This paper aims at filling this gap by presenting a comprehensive study which we conducted to find answers regarding these questions.
In particular, we were interested in: * How accurate do users actually interact in the space above the tabletop ?
We conducted a comparative user study with 18 participants.
For this purpose, a simple tangible magic lens system with limited features was implemented.
As the participants accomplished several tasks with the system, more than five hours of performance data was collected.
Beyond that, we gathered detailed self-reported data directly after each task.
Our findings address valuable insight into physical precision as well as practical guidelines on how to extend a  system with multi-layer interaction techniques.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows.
After presenting background/related work, we describe the goals and the scope of the study in more detail.
In this section, a brief overview of common tangible mobile display approaches is presented and set into context of the used reference surface.
This is done in order to highlight technical environments and potential usage scenarios that are likely to benefit from multi-layer exploration techniques as will be discussed in the next section.
Merging the digital world with the physical world is the vision of ubiquitous computing, as defined by Weiser .
This concept was adapted by Ishii's and Ullmer's tangible user interfaces  , where interaction with digital information is provided through physical manipulation of real-world objects.
Inspired by the notion of see-through interfaces , these objects can also be spatially aware physical displays  that serve as tangible magic lenses into the virtual world.
One of the first mobile displays for ubiquitous usage has been proposed by Fitzmaurice, who presented a spatially aware palmtop computer for exploring 3D-situated information spaces for revealing virtual information associated with arbitrary objects in an office environment .
Contrary to Fitzmaurice's approach, the metaDESK project by Ullmer and Ishii  makes use of a horizontal reference surface only: a tabletop.
Here, users can freely navigate through polygonal 3D models by moving an arm-mounted LCD display through the space above the tabletop that is also responsible for providing contextual graphical information.
Hirota and Saeki  as well as Konieczny et al.
In terms of vertical reference surfaces, Sanneblad and Holmquist  used mobile phones to magnify details of a larger contextual image that was shown on a wall display, but without using the space in front of the wall for interaction purposes, such as controlling the level of detail.
Besides providing a technical solution for projecting video content on spatially aware projection screens, Lee et al.
User's Body as Reference Surface.
The peephole displays by Yee  explore the virtual information space wrapped around a user by taking the distance between user and PDA into account.
This is used for zooming and layering operations in the context of desktop applications, such as calendar, web browsing or geographical maps.
In various cases, active display solutions, such as LCD panels, do not provide suitable form factors for a seamless integration into a tangible magic lens system.
This lack of technology motivated researchers to come up with a variety of lightweight display solutions, with many of them being designed for horizontal tables. Most of these solutions use a passive approach, i.e., image content is projected onto spatially aware projection screens in one or another form.
In contrast, SecondLight by Izadi et al.
It supports dual back-projections on both a tabletop surface and tangible lenses above it.
For UlteriorScape, Kakehi and Naemura  use a special projection foil that changes its translucency depending on the projection angle and can be used to simultaneously backproject different image content onto a tabletop surface and a tangible lens, respectively.
Another promising technological development are organic LEDs  that one day might unify the advantages of active and passive displays.
As demonstrated in the previous section, a vivid research community is working in the field of tangible displays.
Although the aforementioned systems show that a broad spectrum of technical solutions and interaction techniques has been created for tangible displays, only few of these solutions truly utilize the 3D space above a reference surface for the purpose of multi-layer interaction.
A multi-layer space is a batch of discrete horizontal layers that are stacked one upon each other with each layer consuming a distinct height in physical 3D space.
In this way, the multi-layer stack features a physical extent into the third dimension that can be used as a "habitat" for spatially aware tangible displays.
Multi-layer stacks have been proven to be an effective interaction metaphor with a broad field of applications, e.g., geometric zooming of large images, semantic zooming of node-link diagrams, exploration of space-time data, and layered geo maps - such as demonstrated by our PaperLens  project.
This is a lightweight paper-based display solution that enables users to explore various types of information spaces by moving paper-like screens through the physical space above the tabletop .
For this purpose, layers of a virtual data space are mapped onto physical layers of a multi-layer stack that remain parallel to a horizontal table surface.
Another example is the layered information space  that enables users to explore several 2D information layers , e.g., anatomic images by moving a display horizontally above the table surface .
Here, selecting a layer is accomplished by vertical search.
For all these types of information spaces, the tabletop usually serves as a contextual reference that provides a graphical overview to the detail that is displayed on a mobile display.
In a concluding formative user study , we confirmed that their exploration techniques are easy to use and intuitive to work with, i.e., users were able to instantly accomplish given tasks without being taught how to actually interact with them, making these techniques ideal not only for public installations.
We believe that such techniques will play a vital role in future tabletop research.
Evaluating specific tangible display systems has been the goal of a few research projects only.
Besides our own work , a notable example is Oh and Hua's evaluation on form factors of tangible magic lenses .
In a comparative user study, they tested various lens aspect ratios and sizes.
They came to the conclusion that the aspect ratio of a lens plays a more important role for smaller lenses than for larger ones and that lens sizes are more dominant in impacting the user performance.
However, to the best of our knowledge, no evaluation of the particular needs of the multi-layer interaction aspect of such systems has been done before.
Although this is similar to the previously introduced PaperLens concept, it does not couple input and output within the same physical device.
In a pilot study with 5 users  they estimated a minimal layer thickness of 4 cm to prevent frustration due to accidentally changing layers, which is close to our findings.
In order to reduce fatigue, they argued for limiting the maximum height above the work surface to about 16 cm, thus,
They also noted that when users only navigated through layers  these could be made thinner than layers where selection gestures were performed .
At the same time, layers closer to the work surface could be made thinner than others.
While the long-term goal of our work is to fully understand general affordances of tangible magic lens interaction above the tabletop, the focus of this study is the thorough investigation of the special requirements of multi-layer interaction and its physical boundaries.
In particular, we are interested in the three basic interaction tasks discussed in the previous section: holding, vertical search, and horizontal search.
These operations shall be examined in terms of the accuracy at which users can execute them in physical space.
In addition, design principles concerning layer thickness, quantity and convenience volumes for multi-layer interaction shall be derived as a sound foundation for designing future magic lens systems.
Hence, the main focus of this work is on designing, conducting and evaluating a user study that addresses the following issues: * Finding possible physical lower and upper thresholds that vertically limit the interaction space * Finding exact measures on how accurately users accomplish vertical & horizontal search and hold operations * Gaining an understanding about layout details for a multilayer stack and its dynamic exploration Many possible variables impact the interaction with tangible magic lenses, e.g., two- vs. one-handed use, tilting, display sizes and weights, device thicknesses, and display frame widths.
In order to maintain a manageable study design while still providing ecological validity, we needed to make some tradeoffs.
We therefore restricted our investigations to the case of a user standing in front of a horizontal tabletop and a two-handed use .
We also decided to disregard lens tilting.
In informal pre-tests we observed no practical influence of display sizes for a two-handed use , so we skipped this variable.
Another example is display weights.
We assume that in the near future a new generation of lightweight displays  will dramatically improve form factors of tablets, smart phones and alike, so that display weights are likely to come closer to the weight we used in our study .
A high priority was the avoidance of additional disturbing effects, such as a visual context displayed on the table surface.
In order to diminish cognitive load from participants, mainly stimuli were considered that address low-level processing.
Based on the feature integration theory , we designed single-feature search tasks with targets that are clearly visually separated from distractors.
This is achieved by using discriminative features , for instance strong contrasts of light, shade and color, which can be preattentively processed.
We used a within-subject design.
To compensate for different body sizes of participants , we decided to use the fist height and the shoulder height as a priori limits for the lower and upper boundaries of the interaction volume, with the fist height being the distance of fist to floor when the arm hangs loosely.
These values could be adjusted for each participant by using a platform .
The use of fist and shoulder heights was motivated by ergonomics literature - in our case  - and the outcome of a small pre-test: a table surface that is too low forces users to bend the upper body, whereas holding lenses higher than the shoulder quickly leads to fatigue.
We used the shoulder-fist distance to define the overall height of the interaction volume for each participant .
For vertical search tasks, a sequence of targets was defined that was distributed over the overall volume height.
For this purpose, we distinguished between three equispaced interaction zones: the lower , middle  and upper  zone .
We chose three random layers from each zone as a search target.
This allowed us to design six different combinations of vertical search tasks: L-L, M-M, U-U, L-M, L-U, and M-U, which was further multiplied by the direction, e.g., L-M vs. M-L or L1-L2 vs. L2-L1.
Since at least two variants were to be tested for each combination, we finally came up with 6 x 2 x 2 = 24 vertical search tasks.
For all participants and layer subdivisions  the same sequence was used.
Eighteen students and staff members from our department  participated in the user study.
All were daily users of computers and had advanced knowledge in the fields of computer graphics, simulation or image processing.
In order to test the accuracy at which users perform the three basic interaction tasks , a minimalistic layered information space was designed that consists of vertically stacked randomized integer numbers  representing the search targets unknown to participants.
The independent variable was the number of layers that directly correlates with layer thicknesses.
As pre-tests suggested, we expected this parameter to impact the accuracy of task performances.
Three different levels of layer subdivision were used: 9 layers , 18 layers  and 36 layers , as illustrated in Figure 3b.
According to this design, for each level of layer subdivision  a randomized sequence of 24 holding tasks , 24 vertical search tasks, and 9 horizontal search tasks was defined.
The same sequence was used for each participant.
See Figure 6 for an example height plot.
For each participant, the following order of test parts was maintained:  introduction part,  interaction part, and  assessment part.
Users spent on average 40 minutes performing all parts.
After participants completed a brief questionnaire soliciting demographics and computer usage information, the body, shoulder and fist heights were measured.
Thereon, the platform's height was adjusted to match the table height with the fist height, see section "Compensating Body Sizes" above.
Then, the main task was explained verbally in a standardized way by reading out aloud from a sheet of paper.
To ensure that all participants had perfectly understood all relevant aspects, they were invited to perform a few exercise trials without collecting data until they felt confident in handling the task .
Participants were asked to complete the interaction part in three cycles - one for each level .
The order of levels was counter-balanced.
For each cycle, participants were to hold the tangible display in front of their body in order to explore a stack of white random integer numbers by vertically lifting and lowering it  until they found the search target .
Users were instructed to read out aloud the red number 1.
From time to time , users had to perform a sequence of horizontal search tasks.
For this purpose, the red number was replaced by a slightly smaller white number above a red background with white arrows hinting that the participant should now continue searching horizontally until two randomized search targets  within the same layer were found that had to be read out aloud .
Whenever participants accidentally left the layer, they got immediate visual feedback .
In such cases, users had to manually find back to the layer by lifting/lowering the lens until it turned red again.
Neighboring layers did not contain any numbers.
This prevented reports of false numbers.
By reaching the starting position again , the horizontal search task ended, followed by the next vertical search task.
At the end of each cycle in the interaction part, participants were asked to rate their agreement on a 7-point Likert scale from "1"  to "7"  to several items in a questionnaire.
These items addressed the usability  regarding holding tasks, vertical search tasks and horizontal search tasks.
After all tasks of the interaction part had been completed, participants were asked to fill out another questionnaire that was very similar to the one from the interaction part, but this time with respect to how they perceived the interaction in each of the three interaction zones .
In order to utilize spatial memory, participants could play around with the tangible lens once again while the lens was tinted according to the scheme depicted in Figure 3a .
This was accomplished by holding the lens at the favored lower and upper heights above the table and then saying "okay".
The user study was conducted in a dark and quiet lab environment.
The technical setup used for the experiments consisted of a horizontal table , a piece of a rectangular cardboard of size 21.5 x 21.5 cm , and a ceiling-mounted video projector directly above the table.
In order to guarantee a high degree of spatial precision we opted for a magnetic-based tracking approach  that enabled us to limit the spatial error to 0.3 mm within a working volume of 70 x 70 x 70 cm.
We decided against projecting additional visual context onto the table.
Instead, the table surface primarily served as horizontal spatial reference.
On the software side, our system was implemented with C#.
We opted for a client/server model with the server being responsible for lens tracking and the client being responsible for displaying and application .
Communication between client and server was achieved by a simple self-tailored UDP/IP-based protocol.
It allows for sending and receiving a stream of 4 x 4 transformation matrices that describe the current 3D position and orientation of the tangible lens' center.
For later evaluation, the stream of transformation matrices was continuously logged into a file at a rate of about 33 samples per second.
Along with this, additional marker timestamps were recorded .
For this purpose, the study leader had to manually press the ENTER key every time a number was read out aloud to trigger the next task.
To ensure equal times for the holding task, the system automatically generated a "beep" sound after 3 seconds of holding.
Second, we provide further analysis with respect to the three interaction zones.
And third, we investigate data from questionnaires.
In order to analyze collected performance raw data, the following types of derived data have been extracted: * Task completion time  that we used as a distinct measure of performance for vertical and horizontal search tasks.
For holding tasks this time is constant  and thus not relevant.
By using MIN/ MAX operators, we decided on a conservative but simple statistical tool.
Choosing other tools, such as MEAN/ VARIANCE, would only further narrow our findings.
We used this as a measure of error.
We also analyzed tilting of lenses.
However, in contrast to our assumptions, we did not find any significant effect and thus will omit the discussion about it.
Collected data  was analyzed with a repeated measurement ANOVA.
For all ANOVAs, p-values were Greenhouse-Geisser corrected.
When main effects were significant, Bonferroni corrected p-values are reported for post hoc comparisons .
For testing the relationship between layer subdivision and accuracy of horizontal search tasks, correlation coefficients  were computed.
For statistical tests, the a priori threshold of  = .05 was used.
If not stated otherwise, results are in sec; "ns" stands for "not significant".
In the following, a basic analysis of performance data is presented.
See Figure 7 for completion times.
In summary, total completion times show that with decreasing thickness of layers participants needed significantly more time for completing horizontal and vertical search tasks.
In the following, further results are presented for each task.
The analysis of height deviations revealed no significant main effect of layer subdivisions  = 2.41, ns.
Pairwise comparisons showed that participants accidentally left target layers significantly more frequently  = 3.00, p < .024 for L18 than for L9.
In terms of the completion time, we observed a significant main effect of layer subdivisions for vertical search tasks  = 77.9, p < .001.
For horizontal search tasks we found a significant main effect of completion times of layer subdivisions  = 24.82, p < .001.
We observed no main effect of layer subdivisions for height deviations  = 2.25, ns.
The participants crossed layer boundaries less often for L9 than for L18 and L36, see Figure 8 .
This shows for all layer subdivisions that participants who accomplished tasks accurately were the ones with a good overall performance and vice versa.
In this section, further analysis of performance data is presented with regards to the lower, middle and upper interaction zone .
For this purpose, we rearranged already analyzed performance data with respect to these zones.
In particular, we looked into height deviations and outside times for holding and horizontal search tasks separately for each layer subdivision .
We did not find any significant main effect of the three interaction zones for height deviations or for outside times.
For L9 and L18 we observed no significant main effects with regard to the three interaction zones, neither for task completion times and height deviations, nor for outside times.
For the following discussion, see Figure 9.
Height deviations of the middle zone are slightly  smaller than the ones of the lower and upper zone.
This indicates that the middle zone takes on a special role for horizontal search tasks.
In this section, we will reflect on our results and provide answers to the questions of minimal layer thicknesses, vertical boundaries for the physical interaction zone, and maximum number of layers.
Based on these findings, we will derive design guidelines that will be presented at the end of this section.
In general, we can show that a diminishing layer thickness correlates with decreasing test performances.
This applied in particular to the vertical and horizontal search task.
In contrast, the holding task remained mostly unaffected.
Compared to other tasks, holding was performed most accurately.
On average, the height deviation for holding tasks was approx.
By taking into account a standard deviation of approx.
2 mm, this leads to a rather conservative minimum layer thickness of approx.
This value is even substantially lower than the average thickness of L36 , which is most likely the reason for why the control variable "layer subdivision" only marginally affected the error measure "outside times" for holding tasks.
Interestingly, participants performed the holding tasks most accurate with L36 , as opposed to L9 .
This effect was significant and indicates that visual feedback helps to further improve the accuracy at which holding tasks are performed - simply because users can adapt to errors quicker .
This interpretation is also supported by slightly longer "outside times" for L36 , which correlates with more frequent visual feedback due to thinner layers.
Surprisingly, these findings are somehow contradicted by self-reports.
Here, users had the subjective impression that they would perform significantly worse for L36  compared to L9 , which was just not true.
One reason for such ratings could be disappointment due to an assumed bad performance that was associated with leaving a layer.
We found significant main effects for task completion times between all combinations of layer subdivisions.
Pairwise comparisons show that L9 is rated best when compared with L18 and L36.
Individual comparison shows that contrasts are significant for all combinations.
With respect to the ratings for vertical search, we found a significant main effect of layer subdivisions  = 8.62, p = .001.
Pairwise comparisons show that L9 is assessed as significantly easier than both L18 and L36.
For L18 vs. L36, this effect is not significant.
Pairwise comparisons reveal that L36 is rated as significantly more difficult than L9 and L18.
The analysis of subjective boundaries of the interaction volume results in a preferred lower limit  and a preferred upper limit  above the table surface.
More precisely, for L9-L18, there were 9 added layers with 18 sec of longer completion times that resulted in a delay of 2 sec per extra layer.
In contrast, for L18-L36, there were 18 added layers with only 25 sec penalty producing a delay of less than 1.4 sec per extra layer.
This indicates that the vertical search task is an efficient interaction technique for single-feature searches  that performs better than linear with a growing search space.
These insights are also supported by self-reports.
Unfortunately, data gathered during our experiments made it difficult to directly derive a minimum layer thickness.
This is because "outside times" and "height deviations" are not available for vertical search.
However, since search tasks are usually accompanied by holding tasks, we can borrow from our findings there.
Thus, our conservative estimate for the minimum layer thickness for vertical search is roughly 1 cm.
For horizontal search, task completion times and outside times indicate that the threshold for a minimum layer thickness lies somewhere between L18 and L36.
Thus, a conservative measure is found by using the average layer thickness of L18  as the minimum layer thickness that is about 4 cm.
A less conservative measure would be slightly smaller but should not get too close to L36 .
A follow-up study with finer layer subdivisions might help further narrowing down this value.
However, conducting another user study is probably not worth the effort.
By compensating for the preferred lower boundary, we obtain a corrected upper boundary of about 44 cm  above the adjusted table surface.
A reasonable threshold for the maximum number of layers is found by mapping minimal layer thicknesses  onto the absolute height of the physical interaction volume .
Depending on the task, this results in a number of 44 layers  or 11 layers .
When designing multi-layer applications, the general rule of thumb is to use as few layers as necessary with the exact number depending on the primary interaction goal.
For instance, for the exploration of a multi-layer geo-referenced map, where panning  is the dominant task, at most eleven layers should be adopted.
In addition to that, most relevant information layers should be assigned to the middle  zone, followed by the lower zone.
One important outcome of our study was that vertical search was clearly favored over horizontal search.
Thus, it should be the first choice whenever possible.
For example, for the exploration of temporal data sets , vertical search should be reserved for the dominant goal of time-browsing, whereas horizontal search should be used for secondary goals, such as selecting a video.
Although our study mostly addressed single-feature search tasks in discrete  layers, many of our findings also apply to continuous layer setups.
Examples are the measures for lower and upper boundaries of the physical interaction space, the minimum layer thickness for holding tasks, and the recommendation for restricting the interaction to the middle and lower zones.
A simple way to improve the accuracy of holding and horizontal search tasks is to provide instant visual feedback regarding layer borders.
Another strategy is to adjust the center of the layer to match the current display height after a certain dwell time.
This prevents the problem of losing the layer when the tangible lens was originally too close to one of its boundaries - an effect that we frequently encountered during our studies.
Another noticeable effect was over- and undershooting during vertical search, especially whenever an unknown search target was encountered .
Beyond that, in many scenarios the required number of physical layers can easily extend a reasonable amount.
Holding tasks were performed equally well in all of the three interaction zones.
Horizontal search tasks, in contrast, were best accomplished in the middle zone  and not as we anticipated in the lower zone.
This was a surprising insight and somehow the precursor of another unexpected finding: Lower and Upper Boundaries.
When asked for their preferred lower interaction boundary, most participants did not choose the table surface.
Instead, they opted for a slightly higher value that was roughly 7 cm  above it.
On the one hand, this was because most participants did not consider letting the lens loose in order to put it on the table surface.
On the other hand, this means that the initially used "fist height" was a rather weak estimate for the table height.
This was probably due to the frequent bending of the upper part of the body that was involved, for instance, with the horizontal search task.
We therefore propose the "wrist height" as a more adequate measure for the ideal tabletop height.
This insight can also be useful for conventional interactive table displays, in particular whenever a standing usage is intended.
In this paper, a class of interaction techniques that extends the design space of horizontal digital tables to the physical third dimension was systematically investigated with respect to exploring a layered information space.
With a comprehensive user study, we studied the accuracy at which three fundamental tasks  are performed with tangible magic lenses.
This also considered other fundamental issues such as the optimal number of layers and their thickness.
Our findings include considerable differences in vertical and horizontal search tasks, e.g., a minimal layer thickness of 1 cm vs. 4 cm or a resulting maximum number of layers .
Derived from these findings, design recommendations were also presented.
Given the generic character of interaction tasks in stacks of discrete layers and their universal applicability for many systems and domains, we hope that our findings will help the research community to design and develop a new generation of applications using tangible magic lenses.
For future work, we intend to investigate further aspects of tangible multi-layer interaction, such as rotation tasks, the dynamic non-linear arrangement of layers, perceptual and cognitive issues as well as novel application domains.
