We conducted a two-month qualitative study of three introductory university Russian classes, involving complementary observations and interviews.
The many objects present in the foreign-language learning classroom, such as books and printouts, help facilitate communication among students.
We relate existing work on language learning technology to our findings about the roles played by the non-technological artifacts we observed in use.
We contribute design implications for creating devices to be more effectively embedded into the negotiated practices of students in foreign language classrooms.
This work focuses on student interactions facilitated by the communicative pedagogy of foreign language reaching.
This is currently a popular style of language instruction, associated with a paradigmatic shift in U.S. classrooms over recent decades.
This approach focuses on supporting the real and immediate use of learned knowledge for purposeful communication as a complement to more traditional analytic and rule-based teaching .
Savignon identifies five distinct aspects of the communicative approach:  language arts, focusing on vocabulary- and grammardriven instruction;  language for a purpose, or communicating ideas for their own sake rather than to reiterate lesson topics;  personalized language, encouraging students to express personally-relevant opinions and topics;  theatre arts, ranging from reading scripted dialogs to roleplaying open-ended scenarios; and  going beyond the classroom to incorporate authentic materials and cultural connections.
There are many potential advantages to incorporating technological interventions into language learning curricula, including in the classroom environment.
Garrett surveyed these opportunities and recent progress toward achieving them .
First, interactive software and devices provide feedback in the absence of the instructor, such as during pair or small-group class activities where the instructor's attention is focused on one of many sets of students at a time.
We present the results of a two-month ethnographic study of three introductory Russian classrooms.
Through observation and interviews, we identify several distinct roles played by physical artifacts in the classrooms, such as providing a reference to necessary foreign-language material and serving as props in creative role-play.
The range of roles taken on by artifacts and the attitudes students have toward them provide a basis for our discussion about how technology might be more effectively introduced into the socially negotiated environment of the introductory foreign-language classroom.
We identify the need to balance between collaborative and personal technology in a stressful, but social, context.
Our findings inform a range of roles that technology can undertake in replacing or augmenting existing classroom artifacts.
Computer uses in education People learn foreign languages for many different reasons, such as for personal or professional growth, to fulfill academic requirements, as part of relocating, or to connect with others.
Although people can learn individually through software and self-teaching books, foreign-language classrooms remain a popular and vital way of learning languages for people around the world .
However, as pedagogical practice embraces communicative approaches that encourage students to predominantly use the foreign language, the social, collaborative learning environment of the introductory classroom in particular is associated with tension and anxiety.
Learning a new language is a very difficult journey, regardless of how or why it is undertaken.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Second, technical interventions enable greater engagement with authentic materials, created by and for native speakers.
Especially in the introductory context, these are largely unapproachable to students, who lack sufficient mastery of the language to understand many authentic materials.
Even captioned movies provide benefit, but greater interactive multimedia has the further potential.
Technology is present in classrooms, in the form of CD players and PowerPoint presentations, but the roles it plays are limited in the extent to which they shape communication between students.
In communicative classrooms, synchronous, co-located technology is nearly nonexistent.
Offloading lecture and assignment feedback onto asynchronous software can benefit the communicative classroom, increasing both teacher and student satisfaction .
Placing devices into such an environment, however, has not seen any great success.
In-depth ethnographic studies are crucial to understanding how to design for the needs of students engaged in collaborative language learning .
Computer-supported collaborative learning  at large benefits from recognizing that collaborative knowledge building is distinct from individual knowledge building, in terms of technological needs .
A key role of discussion in collaborative learning is to make the tacit explicit, and negotiate breaks in understanding as a way to build understanding as a group.
Actions and utterances in a group setting have no analogue for individual learning.
Students rely on common ground knowledge to arrive at new, shared understanding, which is then embedded into externalized words and artifacts.
This opens new needs for technology to support distributed cognition, and the externalization of socially generated knowledge.
We contribute a study of introductory Russian classrooms where we characterize how non-technological artifacts mediate collaborative learning.
This characterization provides the basis for the following discussion on the possibilities and challenges in designing pervasive digital artifacts for a communicative language-learning classroom.
All three sections were taught in a large public university; the two larger sections were attended by first- or second-year college students fulfilling a foreign language requirement or beginning a major relating to Slavic studies.
The other, evening section also had several continuing education students looking to fulfill credit requirements or, in the case of a heritage student we interviewed, to improve his knowledge of a language he had an intuition for.
The three classrooms we observed were taught by two different instructors who had each granted us permission to observe their classes.
Each section was located in a different space, with slightly different layouts, as pictured in Figure 1, which affected the extent to which students could move around and engage with those not in their immediate vicinity.
Two of the sections met in the mornings and afternoons, respectively, for 1-hour sessions on Monday through Friday.
In the evening, there was a longer, 1.5-hour section of the class that met Monday through Thursday.
The morning, afternoon, and evening sections had 13 students, 15 students, and 8 students respectively.
The students were in the third part of a yearlong sequence of three introductory Russian courses.
We observed students in classrooms and conducted individual semi-structured interviews.
The first three authors conducted qualitative fieldwork across three introductory Russian classrooms for two months, and interviewed a subset of the students from each classroom to supplement our data.
We iteratively analyzed observation fieldnotes and interview transcripts, synthesizing relationships and processes into a grounded theory of artifact use and communication  .
Over two months, we observed 33 meetings of these classes  and collected data about a total of 40 hours of class time.
In each class, we observed non-verbal events and verbal patterns that could be recognized without understanding Russian.
One researcher, a native Russian speaker, was able to provide data and translations that complemented the behavior-focused observations made by other team members.
Observation data was analyzed first using open coding, then axial coding.
Codes covered six areas: student behaviors, student acting, student affect, instructor behaviors, artifacts in the classroom, and assigned activities, focusing on the roles played by artifacts in student-student communication.
A review of second-language acquisition and communicative language learning literature theoretically informed the coding scheme.
Iterative analysis then revealed the key role that artifacts played in shaping communication and organizing activities; in this paper, we present artifact-centric findings.
From the classrooms we observed, we recruited 6 students for semi-structured interviews.
We spoke with 3 students from the morning class, 2 from the afternoon class, and 1 from the evening class.
The interviews ranged in length from 15 minutes to an hour, averaging 45 minutes.
We developed the protocol while reflecting on the findings from our observations, conducting the interviews towards the end of the study.
The interview protocol prompted students to reflect about their language-learning background, the classroom environment and artifacts, the significance of student collaboration, and their emotional reactions to class activities.
Interviews were audiorecorded, transcribed, and coded with a coding scheme similar to that used for observation data, relating personal attitudes and values of the interviewees to the relevant phenomena that emerged from observation data analysis.
While the observations focused on descriptions of activities that transpired in the classrooms, interviews captured reflection on those same activities.
Therefore, when we used codes from the same coding scheme, we did so with the understanding of a fundamental difference: while observations might describe a researcher's observations of events during an activity, interviews will instead provide insight into the attitudes of a student toward that activity.
Despite this difference, the two sources of data could be coded with parallel coding schemes to help relate different perspectives on common artifacts and activities.
In the classrooms we observed, students engaged in a range of social activities.
The fast-paced sessions were packed with pair and small-group work that involved combinations of speaking, writing, and so on.
We found students to frequently speak English, rather than Russian, despite instructors' efforts to limit the use of the first language except for certain activities.
In the framework of collaborative knowledge building, these discussions provide a way to explicate tacit impressions and negotiate misunderstanding  though the use of the first language makes it less desirable from the communicative language teaching perspective .
There is some debate in the literature about the place of the first language in these classrooms.
Cook provides a review of popular arguments against use of first language, and urges a reconsideration of this stance .
The teacher can, for example, support spontaneous communication by translating students' first-language statements, which can then be repeated by the students.
Over time, this support becomes less necessary, in the meantime increasing purposeful participation.
The key stance of viewing the first language as the "initiator of meaning" makes this distinct from other forms of instructor guidance.
In our observations, English was temporarily used to bridge the gaps in understanding, including requests for clarification.
English was also used for reflecting on the difficulties of their experiences as students:
Ben and Andrey take turns staring down into Ben's book.
They both ask the instructor for help occasionally.
Justin, who is in another pair with Max, whines about saying 11:55pm in Russian.
Max asks, "how would you say that?"
They go back to taking turns; they seem to be focused on dates rather than times after a short while, and the instructor has now walked over and watches them carefully.
From across the room, Andrey asks, looking at the instructor, "are we the only ones having trouble with this?"
This type of communication helped students develop rapport with their classmates, growing comfortable in their stressful environment.
Furthermore, commenting on breakdowns in expectations of performance helped build a cohesive social understanding of material difficulty.
The prevalence of reflection on the difficulty of material indicated a level of uncertainty and tension, which became more apparent in the interviews.
The classroom environment is also fraught with stress resulting from continually challenging students' knowledge in a social setting.
Lane, a student from the afternoon section, said that when someone doesn't know an answer to a question from the instructor, "I feel like it's a good learning incident sometimes, and someone has to be the scapegoat, so if I am, well, fine.
Unlike Lane, another student we interviewed, Jenna prefers reading scripted dialogs in small groups, because:
The middle ground, exemplified in the above improvisation activity, involved using word banks and sentence structure formulae to complete a role-play activity.
Additionally, activities varied in the level of physical engagement, from movement and props to incorporating gestures and facial expressions in pair work.
During various theatrical activities, artifacts were used as media for creative expression, rather than for information and structure as in other kinds of activities.
In these activities, artifacts provided students with common understanding of topic and protocol; the ability to look up a word or phrase not initially intended for the exercise, enabling creative expression; and the use of objects and gestures to disambiguate situations with unfamiliar words.
In less scripted situations, students developed a cohesive scene and an entertaining scenario, using the surrounding objects and environment as a physical backdrop for their actions.
These activities sometimes involved purposeful language use, such as in this example of a creative ending to a restaurant-themed role-play activity:
Ben, playing a waiter, waves the instructor over, very secretively, and whispers a question about how to say a phrase in Russian .
After he finds out, he runs up to the table, waving his hands frantically, and yelling in Russian that there is a FIRE IN THE KITCHEN!
And, laughing, the students disperse and the exercise is over.
This kind of stress seems to stem from the communicative approach, and colors both the group interactions between students, and the roles that artifacts play.
Jenna suggests that there is a comforting aspect of the physical book in the face of uncertainty.
As Lane suggests, the associated pressure sets up an atmosphere for camaraderie and joy:
The instructor interjects a few minutes before class ends, announcing, in Russian: "and now, we improvise!"
She calls on Josh and Natalie.
As the instructor looks at him sternly, he realizes: "wait, so no reading, then?"
The instructor beckons Josh and Natalie forward.
With pauses and blushing, Josh weaves together a hesitant sentence, and Natalie constructs a similarly hesitant response.
There is a lot of laughing by them and their classmates throughout.
At one point, Natalie comes up with, "do you have a passport?"
The class is now roaring with laughter, the instructor clapping her hands and congratulating them in Russian and English, "bravo!
The emotional context of the classroom, including stress and joy, is important to consider when discussing the roles of objects.
Artifacts were not sterile; they mediated complex social phenomena in an environment of uncertainty intertwined with camaraderie and humor.
Students and instructors made use of a variety of artifacts during class activities, such as textbooks, blackboards, photographs, and toys.
These artifacts each had multiple and overlapping roles, which are summarized in Table 1, and described in more detail below.
In this situation, the exercise was very tense for everyone, especially those students singled out, but nervous laughter ultimately resulted in genuine joy.
Furthermore, the joke - that Josh, without a passport, bribed Natalie in the scenario - was not apparently intentional and not understood by many students until other students informally explained and the instructor translated the exchange.
Notebooks were used by students to record information, although because of the fast pace of the class sessions, this was not frequent.
But mainly, I just speak."
While recording in notebooks was infrequent, almost all students brought their notebooks to class every day.
Because of the fast pace of the classes, students rarely take notes during class.
Instead, they focus their attention during class time on interacting with their peers and the instructor.
Another student, Jenna, also noted the importance of the ability to write something down when needed, "I always have  open just in case.
I'll write little random notes," specifying that she would mostly only write something down "if it's something that wouldn't be in the textbook."
We saw a few examples of this:
Kelly interjects in English, asking a grammar question, about the effect of "in" vs. "at" on the case of the modified noun.
The instructor pauses, and then suggests that Kelly picture relationships, and Kelly asks again, "I still don't know what it's supposed to be."
The instructor responds by gesturing out some examples of containers and things in and at them, all in Russian.
A handful of students seem to frantically be writing things down.
Students would often pair off and read scripted dialogs from the textbook, or do question-andanswer exercises with their neighbors to fill in blanks on a worksheet.
One of the most common exercises involved students working in pairs of groups of three, reading dialogs from the book, or taking turns with question-and-answer exercises.
Other exercises use the book or handouts as scripts for dialogs.
Not all of these are familiar and rote to the students:
The instructor hands out worksheets and divides the room into the "guests," played by three students, and the "waiters," played by three others.
There is some confusion: "so is this like a chorus so we say at the same time?"
They agree that it is, and so that student counts off for his team - 1, 2, 3... and the three of them speak in a unison the line that is written for a single guest character.
The two teams dialogue, giggling and occasionally sounding obviously intentionally robotic.
At one point one of the teams talk about "I" and everyone, including the instructor, laughs.
The confusion persists, as another student asks: "dude... we're not one person..." The first student clarifies: "yes we are, we're speaking as a chorus.
Students and instructors often used artifacts as reference materials: most often the textbook, but sometimes other artifacts such as the blackboard or slides, which formed a common ground for collaborative learning .
These resources were used during conversations in Russian or when answering questions as on-demand information sources to help resolve a memory lapse or to prove a point.
Jenna sees the textbook as a comfort during class, especially when the instructor decides to "pick on" a student: "I know exactly where I could find the meaning of specific words, if I don't remember what it is."
On several occasions the removal of textbooks, and their potential helpfulness, led to a sense of chaos and panic in the students, such as in this incident from the evening section:
The instructor tells Mary, Max, and Ben they are limited in how much they can use the book in a dialog.
They look terrified, their mouths agape, suddenly clutching their books with their hands, almost moving to close them or put them away but not.
They are silent for a few moments, looking at their books and the instructor.
Mary chuckles and says, without looking into the book, "oh my gosh, this is horrible, I'm not this bad."
The script had been about getting a meal at a restaurant.
When they come to the part about the bill, which turns out to be for 400$, Justin jokes: "oh my god, 400?"
There is laughter and another student frowns, commenting in English "what did we even eat?
The leaders  hold up the half-sheet-sized cards with photographic images of vegetables and ask their other two teammates, in Russian, "what did you buy?"
They then go on with a series of questions, issued apparently wihout order, like "do you like ?"
These cards were passed out to students in small folders, pictured in Figure 2.
In another class, another vegetablename-related activity involved actual plastic vegetable props, also pictured in Figure 2.
In both cases, the artifacts were used as illustrations, providing context for communicating in Russian.
Pictures and objects were used not only to denote specific words, but to structure the conversation.
The two types of artifacts pictured had different affordances, however.
The props were used to communicate the vegetables' relation to one another on the table or the dishes , and to provide imperative commands to peers .
Illustration artifacts not only informed conversation content, but afforded particular protocols.
Occasionally, some implicit negotiation takes place prior to a corrective event, which is not a phenomenon reported by Lyster & Ranta.
A student can seem to invite others to give a correction, by pausing frequently, looking up at the other student in the conversation, and using a questioning intonation.
For example, in this case, Mary and Andrey had previously talked at length about a particular sound  with which Mary was struggling, but Andrey, who had prior experience with Russian, was relatively comfortable with:
Mary is hesitantly and with a questioning inflection saying, rapidly looking at her book and at Andrey, " ?"
This word includes the problematic "," and she gets it wrong again.
Andrey nods, and repeats, correctly, "."
Mary nods and moves on to the next sentence.
An artifact is used as a prop when it plays a part in a roleplaying or theatrical activity.
We observed everything from textbooks to plastic food used as a prop over the course of the study.
In many cases, artifacts used as props bore only a faint resemblance to the item they stood for in the activity.
For example, the students use worksheets as props while role-playing ordering food at a restaurant:
Figure 3 illustrated the setting of this particular activity.
As it unfolded, however, additional artifacts besides those clearly intended as props began to be used as props, such as textbooks and worksheets, as described in the quote above.
A great range of objects were used as props, and in some cases, props were entirely imaginary, consisting of gestures, such as in this restaurant-themed exercise:
As she is speaking, Amy turns, walks, gestures, and intonates, at one point pretending to hand one of the others an imaginary glass of water.
Her team members giggle and also seem to be enjoying themselves as they order their food, looking up at Amy after ordering.
She looks into the book occasionally after asking questions, but intentely staring down when taking the order.
Student-student corrective feedback was one of the most prevalent and important forms of student interaction that we observed in the language classrooms.
Lyster & Ranta have categorized different kinds of corrective feedback, and analyzed its effectiveness in immersive, communicative language-learning classrooms .
We saw students regularly correcting one another, particularly when working in small groups:
Examples of illustration artifacts, associated with shared knowledge of activity protocol and providing a commonly-understood backdrop for practicing Russian.
Above: folder with printouts of photographs of vegetables.
Both were used to practice saying phrases about food, but with different affordances.
The process of negotiation is subtle and error-prone.
As we found through our interviews, unwelcome or excessive corrections can be annoying.
One student we spoke to, Lane, also said that corrections "just stick with me," making them particularly helpful in the future.
Although any student can correct any other student, it seemed that students from a Russian background in the classes made a disproportionate amount of corrections, which was annoying to several of our interviewees, such as Jenna:
This was in last quarter where there was a lot of native Russian speakers, and I had sat by this boy who knew a lot of Russian and he would always correct me, always kind of nitpick on things I said, and I didn't really like that  And I felt like--he was completely trying to help me, I understand that, but, yeah.
In the many instances of correction we noticed, however, it was often solicited, and resulted in the student being corrected incorporating the suggestion in some way into their speech.
On the occasions when the corrections were not appropriate or accurate, the instructors quickly intervened and corrected both students.
In our observations, the occasional activities that involved all students writing on the board together in pairs or even individually were associated with a great deal of discussion in both Russian and English, often with the textbook acting as proof one could point to:
Most students in pairs are turned toward each other, deliberating; they are peering into their own books, as they gesture around them.
For a short time, two pairs of students seem to coalesce into one group, standing in a circle waving their arms and pointing at their books; their deliberation seems heated, but is eventually resolved.
In support of corrective feedback, artifacts helped to provide evidence as peers suggested alternative grammar, vocabulary, and pronunciation.
This was especially important for non-heritage-speaker students.
Using the whiteboard or worksheets for recording information during more informative lecture-style sections of class allowed students something to rely on for immediately-relevant knowledge they may not have remembered.
Similarly, the tangibility of using the board for illustrating corrections, such as pictured in Figure 4, or using the book as a reference to prior material provided additional evidence to enable and encourage students to engage in peer-correction.
The findings of our study suggest a variety of opportunities and challenges for technology in the introductory communicative language classroom to address unmet needs, including  feedback: small group activities are an integral part of learning, but the instructor cannot be present to provide feedback by each group all the time; and 
The high frequency of students, rather than instructors, giving corrective feedback was surprising in light of the existing work, and illuminating in demonstrating the potential of different activity modes and artifacts to produce a stimulating environment for this type of collaborative student learning, such as by increasing students' confidence to correct one another.
The hope of technology in better supporting in-classroom foreign language learning has largely been left unrealized.
Therefore, the following discussion focuses on how new technological artifacts might more effectively augment the existing ecology n such a classroom.
In an environment where many artifacts compete for physical space and cognitive attention, the design of a new artifact must take advantage of the unique affordances not available in existing artifacts, such as to maintain more meaningful ambience or support multiple different roles.
In the following sections, we discuss how technology can benefit three phenomena in particular - feedback, use of the first language, and theatrical creativity.
Feedback and concern with first-language use as balanced against authentic engagement reflect major recognized CALL needs ; focus on artifact-mediated creativity is presented as a novel design direction in this space.
The discussion focuses on function of potential technology, rather than its form.
There is a spectrum of possible physical objects, from a single shared artifact  to individual artifacts .
In the non-digital artifacts we saw used, there were objects used by individuals, small groups, and the entire class.
Those functionalities that concern reference or record roles would best be served by individual objects, while illustration benefits more from a class-wide, shared object.
While, props and structuring artifacts may take on any form, smallgroup artifacts were associated with the most engagement.
Jamil et al, found that, relative to other similar mechanisms for group interaction, interacting with objects on a shared tabletop encourages the most direct group interaction .
One of our key discoveries was the prevalence of corrective feedback, especially correction by example, enacted by both students and instructors, as well as the absence of judgment-based "right or wrong" feedback.
Furthermore, this feedback was associated with the use of reference materials to check the right answer, by either the giver or the receiver.
In addition to taking advantage of the possibilities of electronic media, we can better contextualize the information that is provided by artifacts.
Textbooks, for example, provide a contextualized version of a vocabulary list by including an abridged list at the end of each chapter, rather than only providing a dictionary in the back of the book.
Interactive applications and devices can provide streamlined access to words and rules.
This could be based on flashcard principles, such as the context-sensitive MicroMandarin mobile application .
Besides reference to the book, the record of a class can act as a backdrop for student-student feedback.
For instance, the Conversation Clusters system provides meeting archive functionality for collocated meetings by maintaining searchable topic clusters based on speech recognition and interaction with meeting members during the meeting .
Although the off-the-shelf speech recognition system used is not perfect, it is real-time, and its errors are mitigated by enabling users to edit the output.
Mimicking human memory, Bergstrom and Karahalios maintain a record only of key terms whose utterance the speech recognition system was sure of.
As these terms are recognized in real time, they are presented in clusters in a "public conversation space."
This space allows people not only to remove wrongly recognized terms, but to move terms across different clusters, which are initially constructed using existing technology.
This visualization method provides a current snapshot of the conversation topics, and is complemented by a history view.
Given the verbal and spontaneous nature of the classrooms, this type of record-keeping technology could be appropriate.
One of the most discouraged means of communicating in the first language that we saw was commiseration and reflection on the frustration and anxiety of the busy and challenging classrooms.
This type of communication seemed important to the development of a group identity as a class among students.
Besides looking up the right answer or being corrected for being wrong, simply expressing frustration or joy may be a powerful social tool.
For example, the Subtle Stone device provides a flexible, private method of using a small lighted sphere for allowing the students to communicate to the teacher whether they were bored, happy, frustrated and so on .
The authors note that though privacy was important, some students thought it may be worthwhile to use the device as a means of student-student communication.
A variety of Natural-Language Processing  technologies may be salient to the language-learning classroom, including speech recognition, handwriting recognition, semantic analysis, machine translation, and so on.
In existing Computer-Assisted Language Learning  applications, various methods of evaluating lowlevel sentence structures via parsing and so on dominate the space of NLP-enabled applications, within and beyond the classroom  .
These tools seem promising in providing more interactive support in language learning.
Some recent work in incorporating NLP in CALL applications has considered the value of interactive learning, where the underlying NLP system changes its behavior based on interaction with the user .
Machine translation could bring authentic materials within reach of beginners.
Interaction with translation could be used as a way of giving beginning students exposure to authentic text.
Automatic speech recognition  is a promising tool for pervasive technology to augment a language-learning classroom.
However, the state of the art of ASR is pushed to its limit in noisy environments, with learners making atypical errors, from the perspective of systems trained with native speaker data.
Such barriers prevent widespread adoption .
Moreover, the use of the first language - in our case, English - cannot be ignored.
Despite potential efforts to the contrary, it is inherent in learners and has potential benefits from the pedagogical perspective .
If a device or application that incorporates NLP technologies is to be integrated into a classroom, it must be designed with the awareness that switching between languages can and will occur.
Consider this typical scenario, where reading aloud from a book is punctuated by interruptions, switching between languages, and laughter, brewing a nightmare for speech recognition software:
Flexibility and speed are more important than photorealism, so there are possible opportunities for applications that enable quick sketching , or perhaps object lookup from photo-sharing services .
Tools for engaging students in joyful, creative interaction benefit from being on shared devices, rather than individual ones.
In our observations, reading scripts from textbooks seemed to be associated with far less spontaneous interaction or communication, and rather with physical isolation into the books.
One of the main activities that took place in the classroom was the reading of a scripted dialog, using a suggested bank of phrases or words, or constructing a scenario using formulaic sentences.
Devices and applications within a classroom have the capacity for enabling intelligent dialogs that are continually tailored to users' progress and proficiency.
In considering the design of such interventions, it is critical to become immersed in language teaching and learning literature as well as to work directly with instructors, because there is risk of such a device changing the dynamic of the classroom and interfering with instruction.
In transferring existing applications into the social multilingual environment, we must be aware of the limitations and leverage as much as possible human involvement.
One example of such an application is AwkChecker, a real-time text editor that provides feedback on how common certain phrasings are in order to enable students of a language to get a better sense of how natural what they write sounds .
Park, et al, show this kind of feedback to be very useful.
In the classrooms observed, students discussed how to phrase certain statements; an application like AwkChecker in the social context would require, for example, functionality for resolving "which is better" disputes.
The design of NLP-based systems must acknowledge that readily available technologies are often inappropriate here, but that experimental, specialized technologies hold great potential.
Based on a two-month ethnographic study of three introductory Russian classrooms involving observations and interviews, we have characterized a variety of roles currently played by artifacts: record, reference, structure, illustration, and prop.
Objects in the classroom can take on more than one role, and each role supports communicative language teaching  and mediating collaborative knowledge building .
We also contributed a discussion of specific technologies that could help learners within the classroom, taking on one or more role and supporting the breadth of social interaction.
We discussed the manifestation of stress and anxiety, as well as joy and humor in the classroom and its implications for the design of classroom technologies.
In light of our findings, we presented implications for design in this space: Feedback as a negotiated process, not event: A key benefit of technology for education is to help more effectively redistribute the teacher's time, such as by providing automatic feedback where possible .
Technology that can accomplish this is very different in the social, rather than individual, context.
Negotiated feedback from peers, using repetition and correction as a signal, was an important aspect of the classroom, and technology that provides feedback could benefit greatly from similar minimally intrusive, example-based approaches.
Authenticity vs. metalinguistic discussion: To support multilingual interaction, technology must balance authenticity and use of the foreign language against the need to use the first language for metalinguistic discussion.
The theatrical activities we observed provide a particularly rich opportunity for the design of interactive devices, including opportunities for tangible props and intelligent dialogs.
Though sometimes the instructors brought props, such as toys, plastic food, or dinner wares, the role of a prop was more often emergent and imposed on nearby objects, e.g.
Props need not be of very high fidelity in order to be used to illustrate ideas, make jokes,
Joy, creativity, and props: To support creative and entertaining role-play, technological artifacts should be shared within small groups, and enable open-ended activities.
This can either mean rapid image look-up or sketching, or dynamic, interactive dialogues that support engagement over more scripted exercises.
Additional ethnographic studies of classrooms, as well as exploring student interactions beyond the classroom, can provide much-needed empirical grounding for our understanding of how students interact to learn new languages, and how physical artifacts can support that process.
Interviews with students provided invaluable perspectives on the meanings of artifacts and processes, and focusing more on these individual perspectives in future studies will provide richer and more nuanced understanding.
More advanced classes and classes in other languages must be studied, as student motivations and relationships are different.
For example, in an English as a Foreign Language  classroom, there is often no shared first language.
Considering the importance of first language in our findings, studying EFL classrooms will likely shed new light on student-student communication.
Finally, the development and deployment of devices and software for in-classroom use to help language learners, and qualitative and quantitative study of their performance, is crucial.
There are many opportunities for technology to support foreign language learners, as well as challenges for designing artifacts that complement this environment.
A. Landay, "MicroMandarin: mobile language learnign in context," in CHI, 2011.
Good and R. Luckin, "Exploring affective technologies for the classroom with subtle stone," in CHI, 2010.
AwkChecker: An Assistive Tool for Detecting and Correcting Collocation Errors," in UIST, 2008.
