Roman Radle1*, Hans-Christian Jetter2*, Jens Muller1, Harald Reiterer1 1 Human-Computer Interaction Group, University of Konstanz, Germany {Roman.Raedle,Simon.Butscher,Harald.Reiterer}@uni-konstanz.de 2 Intel ICRI Cities, University College London, London, United Kingdom h.jetter@ucl.ac.uk * The first two authors contributed equally to this work.
Dynamic peephole navigation is an increasingly popular technique for navigating large information spaces such as maps.
Users can view the map through handheld, spatially aware displays that serve as peepholes and navigate the map by moving these displays in physical space.
We conducted a controlled experiment of peephole map navigation with 16 participants to better understand the effect of a peephole's size on users' map navigation behavior, navigation performance, and task load.
Simulating different peephole sizes from 4  up to 120 , we confirmed that larger peepholes significantly improve learning speed, navigation speed, and reduce task load; however, this added benefit diminishes with growing sizes.
Our data shows that a relatively small, tablet-sized peephole can serve as a "sweet spot" between peephole size and both user navigation performance and user task load.
Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Dynamic peephole navigation  is an increasingly popular technique for navigating large information spaces using small, spatially aware displays .
Users can control the mobile display's content by physically moving it up, down, and sideways.
By this, they can pan their view to move invisible off-screen content into the display and access the entire information space as if it was situated in physical space.
This physical way of navigation provides users with more proprioceptive cues which are assumed to improve their orientation and understanding of the information space  and their spatial memory .
Ideally, peephole users are able to navigate quickly  and directly  from their current location to any destination in the information space without an extensive task load, even if the location is off-screen or yet unknown.
We found that previous studies  have not sufficiently explored the peephole's size as an independent variable and how it affects navigation behavior, path lengths, navigation times, and user task load.
This is surprising since it seems plausible that these aspects are all strongly dependent upon peephole size.
A larger peephole reduces the need for slow physical panning and search in favor of a faster visual scanning of the display's content.
It also allows for recognition rather than recall from spatial memory because it reveals more visual features that support user orientation all at once.
However, a study of simulated tunnel-vision in front of large displays that included a task comparable to peephole navigation showed that the effect of a reduced peripheral vision and field of view is surprisingly small .
If this is also true for peepholes, it will open important design opportunities.
In real-world systems, larger peepholes and displays increase cost, energy consumption, and weight, and the devices become more cumbersome.
An alternative are small and lightweight handheld projectors which can produce a relatively large peephole.
However, some practical problems  come into play.
Designers must make concessions due to these constraints.
They want users to experience the benefits of larger peepholes while avoiding the many disadvantages that result from using and handling larger devices or mobile projections.
Therefore answering the question of how small peepholes can become without overburdening their users during map navigation is of great practical relevance.
With this study, we wanted to find a good tradeoff, or "sweet spot", between peephole size and both user navigation performance and user task load.
To do this, we conducted a controlled lab experiment during which 16 participants completed map navigation tasks on a large, vertical screen with physical navigation of simulated dynamic peepholes.
The independent variable, peephole size, had 4 levels: smartphone, tablet, projector phone, and a control condition where the peephole was the size of the entire large, vertical screen.
The dependent variables were travel path length, navigation time, and subjective workload.
Results show that a relatively small, tablet-sized peephole can serve as the "sweet spot" mentioned above.
In the following, we discuss related work, formulate our hypotheses, describe the experimental design, and report results before we conclude with a discussion of our findings.
Despite the popularity of peephole navigation, it took until 2006 for user studies to move beyond formative usability evaluations of individual systems and use controlled experiments to better understand the different design variants of peepholes more generally.
Results showed that dynamic peepholes improved users' speed and accuracy of discriminating lengths.
Rohs & Essl compared different peephole designs such as panning, zooming, and halo .
They report that the halo off-screen visualization is significantly faster and that only in complex situations zoom and halo show comparable performance, while the combination of halo and zooming is detrimental.
In our study of peephole size, we therefore used only panning without zoom, no off-screen visualizations, and no visual context around the peephole to avoid confounding variables and to achieve better internal validity.
In 2013, three similar studies that compared physical vs. virtual touch-based peephole navigation were published: Kaufmann et al.
They report that users performed navigation in the zoomable map equally well, but that spatial memory performance was 41% better for projector phone users .
Peephole navigation with handheld, spatially aware devices was originally conceived by Fitzmaurice et al.
In the light of these contradicting results and 20 years after Fitzmaurice , Pahud et al.
Therefore, we designed our research to explore these subtleties by isolating the peephole sizes from above studies  in a controlled map navigation experiment to understand their effect on navigation behavior, navigation performance, and task load.
This is the case when users navigate an unknown map or a map they have not seen or used recently, for example in typical augmented map scenarios for tourist or cultural heritage sites.
During this phase, users first have to scan the entire map by physically moving the peephole to get an overview and to memorize positions, map features, and their spatial relations before they then can navigate efficiently.
As discussed above, a larger display size should facilitate learning by revealing more content and visual features at a time and reducing the amount of slower physical panning in favor of more visual scanning.
In the navigation phase, a mental representation of the actual map is already present in the users' memory.
This is either the case when a mental representation of a map remains in a user's memory after the learning phase is completed or when they are already familiar with the map.
In the navigation phase users can, in principle, navigate toward destinations in the map efficiently, even if they are currently invisible.
They do not have to scan large parts of the map anymore to find their destination but can rely on their spatial memory  to reach their targets faster and with a shorter travelled distance.
In comparison to the learning phase, the navigation phase more resembles a pointing task without exhaustive scanning or searching and thus is less affected by peephole size.
However, based on Fitts' law models of peephole target acquisition , there still should be differences between the peephole sizes.
For the overall navigation task including both phases, we assumed that the cognitive load and the amount of physical panning increases with a smaller peephole size.
Therefore, we hypothesized that the users' reported task load  increases for smaller peepholes.
Finally, we predicted that the smaller the peephole, the greater the likelihood that users built an unreliable or incorrect mental spatial representation of the map and thus, when exposed to similar maps, they might not be able to recognize the one they navigated in the experiment.
Therefore our final hypothesis is that the number of errors in a post-navigation map recognition task should increase for smaller peephole sizes.
Another stream of related research concerns formulating models of peephole target acquisition based on Fitts' law and validating them with one-directional  or multidirectional pointing  or AR tasks .
While this work is of fundamental importance, we believe that for understanding the subtleties of real-world map navigation with dynamic peepholes these models are only a first step.
They accurately model a subtask of navigation, namely the time and precision of pointing at a distant target.
However, real map navigation is far more complex than only onedirectional pointing between two targets, since it is a multidirectional task that involves recalling multiple different  locations from a mental representation of a 2D map and navigating between them.
Such map navigation also involves initial phases of learning the yet unknown locations and spatial features or, at least, reactivating them from memory.
All these aspects of map navigation are not part of Fitts' law models, because Fitts' law does not consider them.
Fitts' law models cannot help with finding design tradeoffs for peephole size since they propose that pointing performance always gets better with growing peephole size and thus assume that "bigger is always better..." They do not take limiting factors or boundaries into account.
For instance, upper boundaries like the users' maximum field of view or the aforementioned practicalities of using large displays or projections or lower boundaries like the higher mental and physical demand when using small or very small peepholes.
This is why we chose an experimental approach to measure the "sweet spot" for map navigation instead of attempting to approximate it using existing predictive models.
We entered our experiment with the following basic assumption about the nature of map navigation with peepholes: A typical map navigation activity can be separated into two phases, a learning phase and a navigation phase.
The study was conducted as a 4x4 within-subjects design and systematically counterbalanced using a balanced Latin Square.
The independent variable, peephole size , had four within-subjects factors: control condition , projector-sized peephole , tablet-sized peephole , and smartphone-sized peephole .
We used the four different maps A, B, C, D  to control for systemic errors and to avoid learning effects.
The navigation path length, the navigation time, task load, and the postnavigation map recognition were the dependent variables.
16 participants  were recruited to take part in the experiment.
To get a realistic sample of participants, we excluded participants from the computer science department or with a background in computer science.
12 of the participants were students, 1 was a lecturer in linguistics, 2 were administrative staff, and 1 was a construction worker.
We used a large, vertical high resolution screen  to simulate peephole sizes of typical device displays at a constant resolution of 13.1 pixel/cm .
This resolution was lower than that of actual mobile devices, but the display quality was more than sufficient for our purposes .
The maps used in the experiment covered the entire screen, but users were only shown a rectangular section the size of the simulated peephole while the surrounding screen was black.
Participants used a wireless Logitech Professional Presenter R800 device  to move the peephole on the screen.
The Presenter was equipped with passive markers and continuously tracked in space using an OptiTrack 3D motion capturing system  with a tracking mean error of less than .5 mm and a tracking rate of 100 Hz.
Participants held the Presenter in their preferred hand.
A Kalman filter was used to reduce jittering caused by hand tremor and the noise or inaccuracies of the OptiTrack motion capturing system.
In order to achieve a high degree of internal validity, we simulated the peepholes on a large display  so that the only variation from condition to condition was the peephole size itself.
We initially discussed using different real-world devices instead of simulations, so that users would experience all devicespecific properties such as different weight, resolution, or latency.
However, we decided against this for following reason: Our overall goal is to understand the subtleties of peephole navigation as suggested by Pahud et al.
As a first step, in this study, we wanted to focus only on the effect of peephole size which arguably is the most important property and ideally arrive at generalizable results.
During the experiment, the peephole travelled left or right of the Presenter  to simulate physical navigation with a handheld dynamic peephole.
By movement of their hands and lateral movement of their bodies, participants could move the rectangular peephole in the XY-plane of the display to view any location on the map, similar to the augmented maps in .
To minimize occlusion by hands, the anchor point was adjusted to right-
The ratio between physical movement of the hand in control space and the peephole's XY-movement in display and map space was always 1:1.
To constrain the distance between hand and screen to realistic holding and viewing of mobile devices, the peephole only appeared on the screen when the hand was within a range of 15 cm to the display.
Except this, participants were free to choose their preferred head, body, and arm position during navigation and thereby set the optimal viewing distance to the display as it is the case when using an actual handheld device.
However, they could not use rotation around the X-, Y-, or Z-axis as it is possible in AR see-through scenarios .
There was a red crosshair in the center of the peephole for selecting targets.
We showed the target that the user searched for above and to the left of the crosshair.
The navigation path and time travelled between presenting the new symbol and its selection with the crosshair was recorded.
The recording of a trial started immediately after completion of the previous trial and at the last position of the peephole.
All targets were systematically placed on each map to ensure comparable target distances between the maps.
In each condition, participants had to navigate to 4 targets in the same order for 8 times .
This added up to 16 participants x 4 conditions x 8 blocks x 4 targets = 2048 trials with 128 trials per participant.
After each condition participants reported their subjective workload ratings using the NASA-TLX questionnaire .
After this, they chose the map they navigated from a selection of three maps.
Two maps served as distractors.
The purpose of this task was to test if the participants could recognize the map they had just used based on the mental representation of the map that they created during the navigation tasks.
There was one condition for each peephole size.
Due to the balanced Latin Square design, display sizes and maps were counterbalanced.
Each map had 4 target pins that acted as navigation goals and 4 distractor pins.
Maps were taken from Google Maps but were all unknown to the participants.
All maps had similar visual features and complexity, such as a city with roads and a river .
Each participant was first asked to fill out a demographic questionnaire and was asked about their dominant hand.
After this, participants were introduced to holding the Logitech Presenter device with their dominant hand, its two buttons, and how to move it with their hand.
To avoid learning effects of handling the peephole during the actual data collection, they then could familiarize themselves with the task, the technique for moving the peephole, and the different peephole sizes during a training phase that lasted as long as they wanted.
After this preparation phase, the actual data collection started with the four conditions.
After each condition they reported their task load using NASA-TLX and choose their map in the post-navigation map recognition task.
The entire experiment lasted approximately 30 minutes per participant and each participant was rewarded with 8 Euros for their time.
For each peephole size, Figure 5  shows the mean path length that the participants travelled during each block.
Path lengths were normalized by dividing them by the shortest possible path length, so that 1.0 is the minimum.
Figure 5  shows the mean navigation time per block in milliseconds.
Additional plots are provided for blocks 4-8 where the data points are too close together on the Y-axis to discriminate them.
During the task, participants were asked to navigate with the peephole to a target pin in the map that shows a certain symbol, e.g., a bed .
They were asked to navigate as quickly and as precisely as possible and to select the target with the peephole's crosshair by pressing the confirm button on the Presenter .
Path length and movement time analyses were done using repeated measures ANOVAs  with post-hoc pairwise comparisons.
All post-hoc tests were Bonferroni corrected.
Noticeable improvements in peephole navigation occurred during blocks 1-4.
This can be explained by users' improving mental spatial representation of the map that they achieved by systematically scanning the map for targets with the peephole.
The nature of this initial scanning process becomes evident when plotting peephole movements.
Figure 7 shows two examples of such a scanning process by participant 1 for B1 to B4 using the tablet-sized peephole S3  and the smartphone-sized peephole S4 .
The blue dots show the movement of the peephole's anchor point on the screen.
The red dots show the locations of the navigation targets.
The figure illustrates characteristic scanning patterns with vertical scanning movements that are repeated horizontally or vice versa.
They also visualize the potential benefit of a greater peephole size during this learning phase.
Since a greater peephole reveals more visual information, it is possible to choose larger distances between the repeated movements, thus shortening the overall scanning path.
Since there are only marginal differences in the error rates for the different peephole sizes, we have not used the error rates in the further data analysis.
During these first blocks users still had to scan the information space to memorize locations and to build up a spatial mental representation of the map.
This learning phase initially lead to a rapid fall of path lengths and times until the values stabilized and stayed roughly constant which indicates the beginning of the navigation phase.
In the following, we discuss both phases in greater detail.
This indicates that the effects of peephole size on path lengths and navigation time is depended on the number of repetitions.
We consider this as evidence of a learning process during B1 to B4.
This is further supported by the fact that the same interaction effect cannot be found in the assumed navigation phase during B5 to B8 as we discuss below.
Moreover, the results show that a larger peephole facilitates this learning process and leads to better initial performance.
Interestingly, there are no significant differences for S1 vs. S2 and S2 vs. S3, a fact that we discuss below in a dedicated section on peephole sizes.
There are no significant differences for S1 vs. S2 and S2 vs. S3.
The different nature of the navigation phase compared to the learning phase becomes immediately visible when looking at the plots of peephole movement in Figure 8 that show the same tasks as Figure 7 but this time for B5 to B8.
The navigation trajectories show direct navigation movements between the targets without scanning.
This illustrates how participants successfully applied their mental spatial representation and proprioceptive cues of the physical peephole navigation to efficiently move between invisible but known targets without a need for scanning.
Up to now, the results were largely reflecting our initial assumptions about the existence of a learning phase, a navigation phase, and the benefits of larger peepholes that we formulated above.
However, there are some unexpected observations that shed light on the question, "Is bigger always better?"
Table 1 shows that for all blocks in B1-B8, each individual block, the learning phase , and navigation phase , there was no significant difference between control condition S1 and the peephole S2.
This is clearly a case for projector phones since there were no significant differences in performance between S2 and a 120 large screen without any peephole.
Also the NASA-TLX questionnaires did not report a significantly different workload with S2 compared to S1.
Therefore, when comparing S1 vs. S2, bigger is not better.
To expand this conclusion, peephole sizes greater than a projector phone do not pay off in terms of navigation performance or task load when used in a map navigation scenario that is similar to our experiment.
However, in our study, S2's size of 54.7 covers a greater field of view than might be typical in real-world uses of projector phones.
127 of the users' typical field of view.
In , users stood at a distance of 200 cm, so that the projection covered approx.
Interestingly, in the light of this size of S2 in our study, it is therefore even more surprising that the tablet-sized peephole S3 achieved an almost comparable performance as we discuss in the following.
As discussed, the navigation performance in terms of path lengths and navigation time substantially improved between B1 and B5.
After this, as is visible in the plots of mean path lengths and mean time for B4-B8 in Figure 5, the navigation performance in B5, B6, B7, and B8 stayed almost constant, however at different levels depending on the peephole size.
These results indicate gradual transition from the end of the learning phase to the beginning of the navigation phase.
A statistical indicator for the end of the learning phase and the beginning of the navigation phase is the absence of the interaction between peephole size and repetition that we witnessed for B1-B4: A 4x4  ANOVA with repeated measures on B5-B8 revealed a statistically significant main effect of peephole size on travelled path lengths, GGc: F1.27,19.10 = 27.11, p < .001, partial 2 = .644 but no difference for the repetition,
The comparison of the projector phone condition S2 vs. the tablet condition S3 in Table 1 reveals that there are no significant differences in both devices except for B5, B5-8 , and, as a result, also for the overall performance B1-B8.
S2 outperforms S3 only during the navigation phase, but not during the learning phase.
While statistically significant, these differences have to be seen in relation to the afore-mentioned disadvantages and practicalities of mobile projections vs. tablets.
In our interpretation, the only moderately increased performance during navigation phase cannot outweigh the many disadvantages of mobile projection and the many advantages of using off-the-shelf tablets.
Furthermore, there are no significant differences between S2 and S3 in terms of the reported subjective workload.
By this, we do not imply that a tablet-sized peephole should be considered as an equivalent to a projector-phone-sized peephole in every respect.
However, designers of peephole navigation systems should carefully balance the specifics of both technologies.
We therefore suggest for use cases that are similar to our experiment that a tablet-sized peephole is more suitable than a larger one.
First, controlling device-specific properties such as weight or resolution and only using peephole size as independent variable increases the internal validity but also decreases the external validity.
It would be interesting to repeat the experiment using real-world physical devices to see if the same results can be replicated or if the differences in device-specific properties such as resolution, weight, or latency outweigh differences in peephole size.
Second, in future studies, the peephole size S2 in the projector phone condition should be reduced to reflect more realistic scenarios like in Kaufmann and Ahlstrom  where the peephole covers only a much smaller field of view.
However, it is very likely that such an adjustment would have led to an even greater similarity between our conditions S2 and S3, thus further strengthening our recommendation of tablet-sized peepholes over projector phone-sized peepholes for many scenarios.
Third, compared to the size of S3 and S4, we used a large map and a large physical navigation space with a 1:1 control-display ratio.
This could have penalized S3 and S4 and been in favor of S1 and S2.
However, similar to , our intention was to employ frequent physical navigation and strong proprioceptive cues to support users' spatial memory.
The absolute values for the NASA-TLX  and the absence of significant differences between task loads of S2 vs. S3 reflect that the tasks were still solvable by the users even with a comparably small, tablet-sized display.
Our results clearly show that a peephole with the size of a smartphone is outperformed by all other peephole sizes.
This is particularly interesting with respect to tablets which are natural competitors to smartphones in peephole navigation scenarios due to their great availability, popularity, price, and mobility.
The tablet-size S3 outperforms S4 in blocks B1 to B7, during the learning phase B1-B4, the navigation phase B5-B8, and the overall performance B1-B8.
These findings about better navigation performance and less workload with S3 compared to S4  could be helpful for revisiting the study of Pahud et al.
Replacing the 4.3 device in their study with a tablet should lead to better navigation performance and reduced task load in their physical navigation condition.
This could possibly lead to different results for their comparison between virtual and physical navigation.
These findings are also relevant for Kaufmann and Ahlstrom's study of spatial memory and map navigation performance with projector phones vs. a smartphone .
It would be interesting to see if the reported significant differences in spatial memory still exist when replacing the smartphone with a tablet-sized peephole.
With this study of peephole map navigation, we wanted to find a "sweet spot" between peephole size and both user navigation performance and user task load.
By simulating different peephole sizes from 4  up to 120 , we found that a smartphone-sized peephole is outperformed by all other sizes and that larger peepholes significantly improve learning speed, navigation speed, and reduce task load.
However, this added benefit diminishes with growing sizes, and peephole sizes greater than a projector phone do not pay off in terms of navigation performance or task load anymore.
Our data shows that a relatively small, tablet-sized peephole can serve as a "sweet spot" in terms of both user navigation performance and user task load.
We have also shown that for understanding the subtleties of real-world map navigation with dynamic peepholes, existing models of peephole target acquisition based on Fitts' law  are only a first step.
They were not intended to model different phases of map navigation such as a learning phase and a navigation phase whose existence we have shown using a statistical and visual analysis of the users' navigation paths in our study.
By this, we have contributed to the better understanding of the subtleties of peephole navigation as motivated by Pahud et al.
Ball, R. and North, C. The effects of peripheral vision and physical navigation on large scale visualization.
Cao, X. and Balakrishnan, R. Interacting with dynamically defined information spaces using a handheld projector and a pen.
Cao, X., Li, J.J., and Balakrishnan, R. Peephole Pointing: Modeling Acquisition of Dynamically Revealed Targets.
Situated information spaces and spatially aware palmtop computers.
Hart, S. and Staveland, L. Development of NASA-TLX : Results of empirical and theoretical research.
Human mental workload, North Holland Press .
Henze, N. and Boll, S. Evaluation of an off-screen visualization for magic lens and dynamic peephole interfaces.
Huber, J., Steimle, J., and Muhlhauser, M. A model of embodied dynamic peephole pointing for hidden targets.
Kaufmann, B. and Ahlstrom, D. Revisiting Peephole Pointing: A Study of Target Acquisition with a Handheld Projector.
Kaufmann, B. and Ahlstrom, D. Studying spatial memory and map navigation performance on projector phones with peephole interaction.
Distributed User Interfaces for Projector Phones.
Gallud, R. Tesoriero and V.M.R.
Penichet, eds., Distributed User Interfaces: Designing Interfaces for the Distributed Ecosystem.
Mehra, S., Werkhoven, P., and Worring, M. Navigating on Handheld Displays: Dynamic versus Static Peephole Navigation.
