An understanding of how people allocate their visual attention when viewing Web pages is very important for Web authors, interface designers, advertisers and others.
Such knowledge opens the door to a variety of innovations, ranging from improved Web page design to the creation of compact, yet recognizable, visual representations of long pages.
We present an eye-tracking study in which 20 users viewed 361 Web pages while engaged in information foraging and page recognition tasks.
From this data, we describe general location-based characteristics of visual attention for Web pages dependent on different tasks and demographics, and generate a model for predicting the visual attention that individual page elements may receive.
Finally, we introduce the concept of fixation impact, a new method for mapping gaze data to visual scenes that is motivated by findings in vision research.
The World Wide Web has become an information platform of tremendous importance.
Estimates from 2006 suggest that the average U.S.-based user viewed 120 Web pages per day .
The ability to model what parts of those Web pages receive the most visual attention could offer several benefits to both end-users and Web page authors.
From an end-user perspective, there is great value in being able to model both what users have already viewed in the past and what parts of a page they are likely to view in the future.
With regards to revisitation, research shows that 50%  to 80%  of all Web surfing behavior involves pages that users have visited before.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
If one knew what regions of a Web page people use to recognize previously seen pages, one could create compact visual representations of Web pages that emphasize or contain only those areas most relevant for page recognition, thus assisting re-finding .
Similarly, a model of what parts of a page are most likely to be looked at for a given page could be used to construct compact "previews" of pages that could assist a user when triaging many as-yet-unexplored Web pages, e.g., during an investigational search task.
Web page authors could also benefit from a model of visual attention to improve page layout and design, e.g., arranging page elements in such a way that users' attention is focused on the aspects that the author considers most important.
And, of course, the value to advertisers of knowing how users' direct their attention is quite obvious!
We conducted an eye-tracking study in which 20 participants viewed 361 distinct Web pages while conducting both information foraging  and page recognition tasks.
First, we describe the general characteristics of gaze behavior across regions of different pages in the context of each task .
Viewing behavior of arbitrary images is dependent on the characteristics of the image itself, one's expectations about where to find information, and one's current task or information need.
Web pages can be thought of as specific kinds of images.
In this section, we first provide some background about viewing behavior on arbitrary images , and then consider research specifically dealing with eye movements and Web pages.
Eye movements are generally composed of fixations and saccades.
A fixation is a time span of at least 80-100 ms, during which the eye steadily gazes at one point.
A saccade is a rapid, ballistic eye movement from one fixation to the next.
Visual information is generally only perceived during fixations, not during saccades .
Much research has been conducted to shed light on where and when we fixate on images.
Salience of areas is typically computed based on low-level image characteristics, particularly contrast, color, intensity, edge density, and edge orientation .
The first fixation is typically placed on the most salient spot, and the following fixations are placed such that the information gain is maximized .
While salience may direct the first fixation, memory and expectations  also play important roles in subsequent fixations .
Some research has focused on predicting abstract Web page characteristics based on the general page design.
For example, Ivory & Hearst  developed measures based on the DOM that could be used to automatically predict the overall Web page quality.
Both of these studies are based on analyzing important features of a Web page based on descriptions of how they are perceived by the users.
These studies suggest that there might be some elements on a Web page that most users notice  because they are indicators of some global page characteristics .
Such characteristics may also be reflected in the eye movements on the page.
Studies from search engine optimization  and Web usability consultancies  describe broad patterns of visual attention for a variety of Web pages.
However, these studies generally do not provide a detailed quantitative analysis of how the gaze was distributed across pages, instead providing general descriptions such as the "golden triangle"  or the "F-shaped pattern" for general Web content.
They found significant differences in all variables except for task, which seemed to have no influence on viewing behavior.
However, they used a weak task differentiation: remembering what was on a Web page vs. no specific task at all.
In later work focused on Web search, they used stronger tasks  but again saw little difference in gaze behavior .
A study by Josephson & Holmes  suggested that people might follow habitually preferred scan paths over a Web page.
They also suggested that other influential factors like specific features of the Web page or memory might play an important role.
However, their study focused on only three Web pages, making the findings difficult to generalize.
Furthermore, they only focused on scan paths, not on other measures like fixation duration or time to first fixation.
They found that header bars are typically not viewed before focusing the main part of the page.
As a consequence, they suggest placing navigation bars on the left side of a page.
They found significant influences, e.g., on fixation placement and duration.
A Web page rendered and displayed by a browser can be thought of as a single complex image.
Of course, this image is very different from scenic photos.
Web pages often serve specific functions, i.e., to convey information to the user as in product descriptions, news, etc.
Over the years, certain design patterns have been established and design guidelines have been created for Web page layout .
As a consequence, many Web pages contain certain elements at specific locations .
Thus, users have general expectations about where to find certain pieces of information on a Web page .
Of course, Web pages are not just images displayed by the browser, but they are described in HTML.
The browser reads the HTML code and transforms it internally into a formal representation, the document object model .
All the different layout elements 
A study by Cutrell & Guan  focused on viewing behavior on search result lists as created by commercial search engines, and investigated the effect of task and the information density of search results on gaze and search behavior.
In particular, they focused on the composition of three elements for each result list entry .
They found that the three elements influence each other and this has a differential effect on task performance.
For example, the longer the text snippet was, the shorter was the time spent viewing the title or the URL; this improved performance on some tasks and hurt others.
It tells whether the file name of the image contains the substring "logo".
It tells whether the destination of the link is the top-level page of the entire Web site.
We also computed 12 rendering-related features: * Size of the element, computed as width  height.
The position of an element is decided by the position of its center point.
The 10 positions are all computed with respect to the visible area of a page in the browser.
All elements that are not visible without scrolling after opening a page are below the fold.
In our experiment, the area above the fold amounted to 996 x 716 pixels at the top of a viewed page.
The fundamental premise of our study is that since gaze data can be seen as a proxy for attention, understanding how people look at Web pages may reveal something about the salience, recognizability, and importance of different areas that we can then use in a predictive manner.
To generalize these findings to underlying elements or abstractions of all pages, we need two things: * a mechanism that maps gaze data to elements of the HTML-induced document object model  as rendered by the browser; and * a set of features that can be used to describe single DOM elements.
The feature set is based on information in the HTML source and information about how the elements are rendered by the browser.
We can use our mechanism for mapping gaze data to DOM elements to build up a salience map of elements in different contexts.
Machine learning techniques can then be used to try to learn and predict the attentional salience of a given element based on the set of features.
In the end, we are aiming at a model that takes the DOM of an HTML page as input and produces predicted salience values of each DOM element as output.
To help us understand Web page viewing behavior, we designed a user study to collect gaze data from participants engaging in Web tasks.
To maximize the ecological validity of our tests, we had participants perform several different tasks.
For our analyses, we collapsed these tasks into two broad categories: information foraging and page recognition tasks.
A common requirement in eye-tracking research is to decrease variance by insuring that many of the Web pages that people view are the same.
To this end, we designed eight tasks with very specific information needs and provided participants with small sets of more or less relevant Web pages to work with.
In order to simulate the common occurrence of page revisitation under different task needs, these tasks were constructed in pairs that were on the same topic; each pair used a common set of Web pages, for a total of four distinct sets of pages.
We selected four different task topics: cars, kite surfing, wind energy, and diabetes.
For each topic, we provided links to nine Web pages to be used to complete the tasks.
The task descriptions are given in Table 1.
The nine pages for each topic were carefully selected and most contained at least some relevant information for each of the two tasks.
Each set of 9 pages was constructed to include a variety of page types and layouts, such as pages from well-known domains, text-only pages, pages with lots of images, etc.
Each set also contained pages of different types, e.g., news, product descriptions, home pages, and encyclopedia articles.
We used a factorial design for the order of the task topics for each participant.
For describing single DOM elements, we derive two main classes of features, HTML-related and rendering-related features.
In general, HTML-related features can be computed very easily just by looking at the HTML source code.
In contrast, rendering-related features can only be calculated after the page has been rendered by a browser.
For HTML-related features, we created 44 simple binary features for the most frequent element names .
For example, for an A element  the feature "A" has the value 1, all the other features are 0.
Furthermore, we computed 3 more abstract features:
Topic Cars First task Which of three given cars  has the best performance?
What are risk factors for type 2 diabetes that cannot be controlled / changed?
Find a kite surfing school where you don't have to have your own equipment.
What are drawbacks and problems of wind power generation?
Find information about places you might want to visit  Second task Which of those cars is small enough to fit in a tiny garage?
In the U.S., what are estimated yearly costs for diabetes therapy?
What basic equipment is recommended for kite surfing?
Find detailed info about how much wind power is generated in the U.S. Find some equipment for favorite hobby.
With this experimental design, participants may have viewed some of the pages in three different task contexts: The first time during phase 1, the second time during phase 3, and the third time during phase 5.
We refer to the structurally similar tasks during phases 1, 2, and 3  as information foraging tasks.
The main goal during phase 5 was recognition of pages and sites, so we refer to this as a page recognition task.
Participants were free to choose which of the nine Web pages to open and in what sequence.
Participants were given about five minutes to complete each task and were encouraged to use most of that time.
We also wanted to explore how participants freely navigate the Web in pursuit of their own interests, so we had two "free query" tasks .
For these tasks, the participants were also given about five minutes each, but they were free to search and browse any Web pages.
Finally, to get a sense of how participants look at pages for recognition or revisitation, we included a task in which participants were asked to indicate their familiarity with all the pages they looked at in the experiment, as well as twelve other pages not seen in the experiment.
These latter twelve included well-known pages like commercial Web portals , news portals , search engines , and entertainment portals , as well as more obscure sites such as a personal home page, web portals of public organizations, commercial pages of small companies, etc.
For each page, participants gave two assessments on a 5-point scale : First, how often they had seen that specific page before, and second, how often they had seen any page from that Web site before .
During this phase, the participants could freely surf the Web.
All Web pages were shown in Internet Explorer 7; the browser window was sized to 1024x741 pixels.
The use of tabs or additional windows was prohibited.
Eye tracking was performed using the Tobii x50 eye tracker  paired with a 17" LCD monitor  set at a resolution of 1024x768.
The eye tracker sampled the position of users' eyes at the rate of 50Hz and had an accuracy of 0.5.
Gaze data was logged by Tobii Studio.
Before starting the tasks, we performed a 9 point calibration of the eye tracker for each participant using Tobii Studio.
After the last task, a manual 9 point calibration was applied to determine the average tracking error for each participant.
This was used after the experimental run to manually correct for systematic tracking errors as much as possible.
Using a browser plugin, we took a screenshot of every viewed Web page on the fly and stored its DOM in a file.
So, at the end of each experimental run, we had three associated data sets which we used for offline analysis: the gaze log file, the set of DOM files, and the set of screenshots.
Twenty participants  ranging in age from 18 to 69 years old  with a diverse range of jobs, backgrounds and education levels were recruited for this study from a user-study pool.
All participants were native English speakers.
An experimental run took approximately 1 hour for each participant.
Processing gaze data on a Web page starts with detecting fixations and mapping them onto viewed pages.
We used the software bundled with the eye tracker  for fixation detection and adjusting the gaze position for scrolling in the browser.
A fixation was detected by Tobii Studio after steadily gazing in an area with a radius of 50 pixels for at least 100 ms. For each viewed Web page, Tobii Studio reported a stream of fixation coordinates and durations relative to the page coordinates.
From this data, we computed several gaze-based measures in parallel for each DOM element.
Our intention was to build prediction models for each of the four gaze-based measures and then to analyze whether there was a difference between these models.
Therefore, for each DOM element e, we calculate the following.
Note that in all cases, an element e is "looked at" during a fixation f if it got some fixation impact i > 0 from that fixation .
We first computed the accumulated fixation impact on e for each page view and then stored these values in the set I.
So, each value in I describes the accumulated fixation impact of e during one specific page view.
The percentage of participants who looked at the element e on a page out of all participants that viewed that page at all.
Time-to-firstfixation is the time in milliseconds measured from opening the Web page until looking at the element e. This is the median of the time-to-first-fixation values across all participants and page views.
We computed three measures which are described in detail below: Median fixation impact, Viewing frequency, and Median time to first fixation.
Fixation impact is probably the most unusual concept and bears some discussion.
Human vision is characterized by a very narrow window of high acuity  that covers about 2 of visual angle.
When people fixate an area of the visual field, they also gather a smaller amount of information from the region around this point.
Therefore, for each fixation we look at the surrounding area and determine the DOM elements that lie  within this area.
We chose the diameter of the area to be 2 of visual angle  which corresponded in our setting to 0.8 inches or 66 pixels on the display.
Of course, this is a simplification since the focus of attention is not always in the center of the fixation; the locus of attention is also dependent on visual salience and context .
For a given fixation f, we first determine all DOM elements that intersect the circle around the fixation point.
Then, we compute a Gaussian distribution with volume 1 and lay it over the circle around the fixation point.
We calculate a distance impact value d for each element e which is given by the volume of the Gaussian distribution above the element.
So, if an element e completely covers the fixation circle, it gets a value of d=1.
If an element e covers the fixation circle only in parts, its value for d is smaller .
Having computed the distance impact value d, we calculate the fixation impact value i for a given element e by multiplying d with the duration of the fixation f in milliseconds.
So, an element that completely covers the fixation circle gets the full fixation duration as fixation impact value i.
This kind of computation is motivated by observations from vision research indicating fixation duration correlates with the amount of visual information processed.
The longer a fixation, the more information around the fixation center is processed .
For each DOM element on a page, we keep track of all fixations and the fixation impact associated with it over all page views.
During the study, gaze data from 2,126 page views on 361 different Web pages was recorded.
Each of the 9 preselected Web pages for the 4 task topics was viewed by 11.3 participants on average.
This gave us a high overlap of gaze data across participants for 4x9=36 out of the 361 viewed Web pages.
For this analysis, we had two principal goals.
First, we wanted to get an overview of the distribution of visual attention across Web pages.
That is, we wanted to get a general sense of how users spatially allocate their visual attention at a high level for different tasks: which locations on a page generally attract most visual attention from users?
Does this vary depending on tasks?
Second, we wanted to see if we could create computational models based on the DOM of Web pages that can predict the visual salience of single elements on a page.
Given an arbitrary Web page and HTML, can we predict what people will look at and how much?
Figure 3 shows the median time to first fixation across all pages and page views for both information foraging and page recognition tasks.
Here, each of 10 regions of the screen is represented in a corresponding rectangle: 9 equalsized regions above the fold and everything else below the fold.
We did not differentiate any further below the fold since it cannot be seen immediately after opening a page.
Within each region is a circle proportional to the value in that region; smaller circles correspond to faster times to first fixation.
The corresponding figures for median fixation impact  are shown in Figure 4.
Here, larger circles correspond to greater fixation impact.
Figure 6 illustrates median fixation impact when we limit the data to the first second of viewing for each page.
They found that the first few fixations are controlled by visual features and global semantic characteristics of the visual scene.
In our scenario of Web page viewing, such global semantic characteristics might result in expectations about where to find the most relevant information on a page before having seen the page.
So, the first few fixations may reveal the locations where users expect to find relevant information on a page before they begin detailed exploration and reading.
We did not exclude the very first fixation on a page despite the fact that it cannot have been influenced by the page's content, because it might still express the user's expectation about where to find important information.
These results illustrate several characteristics of viewing behavior.
Some of these appear to apply to all viewing scenarios, while others seem to be task-dependent.
It is striking that the entire right side above the fold is neglected for both information foraging and page recognition tasks.
Participants took about 3 seconds to fixate the three regions on the right side of a page for information foraging tasks, and about 2 seconds for recognition tasks.
The median fixation impact on these regions is 0 for all tasks, indicating that even when they do look at these regions, participants don't spend much time there.
In contrast, the four upper left regions generally attracted visual attention faster than all others.
Independent of the task, the time to first fixation was lowest for these regions.
There are also interesting task-dependent differences in the relative importance of different regions of pages.
For information foraging tasks, the center-left region attracts more and earlier attention than other regions.
For recognition tasks, the top-left region attracts the most and earliest attention.
More generally , the three regions center-left, top-left, and center-center seem to be most important for information foraging tasks.
For page recognition tasks, the top-left, top-center, and center-left regions appear to be most important.
The very large difference in median fixation impact below the fold across the full duration of tasks , is likely due to the indepth reading and exploration associated with our information foraging tasks.
Figure 5 shows the viewing frequency of the 10 regions during the first second of the page views .
Supporting the observations from above, the figures also indicate that the four top left regions are most important, especially for page recognition tasks.
The bottom-left and bottom-center regions above the fold are viewed much more frequently during information foraging than page recognition tasks.
Generally, the viewing behavior during the first second of page recognition tasks seems to be less diverse than during the same time span of information foraging tasks.
Generally, during page recognition tasks women tend to be more thorough, looking significantly longer at the page and at every region on it than men .
This is reminiscent of the findings of Lorigo et al.
During the first second of information foraging tasks, the differences for the top-center, top-right, and below-the-fold regions approached statistical significance .
Here, men tended to spend less time on the top-center region, but more time on the top-right and below-the-fold regions.
During the recognition task, participants older than 30 years looked significantly longer at the page and at every region than younger participants .
During the first second of information foraging tasks, younger participants looked significantly longer at the center-center region, but significantly shorter at the center-left position.
Especially during the first second of page views of information foraging tasks there are significant differences with respect to Web site familiarity.
When viewing pages from familiar Web sites participants looked significantly longer at the top-left, top-right, and bottom-left regions compared to pages from unfamiliar sites.
At the same time, they looked for a shorter while at the center-center and bottom-center regions.
Most of our participants  were very experienced with Web browsing; only 3 stated that they didn't browse the Web multiple times a day.
We found that these lessexperienced participants generally looked longer at pages during page recognition tasks.
However, this finding was not significant and we need to collect data from more people who only rarely use the Web to explore this effect.
Here, fixations seem to be more directed by the user's intention to find taskspecific information within a page.
We were somewhat surprised to see that the right third of Web pages attracted almost no visual attention at all during the first second of each page view.
This suggests that our participants have low expectations of information content or general relevance on the right side of most Web pages.
This seems plausible because many Web pages display advertisements on the right side.
Most people seem to entirely ignore this region, only occasionally looking there.
This finding seems consistent with results of previous studies that reported triangular- or F-shaped scan patterns on Web pages .
In general, independent of the task they are engaged in, there seems to be a common orientation phase when people first view a Web page.
In the first few moments, people quickly scan the top left of the page, presumably looking for clues about the content, provenance, type of information, etc.
The elements that are normally displayed in the upper left third of Web pages  seem to be important for recognizing and categorizing a page.
In the study we analyzed only the average viewing behavior with heat map-like techniques over a wide variety of page types, layouts, and designs.
Presumably, certain layouts or designs have a specific influence on eye movements and there may be temporal behaviors  that we did not detect here.
However, in-depth analysis of these issues remains for future work.
Our results suggest that for page recognition, users expect the most important features of Web pages to be in the top left-hand corner of the page.
The very low times to first fixation and complementary large median fixation impacts and viewing frequencies for these regions support this finding .
For our Web page recognition task, it is clear that the top left 4 regions are the most informative regions.
For more goal-directed, information-driven tasks, the first few fixations  seem to be similar to the recognition task.
Again, the 4 top left regions are looked at earliest .
In order to create a computational model for predicting salient DOM elements on a page we consider every DOM element as AOI  and use sets of features to describe the AOIs and group them together.
I.e., we have the set of HTML- and rendering-related features that can be used to describe a specific element .
In addition, we have the 3 different measures of gaze data described in the "Methods" section .
These gaze-based measures build the ground truth of salience for each DOM element  that we will attempt to predict.
A certain amount of preprocessing of the data was necessary prior to learning a prediction model.
Very large elements, like the BODY element, that span the entire page are not interesting for us to predict and tend to produce outliers with respect to the gaze-based measures since they are associated with virtually any fixation on the page.
Second, we normalized the values of all non-binary features and our gaze-based measures to  intervals.
All feature normalization was linear, except for DOMTreeLevel.
Logarithmic normalization emphasized the differences between lower levels in the tree .
Overall, our dataset consisted of about 150,000 DOM elements coming from 361 different Web pages that were viewed by at least one participant during the experiment.
Having determined the top 10 features based on information gain, we wanted to see what influence each measure had on median fixation impact.
The feature weights as computed by linear regression are presented in Table 3.
As suggested by information gain, Size is the most decisive factor and is positively related to fixation impact; larger elements accumulate more fixation impact.
All positional features above the fold have positive weight and BelowFold has negative weight.
In concordance with our findings regarding the region-based gaze distribution, the CenterCenter position is more important for information foraging tasks whereas the TopLeft and TopCenter positions are more important for recognition tasks.
AspectRatio, DIV and A are generally not very useful in combination with the other features.
Interestingly, DOMTreeLevel has a negative weight for recognition tasks but a slight positive weight for the information foraging tasks.
This indicates that elements that are deeper down the DOM tree are penalized more for recognition tasks.
It can be assumed that elements on deeper levels in the tree are more  specific than elements on higher levels.
Thus, for recognition tasks, more general elements are important; for information foraging tasks more specific elements are important.
As a first step we wanted to reduce the number of relevant features to a more tractable number, so we computed the information gain  for each of the 59 features with respect to the 4 gaze-based measures.
Therefore, we discretized the values of the measures to either 1 or 0 dependent on whether an element was assigned a value 0 or =0.
Table 2 shows 10 features with the largest information gain based on median fixation impact, with task type and viewing time considered.
Seven of the top 10 features with the highest information gain are based on rendering-related information of the elements: their size, position on the page, and aspect ratio.
The feature with the highest information gain of all HTMLbased features is DOMTreeLevel.
For all 4 gaze measures, Size is among the features providing the highest information gains.
This conforms to the intuition that bigger elements  are looked at more often that smaller elements .
Table 2 indicates that while the top features for information foraging and recognition tasks are very similar in many cases, there are some notable differences.
This is particularly clear for AspectRatio, DOMTreeLevel, and some positional features.
Note that the relative importance  differs considerably for task type.
The relative differences of the feature information gains were very similar with respect to all 3 gaze-based measures.
While there are many possible applications for predicting attentional salience of Web page elements, we decided to focus first on scenarios of page re-finding .
Because information re-finding is particularly dependent on recognizing previously seen pages, we focus on the data from the recognition task.
There are myriad machine learning techniques that we could potentially use for our predictions.
Rather than immediately dive into sophisticated models, we decided to begin with fairly simple and easy-tounderstand models of linear regression and decision trees to gauge the utility of the idea.
Linear regression for approximating median fixation impact based on the top 10 features from Table 2 yielded a correlation coefficient of 0.50 and a root mean squared error  of 0.08 milliseconds.
The quality measures were determined by 10-fold cross validation.
We further determined a decision tree  for predicting whether a DOM element has any fixation impact .
As determined by 10-fold cross validation, the decision tree had a Kappa coefficient of 0.59, a precision of 75%, and a recall of 53%.
Generally, the correlation and Kappa coefficients of the two prediction methods were promising, so we implemented a new prediction method based on a combination of these two methods: First, the decision tree from above is applied for deciding whether an element received any fixation impact at all.
If this is the case, then the linear regression method is used to approximate the magnitude of the fixation impact on that element.
This combined prediction method yielded a fairly good correlation coefficient of 0.69 and a relatively low RMSE of 0.08 milliseconds.
We also wondered how much the quality of prediction would drop if all rendering-based features were excluded.
To predict salient elements based only on HTML-related features is especially interesting for search engines that cannot render every page while crawling.
Based on the information gain seen in Table 2, it is not surprising that prediction was rather poor.
Linear regression based only on the HTML-based features had a correlation coefficient of 0.28 and an RMSE of 0.10 ms. A decision tree performed with similarly poor quality.
To actually see the page elements and their predicted values, we visualized the actual and predicted median fixation impact for each Web page.
In Figure 7, we show those visualizations for two representative Web pages.
All DOM elements on the page are outlined by a black rectangle.
The red color intensity of those rectangles represents the actual  and predicted  median fixation impact on each element, with deeper red color signifying more fixation impact.
As noted above, however, our prediction models were  very simple.
We believe that more sophisticated models could yield much higher accuracy for these cases.
Depending on the area of application, one could make use of the prediction in different ways.
For example, to create recognizable small visual representations of a Web page , one could extract the image of a certain size that is predicted to be most salient together with the logo of the page and maybe a highest-ranked small text section.
These three elements could be emphasized in a more intelligent thumbnail for a page, e.g., by enlarging them.
We have presented the methods and findings of a study aimed at understanding people's visual attention patterns when viewing Web pages.
This work entailed several contributions, including: * * A method for mapping gaze data to Web page elements based on the concept of fixation impact.
Generally, the prediction method seems to work well and finds the most important elements for recognizing a page.
However, it is biased to prefer elements that are on the upper left-hand side of a page.
As the region-based analysis has shown, this should be expected for the general case .
For specific Web pages, however, the prediction method may miss important elements on the right side of the page, such as the CNN home page in Figure 7.
This increased understanding of users' web-viewing behavior is valuable not only for improving Web page design, but also for creating new types of Web user interfaces.
For example, compact representations of Web pages are desirable, but thumbnails of an entire page are unusable at small sizes .
Our model could be used to select the most salient regions of Web pages to create compact collages representing these pages.
For information foraging tasks, our model could be used to create representations for page previews , while for recognition tasks it could be used to create representations for re-finding .
In future work, we hope to explore more powerful methods of machine learning and classification to improve our prediction methods for DOM element salience.
In addition, we would like to look at more complex models to explain why and when the eyes move to certain regions of a page.
Those models should include a variety of visual features of Web pages like color, contrast, shape, etc, and they should also consider the temporal aspect of fixations.
Finally, we would like to use the salient elements predicted by our model to automatically generate small visual representations of pages to help users recognize them for re-use.
