This paper is the first to assess the impact of touchscreen dam age on smartphone interaction.
We gathered a dataset con sisting of 95 closeup images of damaged smartphones and extensive information about a device's usage history, dam age severity, and impact on use.
88% of our participants continued to use their damaged smartphone for at least three months; 32% plan to use it for another year or more, mainly due to high repair and replacement costs.
From the dataset, we identified three categories of damaged smartphone dis plays.
Reading and text input were most affected.
Further interviews  revealed that users adapt to damage with diverse coping strategies, closely tailored to specific inter action issues.
In total, we identified 23 different strategies.
Based on our results, we proposed guidelines for interaction design in order to provide a positive user experience when display damage occurs.
23% of iPhone owners  have a smartphone with a broken display, with 31% not planning to get it repaired .
Many smartphone owners continue to use their smartphone after it got damaged.
We found that the main reason for continued use are high repair and replacement costs.
Cur rent smartphones require replacement of the complete display unit, which costs 150-250 USD depending on the model.
Considering the combination of visual output and touch input on the display, as well as the visual nature of smartphone soft ware and apps, display damage likely impacts the user's in teraction with the smartphone.
Scratches, cracks, and screen faults deteriorate the user experience by occluding parts of the displayed content or impairing touch input.
In this work, we assessed the impact of damaged displays on smartphone interaction and how users cope with the damage.
Our results can help interaction designers in supporting the growing group of smartphone owners that use a smartphone with a damaged display.
Towards this goal, we performed an explorative analysis, resulting in the following contributions.
We conducted an online survey and an Amazon Mechanical Turk  study with owners of damaged smartphones.
The resulting dataset consists of 95 closeup images of dam aged smartphones and extensive information about the de vices' usage history, severity and cause of the damage, im pact on use, and reasons for continued use.
We conducted a structured image analysis, including manual damage annota tion.
With cluster analysis, we identified three categories of damaged smartphone displays.
Current smartphones are mainly operated via touchscreens that cover a large part of the device's front panel.
The large display area of smartphones increases the risk of damage to the display when the phone is dropped.
Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted.
To copy otherwise, or re publish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
The complete damaged display dataset, including analysis data, is made available alongside this paper to foster further research in this area.1 In addition, we conducted interviews with owners of damaged smartphones recruited from the online survey , to gain deeper insights into reasons for continued use and implica tions of damage on smartphone interaction.
Our participants reported 23 different coping strategies, often tailored to indi vidual interaction issues.
Based on our quantitative and qualitative results, we propose interaction design strategies that can support many of those coping strategies already at design time, or facilitate adapta tion of interfaces when damage occurs.
Planned obsoles cence  assumes that manufactures already design products towards obsolescence in order to increase product sales.
For instance, designing mobile devices with built-in batteries that cannot be replaced by users on their own.
However, our own results indicate that high prices for new smartphones trump perceived obsolescence for many smartphone owners, who continue to use even severely damaged devices.
Not much prior work has considered the implications of hard ware damage on user interaction, particularly not the case of users that continue to engage with damaged devices and their interfaces for longer periods of time.
However, damage has been studied as a concept.
Ikemiya and Rosner  define damage as a malfunction or degradation of an artifact, either caused through user engagement or not.
Hence, damage is re lated to wear, i.e., the degradation of an artifact over time due to use.
Motivations for keeping or discarding personal items can be highly complex .
Yet, Huang and Truong present clear insights on when and why people switch to a new mobile phone .
The majority of their study participants switched devices when offered a new one with contract renewal or a new contract.
About a quarter of their participants switched because their mobile phone broke; another quarter reported they had their phones repaired in the past.
While little research focused on interaction with damaged devices, a large body of work exists on accessibility sup port.
Such mechanisms could potentially also assist users of damaged smartphones in coping with interaction impair ments caused by device damage.
Current smartphones of fer speech input to control certain features .
Apple's iOS devices further support onscreen emulation of hardware buttons and voice overs for visually impaired users .
Recent smartphones, like Sam sung's Galaxy S4, support touch-less interaction above the display  or gaze interaction.
Eyes-free interac tion without use of the display has also been proposed .
Other proposals for alternative mobile device input include scratching  or tapping on the phone , as well as stomping with the foot .
To the best of our knowledge, no work has been conducted that focused on the impact and effects of damaged displays on smartphone interaction or interfaces of mobile devices in general.
We are the first to explore and investigate how dam age of smartphone displays affects interaction and use.
Damage of artifacts can be addressed with protective mea sures at design time and during use, as well as reactive mea sures after damage occurred.
One radical approach that em braces the change and transience of artifacts by damage are ephemeral interfaces .
Such interfaces are specifically de signed for very fast degradation rather than lasting use, e.g., a display created by falling water or interaction handles pro vided by soap bubbles.
Interaction with an ephemeral inter face often carries an imminent risk of destroying it .
For instance, by covering a ceramic plate with a silicon layer, the plate can retain its util ity and structure if it shatters.
Our proposed interaction de sign strategies follow a similar goal by considering the impact of potential damage already during app design.
Huang and Truong caution to also consider an artifact's expected time of use during its design .
For instance, a short-lived artifact may not require durable casing.
The notion of relative obsolescence as discussed by Cooper , provides further insights why and when artifacts are be ing replaced.
He distinguishes three types of obsolescence:
To gain insights on how smartphone displays get damaged, to what degree, and how different types of damage affect inter action, we conducted an online survey with owners of dam aged smartphones.
Based on the findings of Ross et al.
In addition, an online version of the survey was widely adver tised at multiple schools and universities.
In initial experiments, the selected green-white pattern proved most suitable for different types of display damage.
Each participant also completed multiple questions on phone usage and personal background.
Furthermore, participants that took the effort of taking and uploading a photo are likely also inclined towards answering the ques tions accurately.
After rigorously rejecting submissions that did not meet our requirements, we are confident that images and data in our dataset are genuine.
In total, we received 260 submissions through MTurk and the online survey.
165 of these submissions were discarded as they did not meet the requirements for the photo of the dam aged smartphone, e.g., the smartphone display was not turned on or did not show the website with our checkerboard pattern.
The resulting dataset includes 95 entries, each consisting of a photo and extensive information on the pictured device's usage history, its damage, and how the damage affects smartphone use.
Display glass was damaged in most cases, with a median rat ing of severe damage.
For the LCD screen, 15.8% reported a severe damage.
Concerning touch, 4.2% reported severe and 14.7% reported medium damage.
The damage did usually not change after it occurred .
It deteriorated over time in 24.2% of the cases.
Only 3.2% experienced irregular damage of functionality.
As mentioned before, participants not only rated damage, but also provided a photo of the damaged device, displaying a checkerboard pattern we provided as a website.
The checker board pattern served multiple purposes: it provided a con sistent background to make glass and screen damage visible, it provided information about the scale of the damage and a reference for color correction.
We performed a structured analysis of all images in the dataset to objectively quantify the damage of smartphone dis plays.
Hereby, we focused on visible damage to the display  as we were mainly interested in interaction is sues with the smartphone software.
Touch damage was also not considered in image analysis, as it was not visible.
All images were pre-processed to account for differences between submitted photos in terms of illumination, as well as position and size of the damaged smartphone in the im age.
Images were first de-skewed and rectified based on the checkerboard pattern in order to obtain a rectangular view of the smartphone display.
We further normalized colors with an automatic white balancing filter and cropped images to the display area, as shown in Figure 3.
In experiments, automated detection of different types of damage showed insufficient reliability.
For instance, edge de tection would not only detect actual cracks in the glass, but also the web browser address bar, visible on some photos, or reflections on the display.
Hence, we employed a manual ap proach to reliably annotate different types of damage in the pre-processed images.
We embedded the image in a Scalable Vector Graphics  file.
We followed an iterative approach in the annotation to consis tently annotate different types of damage.
First, we browsed all original photos to gain an overview of occurring damage types, such as cracks or scratches.
Afterwards, we annotated images with the initially identified damage types, extending the set of damage types whenever a new type was encoun tered.
Each damage type was drawn on to a dedicated layer in the SVG to support detailed analysis.
Subsequently, anno tation results were cross-validated against the original photos.
The dataset contains smartphones from ten manufacturers.
54.7% of the participants reported that they bought their smartphones without a contract.
17.8% paid a subsidized price or received it free as part of a mobile plan.
22.1% indi cated that the smartphone was a gift and 2.1% indicated that it was given to them by their employer.
4.2% obtained a phone through other ways, e.g.
As to be expected, participants reported to use their smartphones mainly for messaging , phone calls, and media consumption.
Web brows ing, personal information management , camera functionalities, as well as gaming were also commonly reported smartphone applications.
83% reported to use their smartphone exclusively for personal use.
16% re ported to use it for both, personal and business reasons.
Only one participant used the phone only for business.
This rather small percentage of business related usage is most likely re lated to the sample of participants in our online survey.
Representative examples for the categories are shown in Figure 1.
Subsequently, we used k -means cluster ing to determine cluster members.
The minor display damage category contained 45.3% of the analyzed cases.
In this category, the sum of the three largest visible areas covered 93.1% of the overall display area on av erage .
The category medium dis play damage contained 15.8% of all cases.
The remaining 37.9% were classified as severe display damage.
There is a considerable drop between the medium and severe dam age categories in terms of visible area, as shown in Figure 6.
Cases in the severe display damage category exhibited exten sive spider webs and many scratches and cracks spanning the whole display, with only small unpartitioned areas remain ing.
The damaged display shown in Figure 3 falls into this category.
Devices at the lower end of the medium category also exhibited spider webs but those did not cover the whole display.
Thus, the largest visible areas tended to be bigger.
With the visual damage annotation approach, non-visible damages of touch input could not be quantified.
We did not find a correlation between subjectively rated touch input damage  and the size of the visible display area .
Yet, reducing the subjective rating of touch input damage to a bi nary scale  revealed a sig nificant correlation .
This indicates that dis play damage and touch input issues are likely connected.
Al though touch input issues of varying severity occur across all three identified display damage categories, as shown in Fig ure 6.
In the severe display damage category, there is a no table concentration of slight and medium self-reported touch damage.
However, there are also multiple cases with minor visible display damage but medium to severe touch damage.
Thus, while severe display damage appears to co-occur with the presence of touch damage, touch issues may also occur without extensive visible display damage.
The identified damage types can be categorized as either glass issues or screen issues.
Grayouts are areas with partial occlusion, whereas blackouts denote areas with full occlusion, typically caused by screen backlight failure.
Based on the damage annotation, we determined the percent age of visible, intact display areas, as well as damaged and occluded display areas.
We further quantified the number of disjunct partitions of a display, separated by cracks or other damage types.
In Matlab, we used morphological functions to close small areas and gaps in the damage annotation and sorted resulting areas based on their pixel size.
In general, damage  covered a low percentage of the dis play.
For 92.6% of the analyzed smartphones, less than 20% of the display was occluded or damaged.
However, displays are partitioned by damage into multiple visible areas, as shown in Figure 3.
To analyze this data and to assess whether categories can be identified, we em ployed a two-step approach in cluster analysis.
First hierar chical clustering was used to estimate the number of existing clusters.
Participants were asked to rate the impact of their smartphone damage on application categories and activities .
Figure 7 shows results for the four most impacted application categories, as well as the least affected category.
Reading was most impacted by damage, particularly in the medium  and severe damage categories .
The non-parametric Kruskal-Wallis test in dicated no significant differences between groups.
The ef fect on text input, which was also rated the most impor tant aspect of smartphone use, varied significantly between groups =8.87, p<.05.
While minor and medium display damage had a small impact on text input , severe damage had a higher im pact .
Post-hoc analysis  shows that the difference between mi nor and severe damage was significant .
The impact on media use, i.e., playback of photos, music or videos, was also rated highest in the medium damage category , but differences were not significant.
Across groups, phone calls were least impaired by display damage.
The mode for all three groups was a rat ing of no effect , with a marginally higher impact in the medium and severe display damage categories , but no significant differences between groups.
Notable in Figure 7 is that the third quartiles are higher in the medium damage group than the severe damage group for the four most affected categories.
A potential explanation is that smartphones with medium damage are continued to be used more actively than those with severe damage.
Of the 95 participants, 97.9% continued to use their device after it got damaged; 82.1% still used it when completing our survey.
However, 8 participants  were already using their damaged smartphone for 1 year or longer; 3 years in the most extreme case.
Furthermore, 85.3% planned to continue using the damaged smartphone.
While one third  planned to use the damaged phone for 3 months or less, another third  planned to use it for at least another year or longer.
These numbers align with the frequency of switching phones.
The majority  switched their smartphone every two years, which corre sponds to typical mobile plans in many countries.
18.9% specifically indicated they switched smartphones when of fered a new one by their provider, which conforms to Huang and Truong's results .
Non-periodic reasons for switching smartphones were damage , release of a new model , and lack of functionality or performance .
67 participants  did not plan to get their damaged phone repaired.
The main stated reason was high repair costs , followed by being able to live with the damage , new phones being too expensive , and wait ing for the release of a new model .
The main stated reasons for abandoning a damaged phone were impaired visi bility of display content , important functionality being broken , or risk of injury from broken glass .
The survey results indicate that display damage mainly im pacts visual output and touch input.
Despite that, most dis plays are not repaired, mainly due to financial reasons, and are continued to be used for prolonged periods of time.
We conducted interviews with owners of damaged smartphones to elicit specific interaction issues that arise in daily use and coping strategies that users developed to deal with them.
Interviewees were recruited from participants of the online survey .
The 11 semi-structured in terviews consisted of 17 open questions.
They were con ducted either at our lab  or via online video chat .
Inter views were video-recorded to capture interaction with dam aged devices.
Participants received 10 Euro as compensation.
We employed grounded theory  with iterative coding for qualitative analysis.
First, three of the authors independently coded the same two interviews.
Based on these results, a joint consolidated set of coding categories was developed, which was further refined through a second iteration.
Inter-rater reliability was verified with a randomly selected interview , before the remaining interviews were coded separately.
Fleiss' Kappa  showed substantial agreement between the three raters .
The coded data was then analyzed with affinity diagramming to identify concepts and insights.
The 11 interviewees  came from different German cities, had mainly an academic background , and used smartphones for 1.5-7 years .
We categorized them into two groups, as shown in Table 1, based on the importance of their smartphones to them.
Mobile utilizers appreciated the mobility and utility of smartphones, but placed less emphasis on social networking or communica tion with peers.
Social communicators used their phone pri marily to stay in touch via messaging, social networks, and gaming apps.
They appreciated mobile Internet access and reachability, but did not talk much on the phone.
Almost all rated the importance of their phones higher than mobile uti lizers, seeing it as highly important for staying in touch with peers.
P10 and P11 described their phone as a "body exten sion."
P11 characterized it as a "permanent social link" and "competence extension."
All mobile utilizers were female in our sample; social communicators dominantly male.
Almost all of the participants' phones suffered damage from a fall, either because the phone slipped out of the hand  or a pocket .
P6 and P7 reported that their phones slipped out of their pants' back pocket while in the restroom.
P11's phone was damaged while inside a bag.
In 9 cases, only the phone's display glass was broken .
Many participants continued to use the damaged device be cause it was still usable with minor constraints , or because the damage was deemed too insignificant to justify replace ment or repair .
What degree of damage was perceived as still usable varied considerably, ranging from minor glass  or screen damage  to medium  and severe display damage .
However, P1 and P6 planned to re place their phones soon.
The threshold for replacing a phone was quite high in both groups.
Acceptability of damage was mainly traded off against financial considerations.
5 partic ipants were not willing to pay full price for a new phone.
3 expected to receive a new phone through renewal of their mo bile plan.
P8 usually bought a new phone every 1.5 years and planned to keep the current phone for another 6 months.
P6 continued to use the damaged phone, because she did not like the phones available in her price range.
7 participants thought repairing the phone was too expensive, which corresponds to our online survey results.
While 5 par ticipants did not consider repair, others looked into getting it repaired  or self-repair .
However, only P4 had the phone repaired at the time of the interview  and P11 had bought a new phone .
In general, repair costs were considered too close to the pur chase price: "repair costs 170 Euro, the phone cost 300 Euro.
While this suggests economical obsolescence, the high price of a new phone did not lead to replacement .
For repair, P6 was also skeptical about placing a new display in the old casing, and P1 feared further malfunction.
P2 and P5 knew that high repair costs were caused by combined glass-display units and wished that the glass was easier to replace.
4 participants stated that the damage did not change their per ception of the phone manufacturer, and would not influence purchase decisions.
However, P11 switched to a different manufacturer after breaking two phones from the same man ufacturer.
Interestingly, P4, P6, P7, and P9 perceived their phones as more robust, because they were still usable despite the damage.
This increased trust in the manufacturer of their phone , but also decreased trust in other manufac turers .
For instance, P6 stated " you see even more broken iPhones.
I think those are even easier to break."
Reported interaction issues can be categorized as viewing/output issues and touch/input issues.
Viewing issues are caused by glass and screen damage.
Their severity depends on the location, extent, and opacity of the damage.
Scratches had a negligible impact on most applications , although reading can be slightly impaired by fine cracks .
In line with our survey results, reading was reported to be most affected by damage.
P4 stated that reading was "awk ward", because the damage was in the display's center.
Spi der webs made reading particularly difficult, as the display provided only a tessellated view of the text with cracks par tially covering words and characters, thus, requiring to "look between the cracks" , see Fig.
P6 noted that reading issues also impact typing, as typed text can be occluded, resulting in a lack of feedback.
Damage impact can further depend on device orientation.
The dark spots would only cover the browser's address bar in portrait mode, but be in the middle of the text in landscape mode.
When using Twit ter in landscape mode, the dark spots would either only cover avatars or also be in the middle of text.
Glass and screen damage further impact apps that rely on display content be ing read by other machines, e.g., displayed barcodes being scanned as entry or bus tickets .
Regarding input, display cracks create a tactile sensation, which is particularly noticeable for swipe gestures .
Damage of input-related hardware had the strongest impact on interaction.
P3 reported a defect proximity sensor that caused her to accidentally mute calls with her cheek, and a sporadically defective home button .
P6 experienced the most severe input issues, after the top part of her display became unresponsive.
As a consequence, UI elements located at the top of the screen could not be activated anymore.
Participants developed coping strategies to adapt to their phone's damage.
In total, our 11 interviewees reported 23 different coping strategies, listed in Table 2.
Preventive strategies aimed to prevent further deterioration , e.g., by placing a protective film on the display .
P10 considered purchasing an outdoor phone .
Viewing strategies addressed output issues.
Most participants  used scrolling to move text and UI elements around dam aged display areas , cf.
3 participants with severe damage and 1 with minor damage stated that their perception had adapted so that they hardly noticed the dam age anymore .
P2, P5, and P10 focused on a smaller part of the screen, typically the largest visible area .
Ro tating the device  and zooming  also helped to po sition content in intact display areas.
P5 noted that cracks were less visible on darker backgrounds, while P10's reflec tive screen made blackout spots almost see-through in direct sunlight .
Hiding or expanding UI elements, such as the virtual keyboard or menu bars, were also used to move con tent into viewable display areas , e.g., P11 would hide the keyboard to expand the visible area.
When viewing a WhatsApp conversation, P6 clicked immediately into the text field in order to show the keyboard and move the mes sage text up into less damaged display parts.
P6 would also hold the phone at different angles to recognize text  or just guess based on context .
Touch and input strategies are concerned with direct contact with the damage.
P1, P6, and P7 used or considered pro tection films to smooth interaction and prevent injury .
P1 and P6 also tried to type and click carefully .
Strategy S1 S2 S3 S4 S5 S6 S7 S8 S9 S10 S11 S12 S13 S14 S15 S16 S17 S18 S19 S20 S21 S22 S23 adding protection film to stall display degradation possibly buying durable outdoor phone scrolling ignoring the damage  using only reduced viewing field rotating the device zooming adjusting brightness or color theme hiding UI components  expanding UI components  adjusting viewing angle guessing based on context massaging screen to stall blackouts adding protection film for smoother interaction touching carefully to avoid injury rotating phone to avoid touching broken glass increased/repeated pressing of hardware buttons using other apps using hands-free telephony using call forwarding to second phone emulating hardware buttons with software leveraging alternative interaction methods moving social group to other app
Our interview participants all had an academic background, either being students or researchers, coming from different German universities.
In our sample population, we only iden tified mobile utilizers and social communicators as explicit groups.
With higher diversity more user categories might emerge that may also exhibit additional or different coping strategies.
More users affected by touch damage would be of particular interest, as P3 and P6 exhibited rich and elabo rate coping strategies to compensate for partial touch damage.
While the list of named coping strategies may not be exhaus tive, it highlights the diversity of strategies and the adaptabil ity of users.
The interviews also made apparent that seem ingly innocuous design decisions, such as the placement of a next button to skip ads can have a large impact when interac tion is impaired by damage.
P3 would press faulty hardware buttons repeatedly or used two fingers to increase pressure .
P6 switched to other apps, because certain apps had UI el ements only in the touch-damaged area .
Surprisingly, no participant rearranged icons on the home screen to make them more accessible.
Even P6 did not move icons from the top part of the screen, because "they can still be activated by clicking them on their very bottom".
This suggests that customization with widgets and home screen arrangements is rather a tool for personalization  than a coping mechanism.
Calling strategies served to make phone calls with minimal phone contact.
P1 and P3 made calls in speaker mode to avoid holding the damaged phone against their face .
Later on, P1 automatically forwarded calls to an older feature phone in order to take calls more conveniently .
Interaction strategies enabled users to perform activities with alternative means.
P6 added the settings icon to her home screen to compensate for defective volume controls .
P6 also used alternative interaction paths to cope with partially defective touch input .
Because the address bar in the browser could not be clicked, she opened a new tab via the context menu, which would directly select the address bar.
In the contacts list, the top entry could not be selected, thus she read the number from the contact preview and typed it manually to place a call.
Because she could not send emails with her mail app anymore, she used the Web interface of her email provider, which allowed to "track and scroll the display ."
However, this process was perceived as too cumbersome.
P6 engaged in multiple social gaming apps to keep in touch with friends.
One game became unusable due to a next button located at the top of the screen.
Another game had a similar setup but allowed to reach the main menu by pressing back.
Our survey and interview results show that the majority of participants continued to use a damaged phone ; 88% for at least three months.
32% plan to use it for another year or more.
Repair costs are deemed too high by most, regard less of the degree of damage.
Yet, new smartphones are also deemed too expensive to justify unplanned purchases.
Only if the damage becomes intolerable, e.g., when touch input is strongly affected, damaged phones are actively replaced.
Users adapt to their phone damage with diverse coping strate gies, closely tailored to their individual interaction issues.
Many of these strategies can already be supported at design time of smartphones and mobile applications.
Supporting those strategies would not only provide a positive user ex perience in the face of display damage, but may also prevent affected users from switching to different apps or platforms, potentially moving their social group with them.
Next, we propose respective design guidelines for manufacturers and interaction designers that potentially lessen the impact of dis play damage on interaction.
The frequently named coping strategies scrolling  and ro tating the device  can be actively supported.
Scrolling up and down enables users to position screen content and text in less damaged display areas.
Inertial scrolling  further supports this coping strategy by allowing to move slightly beyond the beginning and end of a screen.
Allowing to move screen content also slightly to the left or right  makes it easier to recognize text occluded by damage .
The inertia, i.e., how far content can be moved to the sides, should be configurable to enable users to adapt it to the extent of their display's damage.
While inertial scrolling is commonly provided by UI widgets, app designers could also integrate it in apps that tend to have non-scrollable screens, such as games.
Switching between portrait and landscape mode changes the perceived visual impact of damage, because different UI ele ments may be occluded.
Coping strategies that rely on expanding and hiding UI ele ments , such as the keyboard or status bars, indi cate a need for flexible UI concepts.
Affected users should be able to customize the layout of an app to better suit their needs -- damage related or not.
For instance, rearranging sta tus bars or soft buttons would have allowed P6 to move es sential components to screen areas still responsive to touch.
Thus, customization does not only facilitate personalization but can also reduce the impact of potential display damage.
Darker colors make it easier for affected users to ignore glass cracks , because reduction of screen brightness coin cides with a reduction of light reflected by cracks.
Operating systems and apps could support this by providing different themes to choose from.
Some smartphones  already provide sunlight readability modes, which adapt screen contrast and color dynamically.
Similar modes could be created to make display damage less noticeable.
Adaptive content rendering example:  A text area is par tially occluded by display damage.
In this scenario, the upper-left corner can also not be used anymore .
By providing multiple alternative interaction paths, utility of an app can be maintained even if the primary intended inter action paths have been rendered unusable by damage .
Relying on a single exclusive interaction path may render the whole application unusable, which poses the risk of not only losing the affected users, but their social sphere as well .
Alternative interaction paths can often be provided without much additional effort.
For P6, the ability to press the back button to skip an in-game ad rather than having to use the app's next button made all the difference.
Similarly, providing redundant options in context menus can suffice as interaction alternatives.
Another approach could be to allow to change the function of hardware buttons, such as volume controls, on the system level to sequentially tab through UI elements, e.g., in order to select the browser's address bar for text en try.
A short press could mean tab, a long press could act as a trigger.
A further option is to provide additional input and output modalities, such as projected UIs  or gaze-based interaction , to compensate display and touch damage.
Named interaction issues were dominated by viewing and reading impairments caused by occlusion of content.
By of fering user control over how content is presented, readabil ity could be enhanced, e.g., by allowing to change font size or family  or by not only supporting zooming for websites, maps, and images, but also for app content .
A potentially useful approach could be adaptive text and con tent rendering.
Display areas highly occluded by damage could either be automatically detected, as proposed before, or manually marked by the user, if touch input is intact.
As a result, the phone would be aware of areas with major damage and could adapt content rendering and representation, accord ingly, e.g., by excluding parts from rendering or rearranging UI components.
Figure 10 shows a simplified example of how this approach might work.
Further research is required to assess the potential of such an approach and the impact on readability and user experience, as well as to develop suitable adaptive rendering mechanisms.
An avenue for further research is the detection of drops and resulting damage with integrated sensors.
Accelerometers could recognize drops as free fall and a sudden stop.
A gyro scope could determine whether the device hit the ground with an edge, corner, the front, or the back.
Such sensor infor mation could be combined with empirical damage models to estimate whether damage occurred and to what extent, which could also benefit manufacturers to adapt their design.
Accelerometer peaks can also be used to detect taps on the device , in oder to determine when intended taps were not sensed properly, e.g., when the display is tapped repeatedly .
In this work, we have shown that display damage has indeed a large impact on smartphone interaction.
Our broken in terface dataset is a rich resource on display damage in the wild, including detailed images of damaged phones, infor mation about the damage severity, how damage occurred, as well as the impact of the damage on prolonged use.
Partic ipants' damage assessment in combination with image anal ysis and manual damage annotation showed that three cate gories of visible display damage can be distinguished , with a considerable gap between the latter two.
While touch issues occur across categories, we identi fied a positive correlation between those categories and the reported presence of touch damage.
We provided our dam aged display dataset1 to the CHI community to foster more research on the impact of damage on user interaction.
Our semi-structured interviews revealed that the severity of damage has a stronger impact on interaction than the type of use or assigned importance of the phone.
Both survey and interview results indicate that even heavily damaged smartphones are continued to be used for multiple months; phones with less severe damage potentially for years.
Main reasons for continued use are high repair or replacement costs, which are balanced against the severity of the damage.
Reported interaction issues are dominated by viewing issues due to visible display damage.
However, when touch input issues emerged, they were typically more severe.
Through our 11 interviews, we collected over 20 coping strategies.
Those strategies highlight the adaptability of users, if provided with flexibility in how to interact with their smartphones and apps.
A valuable insight for application developers is the indication that not catering for potential display damage may not only cause affected users but their whole social group to abandon an app, as reported by interviewee P6 .
Based on our results, we discussed strategies for interaction design ers to cater for potential damage.
The proposed strategies support many of the reported coping strategies, and most of them can be readily considered in application design without major effort.
Conceptual strategies, such as damage-aware adaptive content rendering and sensor-based damage detec tion, require further investigation to assess their potential and overcome associated challenges.
Parts of this work have been conducted within the Emmy Noether research group Mobile Interaction with Pervasive User Interfaces funded by the German Research Foundation.
The authors would like to thank Jens Nickels for help with damage annotation, Alexander de Luca for extensive feed back on an earlier draft, and the anonymous reviewers for their feedback.
