ABSTRACT We study how the visual catchiness  of relevant information impacts user engagement metrics such as focused attention and emotion .
Participants completed tasks in one of two conditions, where the task-relevant information either appeared salient or non-salient.
Our analysis provides insights into relationships between saliency, focused attention, and affect.
Participants reported more distraction in the non-salient condition, and non-salient information was slower to find than salient.
Lackof-saliency led to a negative impact on affect, while saliency maintained positive affect, suggesting its helpfulness.
Participants reported that it was easier to focus in the salient condition, although there was no significant improvement in the focused attention scale rating.
Finally, this study suggests user interest in the topic is a good predictor of focused attention, which in turn is a good predictor of positive affect.
These results suggest that enhancing saliency of user-interested topics seems a good strategy for boosting user engagement.
Author Keywords User engagement, saliency, focused attention, positive affect, user interests, news entertainment ACM Classification Keywords H5.m.
In the context of multimedia design , web page style  has been related to positive affect and to promote focused attention.
Positive affect and focused attention are important characteristics of user engagement .
Focused attention refers to the exclusion of other things ; while affect relates to the emotions experienced during the interaction.
One important, albeit less studied, aspect, of web page style, is the visual catchiness of items, known as visual saliency.
The aim of this work is to study the effect of saliency on focused attention and positive affect.
Research in cognitive psychology and neuroscience show that when users see a display or visually search for a target object in a cluttered display, their attention and eye gaze are drawn to salient objects that appear visually different from the rest of the display .
For example, big, bolded, italicized and colored text surrounded by plain text appears visually catchy or salient and draws attention, due to the difference in size, orientation and color.
More generally, differences in features such as color, brightness, edge orientation, size, motion and flicker are known to draw attention, independently of the user goal or intent .
While saliency is known to attract eye gaze in displays, we do not know if it leads to a better user affect and focused attention.
To answer this question, we carried out a study within the news entertainment domain, where we measured, both quantitatively and qualitatively, affect and focused attention for a large sample of participants drawn from Amazon Mechanical Turk .
We carefully varied the saliency of the headlines in a news page from non-salient to salient, while keeping everything else fixed, and tested whether increasing saliency can help improve user task performance, and whether it impacts focused attention and affect.
To help calibrate saliency of the headlines, we turn to a model of saliency  that takes in a screenshot of the news page as an input and predicts the salient hotspots that will likely draw user attention in the first few seconds of visiting that page.
In web applications, user engagement refers to the quality of the user experience emphasizing the positive aspects of the interaction, in particular the phenomena associated with being captivated by the application, and wanting to use it frequently.
User engagement is a key concept in the design of web applications, motivated by the observation that successful applications are not just used, they are engaged with.
In a world full of choices, it is essential that technology providers do not just design systems but that they design engaging experiences .
User engagement can be improved by serving not only the most relevant content/functionality to users, but also by displaying it in a visually catchy way.
The sensory and visual appeal of a web page is an important factor for engagement .
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
This results in 42 feature difference maps.
In the second stage, the model mimics competitive interactions between neutrons by applying a difference of Gaussian filter .
This is followed by rectification to remove negative values.
A few iterations of such nonlinear competitive interactions results in highlighting only the salient hotspots in the display in each feature dimension i.e., those display regions whose features are different from the rest of the display.
Finally, in the third stage, the model linearly combines the saliency maps from the various feature dimensions to a single master saliency map.
Attention is then guided in decreasing order of saliency in this map, starting with the most salient hotspot, followed by the next most salient hotspot and so on until the entire display is visited.
Our goal was to explore the impact of saliency on positive affect and focused attention.
We selected the entertainment news domain knowing that the internet is a common way for people to get their entertainment news .
To ensure control of the saliency of web pages we were restricted in terms of the tasks to create.
However, these restrictions allowed a more focused study at a more granular level, albeit at the expense of a less natural reading experience.
Participants drawn from Amazon Mechanical Turk were asked to complete an online study.
There were two conditions for this study, salient and non-salient.
We were also interested in the interaction between participants' level of interest in the entertainment web page content with affect and focused attention, but due to its exploratory nature, we did not formulate hypotheses.
There were eight tasks in total for each participant to perform.
Each task involved finding the latest news or headline on a different celebrity or entertainment topic .
Task topics included Justin Bieber , Sam Worthington , Brad Pitt , Halle Berry , Disney , Britney Spears , David Letterman , Brendan Gleesan .
Entertainment news web pages were selected from a variety of sources to ensure diversity of topic and presentation format .
Only the screenshots of the web pages were manipulated by condition.
For consistency, the following manipulation criteria were applied: 1.
All web page screenshots have a width:length ratio of 2:3 2.
Location of headline on the pages is the same between conditions, although it may vary within a condition 3.
Though pages may be scrolled, all headlines appear on the visible page  4.
According to the saliency model of visual attention, headlines in the non-salient condition do not register as salient; those in the salient condition register as salient Manipulations included increases in font size, changes in color of font or background, and addition or removal of image or icon.
For example, Figure 1 shows the Justin Bieber task web page screenshot images.
The headline  has been manipulated in the salient condition; the font size has been increased, the subtitle font color has been altered and two large exclamation points added.
To ensure these web page images contained a non-salient and a salient Bieber headline for their respective conditions, these visible page screenshots were uploaded to a program which automatically applies the saliency model of visual attention described in the previous section to the images.
We used the saliency model of visual attention developed by Itti and Koch , inspired by how the primate visual cortex processes information to drive attention while freely viewing the display, in the absence of user goal.
Extensions of this model have shown to predict user attention during visual search for a target object in a display , while watching video , and playing exploratory video games .
While the model is precognitive and agnostic to the semantics and user biases, it is a good predictor of attention in the first few seconds of seeing the display and hence serves as a good starting point to predict what might catch the users' eye as soon as they see the display.
In the first stage, the model extracts a set of biologically inspired features, such as color, brightness intensity, and edge orientation at various spatial scales.
While the Bieber headline does not register as salient in the non-salient condition, the headline registers as the third most salient item on the page in the salient condition.
A score of "1" indicates the feature has the highest level of saliency on the page followed by "2" and so on.
Affect was also measured by asking users to respond to the question: "Overall, did you feel positive or negative while completing the news headline tasks?
Affect was measured pre- and post- task using the Positive and Negative Affect Schedule  , a 20-item scale that is one of the most commonly used measures of affect.
It includes 10 items measuring positive affect , such as determined, attentive, and enthusiastic and 10 items measuring negative  including jittery, hostile, and afraid.
I was so involved in my news tasks that I lost track of time 3.
I blocked things out around me when I was completing the news tasks 4.
When I was performing these news tasks, I lost track of the world around me 5.
The time I spent performing these news tasks just slipped away 6.
I was absorbed in my news tasks 7.
During the news tasks experience I let myself go Participants were instructed to respond to each item on a 5point scale : "Based on this experience finding celebrity and entertainment news headlines, please indicate whether you agree or disagree with each statement".
Two questions were included to measure participants' perceptions relating to focus and distraction: "Was it easy to focus on finding the news headlines you were asked to find?
These questions were followed with "why" questions to understand reasons for their perceptions.
As perceived time is an integral component of focused attention , the actual time spent on the entertainment web page displays looking for headlines was measured as well as perceived time.
Perceived time was measured using the question: "Please estimate in minutes the total time you think you spent finding the eight news headlines on the entertainment web pages.
We conducted a series of three pilot studies.
These pilots enabled us to test the validity of our use of the focused attention subscale, previously applied to the online shopping domain .
In the initial pilot study  confirmatory factor analysis was performed using the Principal component analysis method of extraction and Varimax rotation; a single factor was extracted and Cronbach's alpha  indicated high reliability.
The second and third pilot studies further confirmed its reliability; Cronbach's alphas of .90  and .88  were found.
The pilots also allowed us to test the study design and led to a number of significant changes in task, question order and delivery, the types of questions asked, and payment structure.
It was imperative that we control users' view of the web page images as much as possible given that they would be in their own environments rather than in a controlled lab setting.
Complaints regarding slow page loading in the first pilot, for example, led us to insert coding to help ensure that web pages pre-loaded.
This reduced the chance that participants would see the page slowly appear from top to bottom, thus impacting saliency predictions.
Comments in the original pilot study suggested that some tasks meant to be in the salient condition were considered difficult to spot while some in the non-salient condition stood out.
Most of the complaints regarding the non-salient headlines in the salient condition were related to highlighting that impaired readability; new tasks were created with this in mind.
The second and third pilots became pared-down versions of the study  in order to get the tasks "right".
The original pilot study included follow-up questions designed to engage the participants in the content.
Comments suggested this was too artificial given the lack of ability to engage with the web pages via links; as well, those with no interest in entertainment news complained vehemently.
Given the sensitivity of the PANAS, follow-up questions were removed and replaced with a question that simply asked them to select the correct headline from a list of headlines.
The number of tasks was also reduced to eight from ten to reduce emotions not associated with saliency itself.
The polarized reactions to entertainment and celebrity news led us to add a few questions relating to interest in the web page content.
The participants' level of interest in topics  was measured using a 5-point level of interest scale with an option to indicate that they did not know who/what this was.
Post-task, interest was measured on a 5-point agreement scale using the following questions: "Though it wasn't possible, I wanted to click on links within the web pages", "I was interested in the content of the web pages" and "I wanted to find out more about the topics that I encountered on the web pages."
Perception of task ease was measured based on responses on a 5-point agreement scale to the following two questions: "I am confident I found the headlines I was asked to find" and "It was easy to locate the headlines I was asked to find."
Actual time spent finding the headlines was also used as a measure of task ease; the easier the task is to complete, the less time it should take.
Participants were instructed that the study would take approximately 15 minutes to complete, though they would be given 60 minutes between the time they accepted and submitted the HIT.
They were informed that they could only participate in this study once and they would not be paid if they had participated in one of the two previous pilot studies that employed the same tasks.
Payment for study completion was $1.50.
Upon accepting the HIT, participants were randomly assigned to one of 8 surveys by clicking the link to the external survey.
Items in the PANAS and focused attention scale were randomized as were questions in the pre-task interest questionnaire and the interest and task ease questions.
Task order was partially randomized; four surveys were created for each condition and the task order in each set manipulated to reduce location bias.
Participants were all given the same instructions and tasks.
No time constraints for task completion were imposed.
Participants were unable to return to previous pages.
Regarding page loading time, 23  agreed or strongly agreed that it took a long time for the pages to load.
Many participants indicated not knowing Worthington  or Gleeson .
However, no more than 1% indicated not knowing the other headline topics and 47% of participants agreed/strongly agreed that they follow entertainment news.
Unlike a 2010 Pew study that indicates that 47% of Americans get their celebrities or entertainment news online , 79% of the participants in our study indicated getting their entertainment news via the internet.
No significant differences  were found between the two conditions  relating to demographics, monitor size, page loading, or entertainment news behaviors.
All quantitative analyses were conducted in SPSS.
The open-ended responses relating to overall feelings, ease of focus and distraction were analyzed through a process of inductive, thematic coding.
The first author developed a coding manual that included definitions and examples of each of the codes.
An independent researcher was asked to code 50 responses from each of the three questions using the coding manual.
Based on this initial step, code definitions were clarified to improve coding consistency.
Both the researcher and the independent researcher then recoded all three sets of responses independently using the revised coding manual.
Kappa was used to determine the reliability of the coding; Kappas > .75 are considered excellent agreement beyond chance .
The researchers then reached agreement on those responses where their coding conflicted.
Participants were drawn from the MTurk population and screened based on location  and HIT approval rate , as recommended in the literature  and communications with crowd-sourcing experts.
The average time for completion of the study was approximately 13 minutes.
Of these, two were found to have repeated the study after abandoning the study part-way through therefore these were deleted.
Those unable to correctly answer at least 6 of the 8 tasks  were also eliminated.
Given the easy nature of the tasks, these participants were not making a sufficient attempt to find the headlines.
To the "confident I found the headlines"
All missing values were NMAR  and included responses such as "don't know" and "cannot say/not applicable".
Six data sets were removed as a result of this NMAR data, leaving N=190.
The negative affect scale  of the PANAS was non-normally distributed, showing extreme signs of skew and kurtosis even after log base-10 transformation.
As NAS violated the assumption of linearity required for this study's analyses and as our main focus of this study was the PAS rather than the NAS, no further analysis was done using the NAS.
Univariate outliers were examined; a number were identified but their removal did not change the results therefore these data sets were retained.
Using Mahalanobis distance five multivariate outliers were identified ; however, Cook's distance values for all but one of the cases fell below the generally accepted cutoff of 1 .
This case was deleted, leaving N=189 for the analyses reported in this paper.
Table 2 contains the descriptive statistics and intercorrelations of the study variables.
There was a relatively even split by condition with 90  in the salient task condition and 99  in the non-salient task condition.
There were no significant differences by condition relating to task accuracy.
Several themes emerged from the qualitative analysis of the three open-ended questions relating to overall affect, easy to focus, and distractions.
Only those themes relating to our hypotheses and exploration of user interests, focused attention, and affect are explored in this paper.
Discussion of these themes is interwoven through the discussion of the quantitative results in the following sections.
Results are organized according to our hypotheses and exploratory examination of user interests, focused attention and affect.
Participants are referred to by condition and number.
Saliency of task-relevant information leads to greater task performance, both actual and perceived.
However, does this positive effect on task performance translate to positive feelings and emotions upon task completion?
Affect improves when the task-relevant information is salient compared to when it is not salient.
There was no significant effect for saliency between the two groups relating to post positive affect, t  = -.35, p = .73.
Pre- and postPAS scores were examined for each of the two conditions.
This same result was not observed in the salient condition, t  = 1.09, p = .28, where there was no change in affect between pre- and post-task affect scores.
Analysis of the "Overall, did you feel positive or negative while completing the news headline tasks?"
Both groups, for example, tended to associate positive feelings with performance, indicating the tasks were easy or relatively easy to perform.
One participant wrote: "I felt like I was able to find the headlines quickly and efficiently"  while another noted "I felt positive because I was able to find the headlines quickly" .
Despite the ease of the tasks, another theme to emerge across both conditions was that the web pages were cluttered or there was too much content.
Negative feelings emerged because "There was too much at which to look.
Those in the salient condition indicated that the location or  the salience of the task headlines made it easy to focus.
S14 noted that it was easy to focus "because they were all close to the top and had a picture or were bolded or highlighted" while S74 wrote "Because most of the headlines that I was looking for stood out from the rest".
Saliency of task-relevant information leads to higher levels of focused attention.
There was no significant effect for saliency, t  = -.09, p = .93 in the focused attention scale scores.
Likewise, there were no significant differences in their likelihood to overestimate or underestimate time spent finding the headlines .
Responses to the question, "Did you find anything distracting when you were searching for the headlines?"
However, the open-ended responses relating to distraction suggests that those in the non-salient condition appeared more apt to be distracted by web page format, layout or image saliency.
One participant  wrote: "Some of the pictures and large graphics were distracting when the headline I was looking for was in small type".
This pattern of responses is reflected in the responses to the question "Was it easy to focus on finding the news headlines you were asked to find?"
Due to some cell counts of less than five, a Fisher exact test was performed which confirmed the significance of this result .
Those in the non-salient condition were more likely to be "on the fence" in their response to this question with more indicating "somewhat" than their salient condition counterparts.
While saliency impacted focused attention and affect, a prominent theme to emerge from the thematic analysis of the open-ended questions was the impact that web page content had on participants' focus.
One participant wrote: "My attention was drawn at first to headlines regarding things that I am particularly interested .
But once I gave myself an attention check, it was easy to find the headlines" .
Others were able to stay focused due to lack of interest in the celebrity news: "I don't really care about celebrity news, so I didn't get distracted very easily" .
Multiple regression analysis was used to test whether interest in topics, wanting to click on the links, and wanting to find out more were related to focused attention scores .
The results indicated that the three independent variables explained 27% of the variance.
However, while interest in content  and wanting to find out more , each contributed significantly to the prediction of focused attention scores, wanting to click on links was not a significant predictor .
Model b Constant 11.27 Interest in content 1.64 Wanted to click on links -.15 Wanted to find out more 1.36 Note.
As well as engagement in the web page content, engagement in the task itself appeared to be an integral reason behind open-ended responses.
In order to focus, one participant noted that " I made it into a game with myself" .
Another who found it easy to focus wrote that "It was kind of like a puzzle trying to find them amid all the other useless information on those pages" .
Likewise, the gaming aspect led some to express positive emotions as a result of the experience: "I enjoyed the game of it " ; "It's interesting, like a hide and find" .
Others expressed neutral feelings relating to their experience noted "It was just a game of finding the headlines, but not that interesting a game" .
Simple linear regression was used to test whether focused attention scores significantly predicted post-positive affect.
Regression results are summarized in Table 5.
The results of the regression indicated that focused attention scores contributed significantly to the prediction of postpositive affect scores  and explained 19% of the variance.
Pre- positive affect also significantly predicts focused attention , and explained 10% of the variance.
This hypothesis was unsupported through the sum scores of the focused attention scale and estimation of the time spent finding headlines.
Focused attention does not increase when the task relevant information is salient nor does a lack of saliency increase distortions of time perception.
In contrast, users reported that it was easier to focus when the headlines appeared salient.
Recall that responses to the focused attention scale were based on the experience of finding news headlines on the web pages.
The tasks themselves were easy, short, and involved only a single change in headline saliency between the two groups.
The user engagement scale was developed to measure engagement in interactive systems .
Perhaps engagement with multiple non-interactive web page screenshots in the entertainment news was not enough to make an impact on perceived focused attention based on saliency alone.
Measurement of any potential differences was thwarted possibly in part by our study design.
Allowing interaction with web pages, however, would have made it impossible to control saliency to the degree that we did in this study.
Due to the lack of interaction with the web page screenshot, the focused attention subscale may have been too abstract.
As evidenced in the qualitative analysis, participants reported that it was easier to focus in the salient condition, suggesting that this question helped them think more concretely about what helped them focus.
Like focused attention, distortion of time perception was expected to be greater when the task-based information was salient than when it was not salient.
Time distortion or lack of awareness of time occurs when the user is focused on or immersed in an activity .
While we expected that saliency would help participants maintain their focus, become engaged with the task and therefore lose track of time, this did not occur.
Perhaps it was the case that the task was simply too easy for those looking for salient headlines; a certain amount of challenge is necessary if a user is to become engaged or immersed in their activity and lose themselves, often referred to as the experience of flow .
As both participants in the salient and non-salient conditions were asked to perform tasks that were essentially controlled activities, this level of control may have mitigated against focused attention in both conditions.
When the task relevant information is salient, it is found faster, and participants report that it is easier to find the headlines.
This hypothesis is thus fully supported.
The connection between task difficulty and time on task has been noted previously  and this study confirms that saliency contributes to both subjective measures of task difficulty and actual measures of time.
Salient headlines helped participants complete the task more quickly.
While the tasks were easy for both groups to complete, those provided with salient headlines perceived the tasks were easier.
But does this benefit in task performance translate to a positive affect?
This hypothesis was supported through the results of the pre- and post- positive affect scores, though unsupported through the responses to the overall affect question.
In general, entertainment news web pages are cluttered and have several visual elements; there are a multitude of images and advertisements, headlines and bodies of text on a single page.
This is also true of the web pages that our participants were shown; there was a lot of information on the pages.
Web pages that are cluttered demand a lot of attention  and the stylistic properties of retrieved documents such as presentation of information have been found to arouse both positive and negative emotions .
Emotions have also previously been shown to change from positive to negative as task difficulty increases .
Saliency of relevant information provided a way to navigate through the page clutter more effectively, making tasks easier for those in the salient condition.
This paper makes three novel contributions: * This paper detailed the first study showing how saliency impacts metrics associated with user engagement .
In comparison, when the headlines appear visually catchy or salient, they find them faster, report that it is easy to focus, and maintain positive affect.
This shows that saliency is helpful in task performance, focusing/avoiding distraction and in maintaining positive affect.
Although users reported that it was easier to focus in the salient condition, we found no significant improvement in the focused attention subscale or differences in perceived time spent on tasks.
Instead, we find that user interest in web page content is a good predictor of focused attention, which in turn is a good predictor of positive affect.
Our results ultimately suggest that the interaction of saliency, focused attention, and affect, together with user interest, is complex.
Examining saliency and engagement simultaneously in this study was a challenge.
Salient features of a web page draw user attention within the first few seconds of visiting a page, but engagement happens after, sometimes long after, that initial exposure.
Moreover, the impact that the manipulation of our perceptual environment has on our feelings and emotions is difficult to measure.
Nonetheless, the use of multiple measures helped us gain a richer understanding of the complex relationships between saliency, focused attention, affect and user interest.
Performing this study online with no control over screen size, internet connection speed, or other variables we would normally control for in a laboratory setting presented further challenges.
However, while the use of Amazon Mechanical Turk as a platform for online recruitment took much of the environmental control away that we could have maintained in a lab setting, it also allowed for more rapid testing and a larger and more diverse participant base than the average user study.
In addition, the Mechanical Turk Workers made excellent participants, contributing through their post-study comments suggestions for study improvements.
Responses to open-ended questions were equally thoughtful and contributed significantly to the interpretation of our results.
Interest in content predicts focused attention.
Similar to other findings , our study suggests that when engaged in a goal-based task, users often make a concerted effort to stay focused and block out non-relevant web page content despite efforts to draw their attention.
As responses to the follow-up questions suggested, some made a game out of the tasks to maintain their focus.
By doing so, they tapped into their attention mechanism, allowing them to control which visual stimuli are processed .
By making relevant, goal-oriented information salient, this aids the attention mechanism, allowing users to complete the taskat-hand .
Despite the focused task we designed, non-relevant content not only captured attention, but also curiosity, and played a significant role in the perception of distraction during the tasks.
This reinforces previous findings suggesting that content and web links of interest to or relevant to the user's goal positively influence focusing of attention on the information-seeking activity; likewise, interesting content and links not relevant to the user's goal have a positive influence on the user's specific or diversive curiosity in a topic .
It seems intuitive, but the degree of interest people have in the content they are encountering has an impact on how engaged they become with this content.
A recent quasi-experimental study by O'Brien  concluded that the user engagement scale which includes the focused subscale should be expanded to include content as a quality of user engagement due to the emergence of a relationship found between content and the way it is presented on web pages.
Immersion in gaming can sometimes lead to positive affect and other times negative affect .
Both negative and positive emotions have also been expressed in relation to reading online news .
Our results suggest that focused attention, whether influenced by the non-task-based content or by focused attention to the task itself influences how they feel once they have disengaged.
While mood prior to entertainment news tasks influences focused attention, there is a strong relationship between focused attention during the tasks and post-task emotions.
The relationship between focused attention and affect therefore merits further investigation.
This paper presented a study of the impact of saliency of task-relevant information on two engagement metrics, focused attention and affect.
As well, we were limited in this study to static forms of salience, the manipulation of color, images, and font size.
Future studies should explore the impact that common dynamic web page features such as animation or simple flickering may have on affect and focused attention.
Findings would be of interest to any website owner, entertainment-oriented or other, interested in not only in catching users' attention, but also maintaining it.
We did not control for interest in this study, but future studies could incorporate this into the design by gathering users' interests on different topics in advance .
A more naturalistic study could subsequently be conducted.
Salience of information that the participant is known to enjoy or have an interest in could be manipulated to test how saliency, user interests, affect and focused attention, and perhaps other aspects of user engagement, interact.
We speculate that increasing the salience of information of personal interest to users might improve focused attention and create positive affect, though this needs to be tested rigorously in future work.
Rather than imposing a goal-oriented, externally-imposed task, facilitating more natural interactions will broaden our understanding of the impact of saliency on users.
Affective feedback: An investigation into the role of emotions in the information seeking process.
S. Attfield, G. Kazai, M. Lalmas & B. Piwowarski.
Towards a science of user engagement , WSDM Workshop on User Modelling for Web Applications .
Beyond kappa: A review of interrater agreement measures.
Visual causes versus correlates of attentional selection in dynamic scenes.
J. Gwizdka & I. Lopatovska.
The role of subjective factors in the information search process.
Designing website attributes to induce experiential encounters.
