In real work environments, ACC systems exist in a rich ecology of collaboration tools 
We conduct a study to learn when workers will choose a widely-deployed ACC system over other tools, and whether it helps workers deal with artifact fragmentation.
An activity is a set of interrelated actions and events around a common goal, involving a particular group of people, set of resources, and time framework .
ACC systems encourage users to structure individual and collaborative work around the construct of an activity by supporting a diverse set of actions within a single tool and enabling the consolidation of related people, artifacts, resources, and actions .
Prior work has provided initial validation for ACC with studies of ACC prototypes used by recruited users for up to a few months .
Such studies exploring shortterm use do not help us understand the use of ACC systems in real work environments .
In contrast, we studied Lotus Activities , which has been deployed for over two years in a large, global company and used voluntarily by nearly 30,000 workers in real work environments.
Whereas a previous study of this system explored how highly active users defined and structured their work in this system's Activity construct , the focus of this research is whether and for what types of activities users will consolidate activity artifacts in an ACC system and whether this improves the user experience.
Our contributions are a description of the major, general usage pattern for one ACC system and qualitative evidence that it helped reduce artifact fragmentation for this usage pattern.
Knowledge workers expend considerable effort managing fragmentation, characterized by constant switching among digital artifacts, when executing work activities.
Activitycentric computing  systems attempt to address this problem by organizing activity-related artifacts together.
But are ACC systems effective at reducing fragmentation?
In this paper, we present a two-part study of workers using Lotus Activities, an ACC system deployed for over two years in a large company.
First, we surveyed workers to understand the ecology of workplace tools they use for various tasks.
Second, we interviewed 22 Lotus Activities users to investigate how this ACC tool fits amongst their ecology of existing collaboration tools and affects work fragmentation.
Our results indicate that Lotus Activities works in concert with certain other tools to successfully ease fragmentation for a specific type of activity.
We identify design characteristics that contribute to this result.
Knowledge workers expend considerable effort managing problematic "discontinuity," characterized by "constant switching among physical and digital artifacts"  and "higher-level activities"  .
Gonzalez and Mark call these two forms of discontinuity "fragmentation" .
The former problem is the fragmentation of an activity across multiple artifacts, which we call artifact fragmentation, and the latter problem is the fragmentation of activity execution by switches to other activities, which we call activity fragmentation.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
The basic organizing construct in Lotus Activities is the Activity, which is intended to be a locus for aggregating information and resources relevant to carrying out an activity, as well as a dynamic representation of its status, members, constraints, and plans .
Creating an Activity is quick and easy, as is adding members to it.
Both authors and owners can add new members to an Activity.
Users can post various types of entries into an Activity: basic text posts, to-dos, and discussion-structured comments.
Users have three ways to access Lotus Activities: via a web browser, an RSS feed, and a sidebar extension to the company's common email client, Lotus Notes.
Throughout the rest of the paper, we use the term "activity"  to refer to workers' conception of their work, as defined in prior research , and we use the term "Activity"  to refer to the computational construct users create in the Lotus Activities system.
For each tool and task combination, participants answered whether or not they used that tool to perform that particular task.
The set of tools in the survey are all commonly used by individuals at this company: Lotus Activities, Lotus Notes , Lotus Notes Databases , wikis, instant messaging , and meetings .
We gathered two categories of tasks for the survey from the Straus and McGrath task-type circumplex, a seminal task classification scheme in group support literature .
Group management tasks involve sharing materials, supporting awareness of projects, coordinating work among participants, and reusing work materials.
Collaboration tasks involve generating ideas, solving problems, drafting documents, and making decisions.
We used a stratified sampling methodology to select 22 participants.
We defined the usage strata of Lotus Activities' total user base of 29,776 by membership frequency: 79% were occasional users , 16% were moderate users , 3% were heavy users , and 1% were committed users .
Next, we randomly chose  several users from each category.
Our sample included 8 occasional, 7 moderate, 5 heavy, and 2 committed users.
Participants were all employees of the same large, global company.
They came from four different business units: Global Business Services , Research , Sales and Distribution , and Software Group .
They represented both managers and non-managers.
Most participants worked full-time in the US , three were in Canada, two were in Japan, and one apiece were in the UK and the Netherlands.
Eight participants were female, 14 were male.
Their age range was 22-59, with a median age of approximately 37.
All names used are fictitious to maintain our participants' anonymity.
A previous study of highly active Lotus Activities users gives additional detail on the full user population and the different types of work users completed with Lotus Activities .
We conducted one hour interviews with all 22 participants to focus on specific projects for which they had adopted the ACC organizational paradigm.
We explored with participants whether and how organization by activity affected their ability to collect related artifacts together and how this affected their experience, since such organization is the ACC literature's proposed solution to artifact and activity fragmentation.
Interviews were recorded and transcribed.
Transcriptions were coded for common themes using grounded theory .
Overall, participants felt that adopting Lotus Activities reduced their experience of artifact fragmentation in their collaborative activities.
However, this did not negate the need for other tools.
They still used many different tools for the same group management and collaboration tasks .
They also used different tools within individual activities .
We found that Lotus Activities was employed specifically for bounded activities - shorter-term efforts with clear endpoints.
For this type of activity, Lotus Activities served as a place to aggregate artifacts as the work progressed.
Other tools were used to support synchronous communication  and to store results after the activity was complete .
Users did not experience artifact fragmentation in using these tools, because they either did not produce large amounts of artifacts to collect, or were used for different types or during different temporal phases of activities.
However, users did think that email fragmented their work, because it was more difficult to consolidate the considerable content being exchanged in email within the Activity context.
This theme was discussed by ten users.
By "bounded" we mean activities that have a definite goal and a shorter-term end-point.
Note that activity details or end-points did not need to be clearly defined at the work's onset for participants to determine whether the work was short- or long-term in nature.
Thus, we saw Lotus Activities being used for activities ranging from clearly defined to ambiguous or ad hoc.
Tim, a moderate user and IT specialist, describes:
Synchronous communication tools were favored for tasks like brainstorming, decision making, and task delegation discussions .
However, their use in support of the same bounded, inprogress projects as Lotus Activities did not appear to detract from users' ability to create a unified set of artifacts.
In fact, these Lotus Activities was used in a complementary way to support synchronous collaborations, a theme mentioned by six participants, including moderate user and IT specialist Tim: "We use Activities to gather info, and decisions are made as a result of looking at that information ."
Lotus Activities was used to collect artifacts needed and generated as a bounded activity was carried out.
These included, to a large degree, materials for group management, as indicated by survey results .
By aggregating artifacts, Lotus Activities helped reduce fragmentation of bounded, in-progress activities.
This filled a previously unmet collaboration need, as Beverly  noted: "We use it for all of these little ad hoc projects that come up.
Activities really fills the gap for things we did in email..."
While most tools examined in this study were complementary to each other and did not create a fragmented experience when used together, email detracted from users' ability to aggregate activity-related artifacts.
Seventeen out of 22 interviewees stated that one of the main reasons they turned to Activities was to replace email as the tool for driving collaborative activities.
Prior work has noted that email inboxes provide a fragmented experience: discussions are split across long email threads and communications about all activities are intermixed .
IT specialist Kevin noted that Lotus Activities provided a less fragmented experience for his team's collaborative projects: "Everyone is realizing that email is not an effective way to keep that cohesive stream of thought.
They are starting to move to  Activities."
A small number of teams, like Kevin's , avoided email and instead included asynchronous communications about their project in their Activities :
Activities help breed a different way that people work.
If everyone else is posting things in the Activity and one guy sends me an email around, he's not getting responded to because things are in the right place, things are getting overlooked.
They tend to get the message that wow  Activities is the place they want to be if they want to get results.
While Lotus Activities was used for bounded projects, many users believed wikis and repositories were better for supporting work with a long-term or open-ended lifespan .
Participants also transitioned endproducts to wikis or repositories for long-term storage after using Activities during the execution phase of a project.
For example, Mark, a Consultant and heavy user, said:
A wiki is for a more elaborate effort of consolidation of information that we have been creating over the course of months, whereas the Activity is just for that set of concrete tasks - let's say one week, two weeks, three weeks - where you have to do something very specific... Once it is done, you may want to share that on the wiki.
While an ACC system can help reduce artifact fragmentation by consolidating work materials for an activity in one place, design characteristics and other available tools may affect which types of activities the ACC system is chosen to support.
Our data help us understand what characteristics of Lotus Activities led to its use for bounded, in-progress projects.
One major reason for this was a perception of greater shared ownership with Activities than with a repository or wiki.
All participants noted feeling comfortable modifying Activities and nine stated that Activities were equally owned by all contributing members.
Another major reason people turned to Lotus Activities for in-progress, bounded work was its lightweightness: according to participants, Activities were much easier to create than repositories or wikis.
Two design characteristics may have contributed to perceptions of both shared ownership and lightweightness: simple, liberal access controls and limited structure.
Participants described how the lightweight design of access controls made it time-effective to create informal spaces for managing shorter-lived collaborations.
Access controls in Lotus Activities are simpler and more liberal than many other shared workspace tools; in particular, all "owners" and "authors" can also add new members to the Activity.
A committed user and IT specialist Mary described access controls in a shared repository, which led to uneven ground between the repository manager and other members, and how this contrasted with Lotus Activities:
The flexibility at which an owner can just go in, create a new Activity and just start adding people.
And then those people can just add other people, they don't have to go back to the owner.
Our observations indicate that to reduce problematic artifact fragmentation, ACC systems need to create consolidated access to activity artifacts, not necessarily reduce the number of tools used.
At this goal, Lotus Activities was successful for bounded, in-progress activities, though fragmentation due to email remained problematic for many teams.
This result was facilitated by simple, liberal access controls and limited structure which contributed to a sense of shared ownership and lightweightness.
Lotus Activities also allows limited structuring on posted content: users can add sequentially ordered entries, which can be reordered or organized into titled sections.
These limited formatting and organizational options afforded just "throwing in" materials without additional effort spent on structuring them.
This helped users feel more comfortable modifying others' content, in contrast to wikis for example, which take more effort to format and organization.
Occasional user and IT specialist, Donna, explains:
When other people set up wikis, they go in and edit it, I am uncomfortable doing that because I feel like I am messing with someone else's work.
With Activities, people are a little bit more inclined to go in `cuz it is more for brainstorming.
But I think it is also related to structure.
So in a more structured environment you feel a little bit hesitant playing with it.
In an unstructured environment you may be more forthcoming to participate.
Interviewing as Qualitative Research: A Guide for Researchers in Education and the Social Sciences.
The interaction of task type and technology on group performance and member reactions.
