This work describes a novel building block system for tangible interaction design, GaussBricks, which enables real-time constructive tangible interactions on portable displays.
Given its simplicity, the mechanical design of the magnetic building blocks facilitates the construction of configurable forms.
The form constructed by the magnetic building blocks, which are connected by the magnetic joints, allows users to stably manipulate with various elastic force feedback mechanisms.
With an analog Hall-sensor grid mounted to its back, a portable display determines the geometrical configuration and detects various user interactions in real time.
This work also introduce several methods to enable shape changing, multi-touch input, and display capabilities in the construction.
The proposed building block system enriches how individuals interact with the portable displays physically.
Constructive assembly is a major genre of tangible user interfaces  .
Users can easily assemble building blocks to construct a new form .
Incorporating mechanical joints with the form further also creates expressive movements .
Users, especially children, can intuitively use the tangible pieces in their hands to learn physics-related concepts and explore geometrical concepts through direct manipulation.
These digital manipulatives  have become highly useful tools for education and entertainment purposes.
Portable displays are easily accessible platforms for general users.
TUI researchers have developed several features for portable displays based on capacitive tracking , optical tracking , and magnetic tracking  to allow users to more flexibly grasp tangible handles in order to manipulate high-fidelity display contents.
Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
This work presents GaussBricks , a system of magnetic building blocks that allow users to construct a tangible form on the displays.
Each magnetic building block containing strong magnets is designed simply to facilitate configurable and stable form construction.
Construct tangible form for physical simulation in the following steps:  Use construction bricks to construct and shape articulated physical structures on the display.
Balls in the simulated gravity bounced away when colliding with the physical structure.
With an analog Hall-sensor grid attached to the back of the portable display, the geometry and skeleton of the construction as well as the user interactions can be derived in real time.
Figure 2 displays an example of GaussBricks assembly for physical simulation.
To understand Newton's laws of motion, users place a physical structure built by construction bricks on the display and then adjust the shape using their hands.
Based on the simulated gravity on the display, users trigger the balls to fall down.
While colliding with the physical structures, the balls bounce away.
To change the direction in which the balls bounce, users snap more bricks to the structures, remove unwanted bricks from the structures, or deform the physical structures.
Users move the structures without affecting their geometry by locking some joints.
This is achieved by adding locking bricks, where the non-rigid parts remains deformable, allowing for shaping the desired affordance to facilitate further manipulations.
Above example highlights the manual construction and manipulation of structures.
While easily scalable and maintained, the passive building blocks support hybrid construction of rigid and non-rigid structures, allowing for spatial operations on the construction with rich force feedback.
Besides forming, users can construct elastic structures by using the proposed GaussBricks system, as well as design a physical form for near-surface interactions.
By integrating with other components or materials, GaussBricks can be extended for advanced applications, such as building mechanical responsive structures by incorporating actuators, enabling multitouch inputs on the construction by applying conductive coatings, and enhancing display capabilities on the bricks by using fiber optics.
Above results provide a valuable efforts to highlight the novel interactions enabled by using the proposed magnetically composite material.
The major contribution of this work is introducing the novel material, GaussBricks, which supports stable, configurable, and interactive form construction on portable planar displays with wide applications.
The rest of the paper is arranged as follows.
Related work is discussed first.
Then, we explain the physical design of GaussBricks and realtime sensing schemes, as well as implementation details and evaluation.
Then, we describe several examples to highlight the basic features of this building block system.
Then, we present several methods that extend the interactivity of the GaussBricks to a wider context.
Conclusions are finally drawn along with directions for future research.
Physical building blocks allow for quick construction and manipulation of structures through two-handed interaction .
To fully exploit the use of building blocks as tangible user interfaces  , Topobo  allows users to create 3D structures by assembling passive pieces with motor joints, and editing the structures' motions by direct input with kinetic motion as output.
Kinematics  extends the Topobo concept by providing computational blocks to allow for editing movements without programming.
Bosu  provides a toolkit for users to construct curve forms and structures.
However, owing to that these methods are unaware of their own structures, users cannot interact with a display without external detection supports when using such methods.
While recognizing the structure of an assembly can enable broader applications, Anderson et al.
ActiveCubes  allows users to assemble different electronic elements in order to increase functionality.
Siftables  detects the geometrical combinations of display blocks and supports embodied gestures such as knocking the table to shuffle the contents displayed on every block.
Despite the ability of active building blocks provide rich interactivity, the electronic elements require additional maintenance, making it difficult for them to achieve scalability as passive building blocks.
Passive building blocks can be recognized by external cameras.
By using a top-mounted depth camera, SandScape  derives a sand sculpture and building block construction on a tabletop platform.
By using an external color+depth camera, DuploTrack  monitors the 3D structures of passive building blocks.
While attempting to provide increased portability and less effort in calibration, Portico  positions two cameras above a display to track the visual markers on a screen and the surrounding surface.
Despite their unique features, these top-down detection methods are sensitive to hand occlusions, thus limiting the form factors of building blocks and degrading the user experiences.
These features are highly desired for sensing interactive constructions.
Magnets initially appear to be highly desired materials for tangible construction, because the different-pole magnetic tangibles are naturally attractive to each other, subsequently forming a sense of connection.
However, the resulting complex magnetic fields through the connections may not follow the geometry of the construction, or even become invisible to the Hall-sensor grid .
Therefore, exactly how to enable constructive tangible interaction using magnets remains unclear.
Magnetic fields shaped by two construction methods.
A laptop display mounted with an analog Hall-sensor grid visualizes N- and S-polar magnetic field intensity maps in red and blue, respectively.
Several methods feasibly alleviate the visual occlusion problems while allowing for constructive assembly.
For more portable capacitive multitouch displays, Capstones and ZebraWidgets  extend the Lumino concept to enable stacking and several 1D operations such as translating and rotating on the stack, based on the foundations of capacitive tangible designs established by SmartSkin  and TUIC .
Based on pressure images, Geckos  allows for stacking on an easily portable IFSR  multitouch panel.
While unable to resolve problems involving the overhanging structures of a stack, above approaches only support constrained 1D operations such as stack rotation.
To our knowledge, the design spaces of 2D constructive assembly and further shape manipulation have not been investigated.
Analog Hall-sensor grid, GaussSense , a portable imaging sensor, allows for monitoring of multiple magnetic tangibles on and above a portable display .
A thin Hallsensor grid can be attached to the back of a device to incorporate with the portable capacitive touchscreen as an additional channel of sensing.
In contrast to capacitive- and opticalbased methods, magnetic object tracking of this method is occlusion-free and independent of touch sensing.
The Hallsensor grid robustly detects and resolves problems associated with the magnetic fields' shape, polarity, and intensity of the magnetic tangibles that those users' hands are interacting with.
This grid also prevents interference with the object tracking when users' hands or fingers touch the screen acci4 http://www.microsoft.com/surface/
The magnetic fields of each unit must be shaped before use to ensure reliable tracking of the construction of magnetic units.
Shaping a usable magnetic field depends on the ability to keep the construction's magnetic field in the same polarity.
An axial-magnetized cylindrical neodymium magnet is used here as the signal source since its physical form allows use of a firm case to fix its direction .
Axial-magnetized cylindrical neodymium magnet provides a uniformally cylindrical and symmetrical magnetic field, which is also a desired property of a signal for magnetic field sensing.
The acrylic case for the magnets is then built to fix their positions in the same distance with respect to each other.
The distance between magnets is set to be sufficiently small in order to merge the magnetic fields from individual magnets into a continuous shape, which is topologically equivalent to the structure of the physical construction.
The shape of a magnetic field is now usable for deriving the geometry of the construction.
The principle of designing a building block system is keeping it simple, stable, and transparent in use.
Providing simple units with minimum physical connection allows for configurable construction to support users' creativity .
During construction, the physical model must be kept as stable as possible .
Since the building blocks are designed for construction on the display, ensuring that the building blocks are transparent allows users to perceive the underlying display contents more easily .
Based on above three principles, we demonstrate the feasibility of three magnetic building blocks made by transparent acrylics: construction bricks , supporting bricks , and locking bricks .
These bricks are designed for additive construction, stabilization, and rigidifying construction, respectively.
A 2mm-thick analog Hallsensor grid mounted to the back of an iPad display  is used here as the presentation platform.
Three basic building blocks are  construction brick for additive construction,  supporting brick for stabilization, and  locking brick for rigidifying structures.
The gear-shaped male connectors underneath each locking brick can fix the joint in 12 angles by inter-locking with the female connectors on the top of each brick.
Use cases of construction bricks.
The geometry and composition of the structure can be derived by the resulting magnetic field intensity.
Construction bricks  are designed for addictive construction.
A 1x2 construction brick is made of an easily graspable 2.5cm-length1cm-width0.5cm-height round-corner cuboid, which has two 3mm-radius4mmheight cylindrical neodymium magnets as connectors.
According to the measured intensities of the magnets we used, the gap between each magnet can be set in range of 0cm to 0.8cm width to keep their magnetic fields merged together.
We set the gap in 0.5cm-width, which not only ensures the reliability of detection but also allows for users to view the underlying display contents between non-transparent magnets.
The magnetic connectors allow users to easily add and remove the bricks by stacking .
Since the building blocks are kept in the same polarity throughout the construction, the validity of the resulting magnetic field is kept as well.
The simple round-corner cuboid form also allows two connected bricks to rotate against each other along with the magnetic joint.
Each joint adds one degree of freedom to the structures .
Stacking each brick on the joints also adds one degree of connection .
Therefore, the construction bricks allow for creating arbitrary physical structures.
When the construction consists of many degrees of freedom, users might have difficulty in taking control of them during interaction.
Locking bricks  are therefore designed for locking the joint temporally to reduce the unwanted degrees of freedom.
A locking brick, in a similar form with a 1x2 constructive brick, consists of a smaller 3mmradius2mm-height cylindrical magnet inside and a 1mmthick gear-shaped male connector on the bottom.
The magnets in the locking bricks are small and adequately far from the sensor, thus not affecting the sensing.
A gear-shaped male connector is paired with the female connectors preserved on the top of each brick .
When snapping a locking brick on a joint, users can interlock the joint in 12 different angles.
Similar to construction bricks, 1x1 locking bricks are also provided to support 1x2 locking bricks for fixing several joint types .
The form constructed by stacking may have an unstable geometry, making it difficult for users to interact with.
Supporting bricks  are therefore designed to support unstable structure.
A supporting brick is a 1x1 construction brick with only one connector for stacking, subsequently allowing users to snap it to the bottom of various unstable structures, as shown in Figure 7.
Based on the results of a previous effort , we develop an analog Hall-sensor grid  to track the magnetic structures without interference from user hands and the surrounding environment.
The prototype analog Hall-sensor grid consists of 3232 = 1024 Winson WSH138 Hall sensors, which is measured in 2mm thick with an 1616 cm2 sensing area.The detected N-polar magnetic field intensities in a range of 0 to 200 gauss are 15x up-sampled to a 465465 8-bit gray-scale bitmap image with the sampling rate consistently higher than 40 fps.
The Hall-sensor grid can be attached to various display platforms, including laptop computer displays or tablet displays .
Sensing pipeline of geometry and skeleton extraction.
Evaluation results of the measured maximum magnetic field intensities of 12 possible combinations.
Data are plotted with the mean value and the covered area of two standard deviation.
The proposed system recognizes stack and overhanging structures by up to three layers.
Notably, using locking bricks does not affect the recognition accuracy.
The obtained skeleton not only allows for rendering graphical context precisely on the skeleton, but also support our system in describing user construction concisely.
A simple pipeline  is designed for extracting the low-level features of the constructions, i.e., boundaries and skeletons, from a raw magnetic field image Iraw .
Ibase denotes the parts of structures that are placed on the displays; Istack represents the parts of structures that are stacked in two layers; and Ihang refers to the parts of structures that are overhung above the display.
Correspondingly, users can freely add different thresholds to extract more sub-images to sense other structural types, such as the components stacked higher than two layers.
Next, the connected components of each binarized sub-images are extracted.
Too small components are removed and regarded as noise.
According to the information in all sub-images, as shown in the contours in Figure 9b, the boundaries, geometrical configuration, and composition of the constructions are roughly determined, as shown in the segmentation results in Figure 9c.
These features are sufficient for programming basic techniques  for users to interact with the display content.
An attempt is also made to support more complex user interactions  by further extracting the skeleton to render a more precise graphical representation under a model.
Based on the procedures from Figure 9d to Figure 9h, the rough skeleton of the connected component is first obtained by applying constrained delaunay triangulation on it, by using the algorithm introduced in .
The magnetic field intensity is measured by using a 6mmthick 11-inch Sony VAIO Pro multitouch laptop display mounted a calibrated analog Hall-sensor grid.
Twelve possible combinations within four layers of a stack are evaluated using supporting bricks and 1x1 locking bricks .
The test cases include four stacking types that use supporting bricks only, four stacking types that use both locking bricks and supporting bricks, and four overhanging structures.
Stacking supporting bricks on 5mm-height acrylic bricks that contain no magnet inside simulates the overhanging conditions.
The maximum magnetic field intensity of each combination is measured at 9 sample points, which are distributed in the 16x16 cm2 sensing area.
One hundred data are sampled at each sample point.
A total of 12 9 100  = 10800 data points are collected and plotted with the mean value and the covered area of two standard deviation in Figure 10.
This finding suggests that the proposed platform does not support 3D model construction effectively, owing to that it can only be stacked up to 3 levels.
Nevertheless, the capability of three levels of stacks is sufficient to support all applications introduced in this work.
The proposed sensing platform can derive features involving the boundaries, geometrical composition and the skeleton of the construction in real time, thus providing high interactivity on form construction and manipulation.
In the puppetry storytelling application , users construct a humanoid puppet using the construction bricks to imitate human actions.
Users can either customize the appearance of the puppet  or add accessories  .
Based on the skeleton captured by the platform, the textures are rendered properly and are easily changeable .
The displayed graphical information reacts properly to the geometry of the construction, as the simulated rains drop on the body bouncing to the ground.
In the same manner, users can grasp the physical skeleton to interact with the graphical content in the digital world.
Since the humanoid puppet consists of many joints, users who move it quickly or remove it from the display may cause an undesired change in its physical geometry.
To easily control the humanoid puppet, users fix its spine, elbows, or knees by snapping locking bricks on it .
After the joints are locked, users can move the puppet even away from the display surface without affecting the geometry of the locked parts.
Users can also manipulate the puppet more comfortably to create expressive movements by using fewer fingers.
Users can even fix the entire model by either snapping locking bricks on all joints or removing the locks to free the joints of the desired parts whenever desired.
We briefly introduces several elastic structures that users can incorporate into their constructions.
Magnetic attraction forces that connect the bricks together maintain the construction's structure.
When users deform the structure, the magnetic joints feed the attraction forces back to the users.
Structures that use magnetic attraction can provide elastic force feedback on the following two gestures: Click.
The hanging structure  allows for clicking with elastic force feedback.
Similar to clicking a button, users press the upper hanging brick down to the surface and release to recover the position of the hanging brick.
The shape of magnetic field conveys state transition-related information.
The three-layered linear structure  allows for bending with elastic force feedback.
Similar to bending a rubber stick, users bend the three-layered linear structure and release it to recover its shape.
Curvature of the shape of magnetic field denotes the pressure asserted by the users.
This structure provides the maximum capability of bending.
Magnetic repulsion forces between each magnet keep the bricks away from each other.
When users move the magnets close to each other, the magnets feed the repulsion force back to the users.
Structures that use magnetic repulsion can provide elastic force feedback on the following three gestures: Pinch.
The V- or X-structure  connected with two construction bricks allows for pinching with elastic force feedback.
Supporting bricks are used to maintain the balance of construction and to prevent the bricks from snapping together.
Similar to pinching a clip, users can pinch the sides of the structure and release to recover the shape of the structure.
The shape of magnetic field refers to the state transitionrelated information.
A physical form that provides rich force feedback allows for more ways of interacting with digital worlds.
Rigid symmetrical constructions allow for near-surface interactions.
An actuation brick is used as the pivot of an assembled physical lever.
Stretch: The X-serial structure  that linearly connects many X-structures allows for 1D squeezing and stretching.
Similar to manipulating a spring, users can squeeze or stretch the built structure in 1D.
While inherited from the X-structure, the X-serial structure supports pinch operations to be performed on it.
Since the magnetic field intensity increases when users push the magnets close to each other, the increased intensity refers to the pressure asserted by the users.
This structure provides the maximum capability of stretching.
Squeeze: The V-closure structure  that linearly connects many V-structures allows for free squeezing and stretching.
Users can squeeze the boundaries to deform the closure structure and release to recover the shape of the structure, as if squeezing a stuffed toy.
By extending from Vstructure, the V-closure structure supports multi-pinch operation to be performed on it.
Since the magnetic field intensity increases when users push the magnets close to each other, the increased intensity denotes the pressure asserted by users, and positions of where the increased intensity occurs indicate the positions and forces of pressures asserted by the users.
This structure provides the maximum degrees of deformation.
In addition to introducing basic interaction techniques that exploit the features of magnetic fields and magnetic forces, this section further highlights several extensions by incorporating GaussBricks with shape-changing, sensing, as well as display methods to explore more interactivity in a wider context.
Applying actuators on a physical construction allows it to provide active force feedback.
Actuation bricks  apply the same brick design on tiny actuators, allowing users to easily snap actuators on the bricks.
The servo motor used in the actuation brick is mounted with a gear-shaped male connector on its shaft.
By snapping the actuation brick on a joint, the shaft interfaces with the female connector on the top of the brick, allowing for bending of the joint by controlling the servo motor .
The seesaw game  displays an example usage of the actuation bricks.
Users construct the lever , place the lever on the display, and touch the display to drop a ball on one side of the lever.
When the dropping ball contacts the lever, the ball bounces away , and the lever tilts concurrently , according to the torque in which the ball is exerted to the lever.
The tilting lever may also hit other onscreen objects to bounce them up.
This application achieves a seamless physical-virtual interaction stage by using the mechanical responsive structure.
In addition to creating movements, different actuations can be considered such as changing the tightness of the joint by applying the brake motor, or simply turning on and off the motor.
Tethers of the servo motors can be removed by using batteries, wireless connection, and tiny micro controllers.
Notably, the form factor of the actuator can be made more compact if using lightweight actuators  or pneumatic actuators .
Magnetic models can be detected above the display surface.
By constructing symmetric models and locking the joints, such as the airplane model  and the ring model , the shapes of the magnetic field are symmetrical as well.
The constructed rigid physical model thus provides 3D position and orientation information by the symmetrical magnetic field, and can function as tangible controllers for near-surface interactions.
In the tangible flight simulation , users grasp his airplane assembly as the controller, tilt it in four directions to steer or pan in the context , and lift or lower it to change the height of the flight naturally.
The physical construction provides users with just-in-time tangible affordances and immediate haptics to facilitate interactions.
The assembled cat model transfers the multitouch events of users to the underlying capacitive multitouch display.
Non-touch bricks prevent the attached parts from unintentional input.
The Hall-sensor grid can monitor the magnetic bricks independently.
Therefore, on capacitive multitouch displays, additional input capabilities can be enabled by using the underlying touchscreen.
Touch bricks  that use conductive coating are applied on each magnetic joint independently.
Stacking the bricks with joints forms a path that transfers the users touches from the surface of the construction to the touch screen at the same location.
Since each joint senses touches independently, the construction that consists of many joints thus acts as a conductive matrix, capable of transferring multiple touch events to the underlying multitouch displays.
Hence, user can perform multitouch gestures on the surface of the construction, as well as get sensed properly.
Users can also avoid unintentional touch inputs by incorporating with general non-touch bricks.
A virtual pet application  demonstrates the enabled touch input capability.
Users use touch blocks and nontouch blocks to construct a sleeping cat.
Users pat the cat to wake it up, please it by sliding their finger along its body , and irritate it by pinching its body .
The cat's facial expression changes according to his feelings.
While performing multitouch gestures on the cat's body, the users press the non-touch block to prevent the model from moving away.
This application demonstrates that integrating magnetic sensing and capacitive sensing can extend the input space of passive tangible objects.
Applying indium tin oxide  coating on the touch blocks can maintain the transparency of the touch blocks .
The capability of supporting more subtle gestures  can be achieved by incorporating the building bricks with a conductive 1D stripe or 2D matrix using Zebra rubber .
The monster puppet is constructed with an optic brick in the middle.
The fiber optics bundle shifts the monster's eye from the underlying display up to its surface .
According to the monitored geometry of the construction, the monster's eye position follows its body position.
When users squeeze the monster, the monster's eye changes to reveal his emotions .
In addition to removing the visual parallax, incorporating fiber optics with GaussBricks provides a more direct approach for users to interact with physical models.
More sensing and display functionalities can be developed by fabricating fiber optics using 3D printing technologies .
This work has presented a novel magnetic building block system, GaussBricks, which enables real-time constructive tangible interactions on portable displays.
A simple mechanical design of the magnetic building block is also introduced, as well a real-time sensing mechanism that enables configurable and stable form construction and manipulation on the portable displays as well as rich force feedback.
Our results further demonstrate the feasibility of using advanced methods to enable wide applications using these building blocks, such as near-surface and multitouch interactions, as well as shape-changing and display capabilities.
Since the enabling features are essential to organic user interfaces , we recommend that future research extends the use of this material by creating prototypes for organic user interface design on commodity portable planar displays, which has widespread use and applications.
Beyond educational and entertainment applications, the capabilities of rich-haptic, free form and real-time interactions provided by GaussBricks can also be useful for live performances.
As Bricks  laid the foundations of graspable user interfaces, we sincerely hope researchers, developers and practitioners can apply the proposed platform and techniques to extend applications involving tangibles on interactive surfaces.
The building blocks are made of a transparent material, which already allows users to view the underlying graphical information through the construction.
Optic bricks  incorporates the building blocks with fiber optics bundle, further allowing the passive building blocks to display graphicrelated information on the surface.
