Abstract People's ability to accurately locate target objects in images is severely affected by the prevalence of the sought objects.
This negative effect greatly impacts critical real world tasks, such as baggage screening and cell slide pathology, in which target objects are rare.
We present three novel image presentation techniques that are designed to improve visual search.
Our techniques rely on the images being broken into image segments, which are then recombined or displayed in novel ways.
The techniques and their underlying design reasoning are described in detail, and three experiments are presented that provide initial evidence that these techniques lead to better search performance in a simulated cell slide pathology task.
This work may not be copied or reproduced in whole or in part for any commercial purpose.
Permission to copy in whole or in part without payment of fee is granted for nonprofit educational and research purposes provided that all such whole or partial copies include the following: a notice that such copying is by permission of Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories, Inc.; an acknowledgment of the authors and individual contributions to the work; and all applicable portions of the copyright notice.
Copying, reproduction, or republishing for any other purpose shall require a license with payment of fee to Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories, Inc. All rights reserved.
People's ability to accurately locate target objects in images is severely affected by the prevalence of the sought objects.
This negative effect greatly impacts critical real world tasks, such as baggage screening and cell slide pathology, in which target objects are rare.
We present three novel image presentation techniques that are designed to improve visual search.
Our techniques rely on the images being broken into image segments, which are then recombined or displayed in novel ways.
The techniques and their underlying design reasoning are described in detail, and three experiments are presented that provide initial evidence that these techniques lead to better search performance in a simulated cell slide pathology task.
Because the number of negative cases is much higher than positive cases, one could achieve a low overall error rate by simply reporting every test as negative.
False-negative  error rates are believed to be much higher, as high as 20% .
Given the overwhelming evidence of the importance of accurate screening in reducing mortality , even small improvements to the false-negative error rates for these tests would have large consequences.
In this paper, we present three novel image presentation techniques designed to improve the visual search of images that can be segmented into pieces.
These techniques rely on the images being broken into image segments, which are then recombined or displayed in novel ways.
The three techniques and their underlying design reasoning are described in detail.
This design rational, while rooted in established work, does not guaranty the techniques' usefulness in improving search.
Thus, the three techniques are accompanied by three laboratory experiments that provide initial evidence that they lead to better search performance.
These techniques are not intended to be comprehensive solution to the general problem of low prevalence visual search per se; rather, they are steps in the direction of improving people's ability to perform some difficult and important classes of visual search tasks.
Many critical tasks that require an operator to visually search images, such as medical image viewing, baggage screening at the airport, and satellite photograph analysis, all involve searching for uncommon targets.
Luckily, conditions such as cervical cancer, severe blood disorders, and knives in carry-on luggage are rare; however, it is the very rarity of these conditions that makes searching for them so difficult.
Recent research  has shown that an individual's ability to search images for a particular object degrades rapidly and severely when the prevalence of the sought objects becomes small.
For example, laboratory directors routinely report error rates of less than 2% for the common Papanicolaou smear slide  test for cervical cancer, which requires a human operator to search for certain visual qualities in a slide's cells.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Visual search has been studied extensively in the psychology literature for over a century .
Many underlying theories have been presented as to the nature of the human visual system; however, no single model of the human visual system explains the variety of experimental results in the literature.
In a typical search experiment, participants are asked to look for a specific object within a stimulus image that may or may not contain the target and does contain a varying number of distracter objects.
Normally, the target object is present in 50% of the stimulus images and the participant responds to each stimulus image by indicating whether or not they believe the target object is present.
To achieve a better measurement of error rate, a variation of this method is used in which images are presented for a prescribed period of time before being removed from the display.
This consistency in image presentation duration is believed to reduce differences among individuals who may have different thresholds for appropriate search time / accuracy tradeoffs.
For difficult searches, search time is linearly correlated with the number of distracter objects present in the image.
Similarly, error rates are typically higher for images that contain a greater number of distracter objects.
Overall error rates are typically around 10% as participants naturally slow down if they are making many errors and speed up when committing few errors.
Target object prevalence is the percentage of stimulus images in which a target item appears.
In a recent study, Wolfe et al.
Their somewhat disturbing results showed that error rate grew significantly as target prevalence dropped - from 7% error in the 50% prevalence trials, to 16% error for 10% prevalence, to 30% error for 1% prevalence.
While some steps have been made toward improving or discounting lowprevalence search , combating the negative effects of low target prevalence remains an open research issue.
The human visual system is extremely adept at rapidly processing visual images .
While well understood in the field of psychology, there has been less research and fewer experiments in the field of human computer interaction.
Spence gives an overview of research in the field of Rapid Serial Visual Presentation  in terms of its use in HCI .
In general, RSVP techniques trade time for space when presenting a set of images, and differ mainly in their presentation and animation of images.
Recent well publicized uses of RSVP in computer interfaces include Apple's "Coverflow" and Windows Vista's "Flip 3D".
With respect to search, Wittenburg et al.
Their work included an experiment that demonstrated this interface resulted in faster search times as well as fewer errors over the traditional fastforwarding/rewinding technique used for VCRs and DVDs.
Mello-Thoms, Nodine, and Kundel  conducted an eye tracking experiment in which radiologist searched mammograms for signs of cancer.
They were motivated by the fact that 10-30% of cancers are missed by radiologists and are only found retrospectively.
Their results included the interesting finding that missed tumors were often visually inspected by the radiologist, indicating that visual search was not the cause of the problem, but rather that decision making or some other perceptual process was.
In regards to modeling human behavior and performance in visual search tasks, Halverson and colleagues  are attempting to produce a unified visual search model for predicting search time in user interfaces.
The three techniques presented in this paper all rely on the original search image being segmented into its component pieces .
The field of image segmentation is an active area of research, especially as it relates to medical image analysis.
Many methods and techniques exist, including k-means clustering, histogram based techniques, edge detection, region growing, and so on.
A good overview of image segmentation as it relates to medical image viewing is provided by Pham et al.
Figure 1 shows the results of segmenting two cell slides using the Vincent-Soille watershed algorithm, as described by Roerdink & Meijster  and implemented in .
While we are not researchers in the field of image segmentation, we feel it is likely that experts in this field could perform a much better segmentation than the approaches we investigated.
We believe this example demonstrates the feasibility of successfully segmenting these types of images for the purpose of enabling the interaction techniques described in the remainder of this paper.
Figure 2 shows an overview of our first technique.
A set of images of a certain size having a certain target prevalence is segmented into a collection of individual pieces using the techniques previously described.
These pieces are then randomly composited into larger, composite images with higher target prevalence that the user then searches through.
Given the tradeoff between task difficulty and target prevalence, we designed an experiment to measure how increasing target prevalence through image combination affects search accuracy.
12 individuals  from local colleges participated in our study.
All had normal or corrected normal vision.
Participants searched for vowels in images that contained collections of letters.
The images were displayed on a desktop LCD monitor.
There were two image sizes: 402x402 pixel original images and 900x900 pixel composite images.
The area of the larger composite images was approximately five times the area of the smaller original images.
Images contained a randomly placed collection of English letters rendered in one of three fonts, with original images containing 10 letters and composite images containing 50 letters.
Participants were asked to search the images and indicate the presence or absence of vowels, with each image containing 1 or 0 vowels.
To avoid confusion between consonants and vowels, there were no Y's in the images, nor were there any lowercase L's .
Each participant viewed three types of images that differed in size and the prevalence of vowels.
In the first set, a vowel was present in 10% of the original stimulus images and absent in the other 90% .
In the second set, a vowel was present in 50% of the original images .
In the third set, a vowel was present in 50% of the composite images .
Figure 3 shows target-present images from the low-prevalence, highprevalence and composite conditions.
The logic behind this approach is as follows.
Define p as the probability of encountering the type of target T in an image I and p as the probability of not encountering T in I.
The basic law of probability informs us that when N images are combined into a single composite image C, then the probability of not encountering T in C is equal to the probability of not finding T in I raised to N. In short, p = pN. Because C either contains T or does not contain T, p+ p = 1.
If p is unacceptably low and interferes with people's ability to accurately search through images, one can raise p through image recombination.
Indeed, any desired target prevalence p that is less than 100% can be theoretically met by increasing N. This tradeoff does not come without cost.
With a larger number of distracter objects, the larger composite images will be more difficult to search than an original image.
It is unclear how this tradeoff between task difficulty and target prevalence will affect peoples' ability to successfully search through image sets for target objects.
Why not skip the segmentation and random recomposition steps and instead simply tile the collection of lowprevalence images together to form a high-prevalence screen of images?
There is some evidence that this type of tiling leads to higher error rates compared to the sequential viewing of each of the images alone .
Therefore, we chose to remove the appearance of tiled images in this technique through the randomized layout of the segmented pieces in the hopes that viewers would treat our composited images as a whole.
Participants indicated whether or not a vowel was present in the stimulus image by using a small keypad with two keys, one to indicate target presence and the other target absence.
After each answer, participants were given visual feedback as to their performance.
When vowels were correctly located, they were highlighted in green for 1/2 second before the next image was shown.
Similarly, when a participant correctly indicated the absence of vowels, the entire screen was briefly highlighted in green.
This pause was meant to reduce the chance that a participant would race through the trials with careless responses in order to quickly finish the experiment.
False-positives  resulted in a similar 15 second pause with the entire screen highlighted in red.
While participants were allowed to answer early, our testing application displayed original images onscreen for 2 seconds and composite images onscreen for 10 seconds.
This consistency in image presentation duration is intended to normalize for differences among individuals who may have different thresholds for appropriate search times in this type of task.
Therefore, it is safe to continue analysis with a within-participant design.
As expected in a visual search experiment, target presence had a significant main effect on error rate .
False-positives are generally rare, and the majority of errors in our experiment occurred during target-present trials .
The remainder of the analysis in this section was performed on the target-present trials only.
A posthoc pair-wise comparison shows a significant difference among all possible pairs of presentation techniques.
We used a within-participant, repeated measures design with presentation technique  and target presence  as independent variables and error rate and search time as dependent variables.
Because one of the main goals of the experiment was to study differences among target prevalence conditions, it was not possible to balance the experimental variables in the traditional manner.
By definition, a low-prevalence condition will contain fewer target-present trials than a high-prevalence one.
To address this issue, we averaged the results from the many repetitions of each presentation technique and used only the average error rate for each of the 6 presentation technique / target-present combinations in our analysis.
Search time was measured as the time between the appearance of an image and the participant's pressing of a key.
To compare the three presentation techniques, we first normalized the search times for the composite conditions.
Because these images contained five times as many items, we divided the search time for these trials by five.
Target-present trials end when a target is located, while target-absent trials require the participant to pass a self-determined internal confidence threshold before deciding that the target is absent.
Participants will commit fewer false-negative errors in the high-prevalence presentation technique than in the lowprevalence condition, as predicted by previous work.
Participants will commit fewer errors in the composite presentation technique than in the low-prevalence set.
Participants will commit fewer errors in the highprevalence condition than in the composite condition.
53 trials in which the search time was more than three standard deviations from the mean for that trial's presentation technique / target presence combination were counted as outliers and removed.
These outliers  occurred when participants took an unscheduled break, dropped the keypad, or were otherwise interrupted.
Our results support H1 and reinforce the previously published findings indicating that target prevalence significantly affects search accuracy, as shown by the significant difference between the low-prevalence and highprevalence trials .
Indeed, it seems that "when a target is rare, we rarely find it" .
While our participants searched images of letters looking for vowels, a false-negative error rate of over 17% is a cause for concern if these results are applied to highly consequential tasks such as cell slide pathology and baggage screening.
Our results indicate the negative effects of low-prevalence can be significantly mitigated by the recombination of multiple low-prevalence images into larger, higherprevalence images.
Although an individual composite image is more difficult to search than an individual lowprevalence image, the raising of target prevalence when the image sets are viewed as a whole resulted in a 28% decrease in false-negatives.
It is important to remember that our participants viewed the same total number of targets and distracter objects in approximately the same time period in both the lowprevalence and composite presentation technique conditions.
The only difference was the manner in which these targets were presented, and it appears that the presentation matters significantly.
Finally, our results also support H3.
While we were able to improve upon our participants' ability to search through the low-prevalence image set by segmenting and then compositing the content of these images into a highprevalence composite image, these composited highprevalence images presented a more difficult task than simply searching through a similarly high-prevalence set of smaller images with fewer items in each image.
This tradeoff is inherent in our technique, but is ultimately not troubling as our approach would never be applied to a highprevalence search task.
While these benefits are encouraging, they have a cost.
In terms of search time, the high-prevalence trials resulted in longer target-absent search times than the low-prevalence trials .
It appears that when participants become use to targets being frequent, they take longer to convince themselves that they are absent from a particular image.
This implicit user decision to tradeoff speed for accuracy, however, may be good for critical search tasks.
A second cost to consider is the increased monetary and physical foot-print cost of requiring a larger display size for this technique.
For search involving very rare targets  a much larger display would be necessary to reach 50% target-prevalence.
Put simply, practical limitations on display size will eventually limit the feasibility of reaching 50% for very rare targets.
This limitation aside, there is evidence that even modest increases in target-prevalence  can result in significant decreases in errors; thus, system designers interested in utilizing this technique must balance increase in target-prevalence with increase in display size.
The motivation behind this technique comes from previous research into gaze paths using eye trackers.
There is some disagreement as to what is the "typical" gaze path one takes through a randomly ordered image .
Some researchers have observed that this path is itself random, with the image being investigated in an inefficient, seemingly random order .
These researchers have observed that searchers not only follow a random gaze path, but also often skip objects and revisit the same object multiple times when searching.
Other researchers have observed that the gaze path one takes through a randomly ordered image is itself orderly .
By systematically scanning a randomly ordered image, one attempts to cover all portions of the image in a timely manner.
Problems arise when the location of objects place them out of step with this orderly search.
People often skip objects or visit the same objects on multiple occasions .
One explanation for these competing theories is that the gaze path one takes through an image is heavily dependent on the qualities of the image and the task at hand.
Given either theory, we hope to encourage the user to take a more efficient path that minimizes traversal by presenting every image as an orderly collection.
The orderly layout used in this technique should give users confidence that they have inspected every object in the image and allow them to visit each object only once .
Additionally, there is some evidence that an orderly layout of objects decreases search time.
While Beck & Trafton  found no difference in search times between a random and orderly layout for target-present trials, they did observe a significant increase in search time for random layouts when the target was absent from the image.
They hypothesize that in the random conditions participants took longer to convince themselves that the target was absent than they did in the orderly conditions.
Others have studied random vs. orderly layouts for an image searching task and found the quickest searches with the shortest gaze path occurred with regularly spaced elliptical and matrix layouts .
While an orderly layout's effect on search time has been demonstrated previously, our interest is on search accuracy, specifically for rare targets.
Thus, an evaluation of the effectiveness of this technique is needed.
We recruited 12 individuals who did not take part in Experiment One from local colleges and universities to participate in our study.
The 7 female and 5 male participants' ages ranged from 21 to 45 years old, and all had normal or corrected normal vision.
Because our desire was to compare the results from experiment two with those from experiment one, much of the study's design is identical.
Participants again search for vowels in images that contained collections of letters.
The display configuration and input keypad from experiment one were used.
The 402x402 pixel images contained an orderly positioned collection of 10 English letters rendered in one of three fonts.
Participants were asked to search the images and indicate the presence or absence of vowels, with each image containing one or zero vowels.
Each participant viewed two sets of images that differed in the prevalence of vowels, a 10% set  and a 50% set .
As in experiment one, we again provided visual feedback after each answer and penalized participants when they committed an error.
80 trials in which the search time was more than three standard deviations from the mean for that trial's target prevalence / target presence combination were counted as outliers and removed from our analysis.
These outliers occurred when participants took an unscheduled break, dropped the keypad, or were otherwise interrupted and represent 1.5% of our data.
As expected in a visual search experiment, target presence had a significant main effect on error rate .
False-positives were again very rare, and the vast majority of errors occurred during target-present trials.
The remainder of the analysis in this section was performed on the target-present trials only.
Figure 8 shows the mean error rates for each target prevalence / image layout combination.
In the low-prevalence conditions, the random and ordered layouts had mean error rates of 17.3% and 12.2% respectively.
This indicates that an ordered layout is beneficial for low-prevalence tasks, but may incur a penalty for high-prevalence tasks.
People immediately stop searching when a target is found, so it was not surprising that target-present trials were on average shorter than target-absent trials and thus target presence had a significant main effect on search time .
No other significant effects or interactions were observed relative to search time.
Individual segments are small enough to be perceived at a glance, and the operator's eye can remain focused on a fixed location on the display.
Similar to the re-layout technique described previously, this RSVP technique ensures that every item in the original image will be visited and that none will be skipped over as the user's eyes move from item to item around the display.
Once again, target prevalence was shown to significantly affect error rates, with infrequent targets resulting in larger error rates.
In regards to H4, our participants committed fewer errors when viewing ordered images than when viewing random images in the low-prevalence conditions .
This drop represents about a 30% improvement in the false-negative error rate.
Additionally, this improvement seems to have occurred without cost in terms of search time, with our participants taking similar times to search through the random and ordered layout images.
When searching an image, a large fraction of time is spent moving one's eyes around the image and fixating them on potential targets.
Humans can only fixate on a target every 250ms.
The psychology literature provides ample evidence that humans are able to rapidly process visual images , with only a 200ms glimpse of an image being enough for recognition and other real world tasks.
Because some types of image processing occur faster than gaze direction, eye movement becomes the limiting factor in many visual searching tasks .
Our third presentation technique takes advantage of this characteristic by rapidly presenting the component pieces of an image over time in the same screen location.
A user does not have to move their eyes, and can process many image pieces quickly.
One well known characteristic of RSVP presentation is known as "attentional blink" .
When viewing a rapid presentation of images, people often fail to observe a target when it is presented shortly after another target.
The RSVP technique described in this section is susceptible to the attentional blink phenomenon; however, this is not necessarily a problem.
Once the first target in the series had been identified, the entire set could be labeled as positive and the original images examined in detail.
Another danger lies in presentation pacing.
Because the presentation of the image segments is system paced, visual distractions or physical blinking could interfere with search.
It is also possible that the rapid presentation of images will simply overwhelm the user and cognitively interfere with search.
Some RSVP systems provide the user with an interface for controlling the rate of presentation; however, the management of these controls may itself interfere with the cognitive facets of search.
Given these dangers, it is unclear if this type of presentation will lead to lower error rates than searching the original images as a whole.
The same 12 individuals who participated in experiment two took part in experiment three.
With the goal of comparing the results of experiments one and three, we took the images from experiment one and segmented them into their component pieces.
These individual letters were then displayed sequentially and participants again indicated the presence or absence of vowels.
At the start of each trial, a black cross indicated the region of the screen that the participant should look at.
After a 2 second pause, the RSVP presentation of the 10 letters began.
At the end of the presentation, the screen became blank and participants entered their answer with the keypad used in experiment one.
The same visual feedback and timing penalties encouraged accuracy and discouraged the careless racing through of the experimental trials.
Each participant viewed a low-prevalence set of letters using the RSVP presentation technique.
Again, search time was recorded as the time between the presentation of the first letter and the participant's pressing of a key.
There was a significant difference between the mean search times for each layout technique , with mean search times of 1.29s and 1.98s for random layout and RSVP layout respectively.
We used a repeated measures design with target presence  as a within-participant independent variable, image layout  as a between-participant independent variable  and error rate and search time as dependent variables.
In regards to H5, our participants performed better using the RSVP image layout than they did using the random image layout.
By simply changing the presentation of the items in the images, we observed a nearly 60% reduction in falsenegative errors in this difficult, low-prevalence image set.
This improvement in error rate was not without cost.
Participants took longer to search when using the RSVP image layout than with the Random image layout .
This difference was not unexpected for the targetabsent condition.
During the RSVP trials, a participant had to watch the presentation of every letter in order to safely determine that there were no targets present.
In essence, the system controlled the pacing as the participants had to wait for the RSVP presentation to finish before answering.
The mean search time of about 2.5s for the RSVP, target-absent trials equates to the 2s of RSVP presentation plus 500ms of reation time to input one's answer.
In the random image layout trials, participants were free to answer at any time within the alloted 2 seconds per image, and did so after some internal confidence threshold was passed.
31 trials with search times of more than 3 standard deviations from the mean for that trial's target presence were treated as outliers and removed from our analysis.
Once again target presence had a significant main effect on error rate , with false-positives being extremely rare.
The remainder of the analysis in this section was performed on the target-present trials only.
While the motivation behind the design of each of these techniques is rooted in previously published literature from the fields of HCI and psychology, these motivations only provide a hypothesis as to why the observed differences occurred.
To gain a better understanding of these techniques, further experimentation is needed to understand the underlying mechanisms as to why the observed improvements occur.
Image segmentation is at the core of our three search techniques, and any difficulties in the segmentation algorithm will likely result in a negative effect on search performance.
One can partially addresses this problem by identifying borderline cases in the image segmentation process and handling them differently.
For example, two objects A and B that the algorithm could not separate with a high-degree of probability would be displayed separately as A and B as well as together as AB.
While this adds to the number of objects that must be investigated, it should compensate for many image segmentation errors.
In the following two sections, we discuss threats to the internal and external validity of the three experiments described in this paper.
It is our hope that these comments help the reader interpret the results presented in the previous sections in a contextually appropriate manner.
With only 12 participants per group, individual differences among the participants will likely manifest themselves in terms of task performance.
A more powerful within-subject design in which participants completed both the orderly and random layout searches would result in a more powerful statistical test.
While a limited number of participants is always a cause for concern, the statistical model employed in the analysis of Experiment Two takes the number of participants  into consideration when determining significance.
Thus, the results can safely be interpreted as differences between conditions, not among subjects.
Participants in Experiments One and Two both searched two sets of 402x402 pixel images; however, Experiment One participants also searched a set of 900x900 pixel composite images.
Experiment One participants effectively received extra "practice" images in the form of the composite images that may have either improved their performance on the smaller images or worsened it due to fatigue.
How large is this danger?
There was no effect in Experiment One from the order of presentation of the three experimental conditions, indicating that performing the composite image searches before the original image searches did not affect search performance.
Additionally, there was no evidence that fatigue was a major factor in any of the experiments.
These two factors match one's intuitive consideration of this danger: because the task was searching through English letters, it would be difficult to argue that extra practice would greatly affect an activity that native English speakers have been completing since childhood.
A similar issue exists in the design of Experiment Three.
The participants in Experiment Three performed the RSVP search after completing the low and high-prevalence orderly search conditions for Experiment Two.
There is again a danger that completing these activities would somehow change their performance relative to those participants in Experiment One.
Again, it would be difficult to argue that participants became significantly better at identifying vowels over the course of an hour-long experiment; however, the danger does exist.
While cell slide pathology is one example of a search activity that is amenable to the type of segmentation and display presented in this paper, some types of search may be negatively affected by the removal of context from each segment.
Context has been shown to impact search performance in a number of search tasks , as viewers are directed toward the target by other objects in the scene.
Future work is needed to investigate the tradeoff between the negative effects of removing target context and the positive effects of the approach presented in this paper.
As with any highly abstracted experimental task, there is a danger that the task used in our experiments may differ significantly from real work activities that involve image search.
Such concerns about the external validity of our experiments are slightly assuaged by the very similar error rates observed in Experiment One and previously published results.
These are very similar to our measured error rates of 17.3% and 6.7% for our 10% and 50% prevalence simulated cell side pathology tasks, and this similarity suggests a high level of experimental reliability and a more universal relationship between target-prevalence and error rate that may extend to many search activities.
Given the results presented in this paper, we feel that there is sufficient evidence to justify further experimentation in which the participant population and tasks better match real work conditions.
While we attempted to simulate some of the motivations that practitioners feel, this is impossible to do completely in the lab.
No experiment can simulate the pressure one feels when making consequential decisions about patient care or airline safety.
Similarly, one cannot reproduce the pressure a pathologist must feel to complete a diagnosis with an ever increasing number of patients and tests, or the pressure that a baggage screener feels when facing a long line of frustrated customers at the airport.
We have presented three novel image presentation techniques designed to improve visual search of segmentable images and provided initial evidence that these techniques improve people's ability to accurately search for target items.
These techniques are similar to one another in that they all use the component segments of original images in novel ways to improve visual search performance.
While these three design variations were motivated by an understanding of search behavior and previously published results, they are by no means the only techniques in this design space.
It is quite likely that there are other presentation methods in this space that will lead to better visual search performance than viewing the original images themselves.
It is our hope that this paper might inspire the interested reader to contemplate this general approach when attempting to design user interfaces that support people performing this important class of visual search tasks.
