This study examines the information-processing activities of digital volunteers and other connected ICT users in the wake of crisis events.
Synthesizing findings from several previous research studies of digital volunteerism, this paper offers a new approach for conceptualizing the activities of digital volunteers, shifting from a focus on organizing to a focus on information movement.
Using the lens of distributed cognition, this research describes collective intelligence as transformations of information within a system where cognition is distributed socially across individuals as well as through their tools and resources.
This paper demonstrates how digital volunteers, through activities such as relaying, amplifying, verifying, and structuring information, function as a collectively intelligent cognitive system in the wake of disaster events.
Meanwhile, in the far north of the country in Milot, about 120km from Port-Au-Prince, the Hopital Sacre Coeur suffered mild damage, but remained fully functional.
In the first few days after the quake, while injured people awaited care in other parts of the country, Sacre Coeur had capacity--74 empty beds, a medical staff on hand with more on the way, and two helipads for receiving patients by air--but no patients .
Traynor, Onsite Coordinator at the Center for the Rural Development of Milot , the organization that runs Sacre Coeur, reports that the hospital tried to communicate with response agencies that it could accept and treat patients, but representatives of the large NGOs who did assess their facility determined that it was too small and too far away to meet their needs.
Believing that their hospital could help people awaiting treatment for in some cases life-threatening injuries, Sacre Coeur staff and volunteers turned to the Internet to get the word out about their facility.
On January 13, they posted to their website that the hospital was open, functional, staffed, and ready for patients.
Hospital representatives also turned to email, social media, and mainstream media to spread their message.
Soon, other social media users, some of them digital volunteers, began to help promote their cause.
A CRUDEM Facebook post explains what happened next:
On January 12, 2010, a 7.0 earthquake struck Haiti, causing catastrophic damage and leaving in its wake great humanitarian need.
In the days after the earthquake, over 300,000 injured people required medical care, a concern made logistically complex by widespread destruction to the country's infrastructure .
The epicenter of the earthquake was in southern Haiti, near the town Leogane, and consequently the greatest need resided in the southern regions of the country where many hospitals were either destroyed or seriously damaged .
Mobile clinics and field hospitals were quickly established near the most affected areas , but medical teams there struggled to keep up with the volume of injured patients .
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Soon, patients began to stream in, including many airlifted by the US Coast Guard .
On January 16, they received four patients.
By the afternoon of January 18, occupancy had increased to nearly 30, and the next day 44 patients were airlifted to their hospital.
They were quickly compelled to expand their capacity to accommodate increasing numbers of patients.
Eventually, Sacre Coeur performed over 200 amputations for injuries suffered during the quake and treated more than 800 patients .
Traynor claims that this would not have been possible--that his hospital would not have been able to connect with all of these patients-- without social media.
But what role did social media and social media users play in this incident?
This paper addresses this question, exploring the use of social media,
Among other uses, social media have begun to play host to digital convergence behavior; just as people have been known to converge physically onto the scenes of disaster events , people are now using social media and other information and communications technology  to converge "digitally" in the aftermath of disasters , and, like many convergers in the offline context who begin to act as volunteers , some digital convergers are taking on roles as digital volunteers .
The 2010 Haiti earthquake marked a turn for humanitarian responders in recognizing an emerging role for social media and its users in disaster response efforts.
The Disaster Relief 2.0 Report explained, "...access to mobile and online communication enabled a kind of collective intelligence to emerge--when thousands of citizens around the world collaborated ... to help make sense of a large-scale calamity and give voice to an affected population" .
Previous work on social media use during the aftermath of the Haiti earthquake has examined the self-organizing of digital volunteers, describing how a group of volunteer Twitterers came together to function as an emergent response organization ; and analyzed digital traces left by Twitter users who authored medical-themed tweets, finding the Twitter platform to have been used by smaller organizations for "beaconing" behavior--reaching out to connect to others who could help them do their work .
Both of these studies  focused on how Twitter was used to coordinate and organize.
This research takes a slightly different perspective, shifting from a focus on organizing to a focus on information.
By looking at the movement and manipulation of information shared in social media spaces after disaster events, this paper describes how "collective intelligence" emerges and offers a conceptual framework for understanding what it is and how it works.
Though crowd work in this context is almost always intentional, individual actions often have broader effects than those intended.
Here, collective intelligence is defined as a shared intelligence that is distributed across groups of individuals , where the problem-solving capacity of the group is greater than the capacity of a single individual .
Early hints of machineconnected, collective intelligence appear in Engelbart's ideas for augmenting the human intellect using machines; e.g.
Engelbart was influenced by Bush's proposed Memex machine, which described a knowledge system based on the associative nature of human cognition .
Using the "trails" of hypertext, people could tap into existing knowledge in a manner more closely related to their own ways of thinking .
In recent work, Engelbart extends these views into a vision of "collective IQ," that increases humanity's ability to solve complex problems .
Real-time coordination of humanitarian response in the wake of crisis events is one of these complex problems to which the collective intelligence of the crowd can be, and is indeed already being, productively applied.
This paper aims to extend our understanding of how collective intelligence manifests during crises by analyzing information trails left behind in our hyperlinked information-interaction space.
This research draws from data collected during several studies of remote crowd work during disaster events.
These include an extended investigation of the "Tweak the Tweet" project , a study of digital volunteers during the aftermath of the Haiti earthquake , and long-term participant-observation of Humanity Road, a virtual volunteer organization that responds to disasters .
Levy defines collective intelligence as "a universally distributed intelligence, constantly enhanced, coordinated in real time, and resulting in the effective mobilization of skills " .
Citing phenomena that occur in army ant colonies, Franks described collective intelligence as problem-solving ability within the group that exceeds the capacity of an individual, noting that, "through communication and mass action, army ants find flexible solutions to complex problems" .
Twitter has become a popular platform among digital volunteers, for whom it acts as a source of information-- including information coming from the ground, a site for working on that information, and a platform for communicating with and connecting to other volunteers, affected people and response agencies .
Several affordances of Twitter contribute to its utility as a real-time, information-sharing platform during crisis events, including the fact that the vast majority of tweets are public and searchable and that social networking features of the platform allow users to follow anyone they like and permit non-reciprocal ties.
The Tweak the Tweet  project proposed an extension to the functionality of the hashtag, incorporating it into a crisis-reporting microsytnax .
TtT asks users to place certain hashtags in front of specific pieces of information, rendering tweets not just searchable, but machine-readable.
From its first deployment, TtT has been adopted by remote Twitterers who work to "translate" information they find elsewhere on Twitter or the web into TtT syntax .
The majority of information on Twitter can be considered "derivative"--retweeted or otherwise repeated information that can be found elsewhere on the web .
Much of this derivative information points to a previous source through original author attribution or URL links.
Following the methodological strategy employed by Sarcevic et al.
This paper therefore uses tweet data to navigate the larger information space, a strategy that complements an analytical focus on information trajectories.
During the TtT deployment for the Haiti earthquake  , we used the Twitter Search API to collect tweets that contained hashtags related to Tweak the Tweet, and from that set identified every Twitterer who sent a tweet or retweet in TtT syntax .
Previous research indicates that this dataset includes a subset of an emergent digital volunteer network, many of whom identified as "voluntweeters" .
Using the Twitter REST API, we collected the full contextual stream--every tweet sent between January 10 and February 1--for each of these TtT Twitterers .
The theory of distributed cognition  provides a methodological framework for examining connected crowd work from an information-centered perspective.
Distributed cognition  is a theory that claims cognition does not exist solely within individual minds, but is instead distributed socially, across groups of people, as well as physically  across tools and artifacts.
A previous study examining "collective intelligence" in the crisis space noted approaching analysis from a dCog view , but did not elucidate how this perspective contributed to the understanding of this phenomenon.
This paper aims to address that explicitly--to illustrate how dCog can help us understand and describe collective intelligence.
Cognition, in the dCog view, occurs as transformations of representations, and this model provides an approach for analysis at the level of these transformations.
Hutchins has outlined a simple strategy for this, asking, "What information goes where, when and in what form?"
The author of this paper has been a participant-observer within a virtual volunteer organization, Humanity Road , for 19 months .
The organization is a first-of-its-kind formal non-profit in the domain of digital disaster response .
This research relies primarily on the digital traces of HR's activity, almost all of which is mediated by ICT.
During each TtT deployment, as part of the infrastructure for running the project, tweets were collected using the Twitter Streaming API to "track" keywords identified by researchers to be related to the event.
This research includes tweet data collected during TtT deployments for two tornado events in the U.S. in 2011.
This paper expands on previous studies, drawing out new findings from existing data sets, and incorporating new data sets for analysis.
Importantly, it offers a alternative approach for conceptualizing the activities of digital volunteers, shifting from a focus on organizing to a focus on information movement, and using the lens of distributed cognition to describe collective intelligence in action.
Earlier work examined the self-organizing of digital volunteers in the wake of the Haiti earthquake, explaining how a group of previously unconnected remote volunteers came together as an emergent organization to help affected people .
While that original study described a range of volunteer activities--from performing as "remote operators" to organizing a campaign to fill the cell phones of affected people--this work concentrates primarily on the information-processing work of digital volunteers, activities that we see across individuals and events that have become foundational activities of an emerging practice of "crisis tweeting" and the larger sphere of digital volunteerism .
Others learned the behavior by seeing other Twitterers retweeting actionable information, and then adopted that strategy themselves.
Amplifying occurs as the combination of two separate actions: first, identifying actionable information or information deemed relevant to affected people or responders; and second, rebroadcasting that information to increase its range of exposure.
The example below demonstrates how the crowd does this:
This tweet, a report of human trafficking, was sent by a Haitian Twitterer who was in the country during the response period.
The Twitter crowd quickly amplified this tweet, retweeting it in a variety of forms.
Within the Contextual Steams of Haiti Voluntweeters, this tweet was retweeted 16 times--most in the first hour after the original.
118 other tweets were sent referencing the same report, but with slightly different content from the original.
42 of 339 Twitterers in the set of voluntweeters we identified--or 12% of the network--sent at least one tweet about this report of child trafficking.
This collective activity by separate nodes within a network of digital volunteers functioned to amplify relevant, actionable information, in this case information from a trusted source who was on the ground at the time.
This example is one among hundreds of mass amplification efforts--for other reports--in the Contextual Steams of Haiti Voluntweeters.
The emergent organization of digital volunteers can be visualized as a network, with volunteers as nodes in that network performing information-processing tasks.
Figure 1, a diagram showing connections between Haiti voluntweeters determined through analysis of their Contextual Streams, provides an initial abstraction for examining digital volunteer work in this way.
In this image, dark nodes represent the 339 voluntweeters identified during the TtT collection.
Grey edges connect Twitterers who retweeted or otherwise mentioned another voluntweeter's account during the Haiti response; this diagram shows a dense network, with all but eight voluntweeters connected to others in the dataset through their tweets.
The network can be imagined as one subsection in a much larger information space that contains other individuals, platforms, tools and resources.
In addition to functioning to identify good information, i.e.
This interview response reveals how some voluntweeters approached this aspect of their work intentionally, but other research suggests Twitterers can also perform this identification function less purposefully .
That study shows how seemingly uncoordinated activity of amplification across a large crowd can have an aggregate effect of adding organization to the information space, performing as a sensor network for relevant, actionable information during mass disruption events.
Identification and amplification fits within the first part of Hutchins' leading question for analyzing dCog, "What information?"
These information-processing actions also function to feed other parts of the cognitive system, for instance by providing source material for routing, verifying, and structuring activities described next.
The most simple and most common form of crowd work during disaster events is amplification.
For many Twitter users who later become digital volunteers, amplification acts as an entry-point to volunteerism.
Evidence within the Contextual Streams and Interviews with Haiti Voluntweeters suggests that many saw routing information as an important task within their digital volunteer work.
Routing addresses the next part of Hutchins' question: "What information goes where?"
Voluntweeters worked to connect certain information with people who needed or could use it.
Though other channels including emails and phone calls were used as well, on the Twitter platform routing was often done using @mentions, public tweets addressed to specific accounts.
The following example highlights routing behavior that occurred in the response to the report of human trafficking:
It may be too late by the time we get there.
Another way voluntweeters help shape the information flowing through Twitter and other channels is through verifying information .
Many of the interviewed voluntweeters reported that verifying information became an important aspect of their work.
Like many other incidents, the report of child trafficking eventually became a focus of this work.
Several hours after the initial tweet and after most of the amplification efforts faded, a few voluntweeters began to question the validity of the report and attempted to have someone confirm it.
These tweets are selections from 64 different tweets sent in the wake of the trafficking report and during the resulting amplification efforts, directing that information to specific accounts.
The recipient accounts were typically ones that voluntweeters thought could act on the information.
In the cases of @navynews and @redcross, those accounts belonged to organizations with people in Haiti, and voluntweeters might have believed account monitors could pass the information to operatives on the ground.
Below, a high-volume and highly-connected voluntweeter describes how she attempted to send actionable information to people on the ground by combining strategies for finding on-theground Twitterers with directing behavior:
In this case, verification work took place across a section of the digital volunteer network, with multiple volunteers joining in on a collaborative effort.
At times, interactions like these could be contentious, because reputations were on the line.
Digital volunteers may lose the trust of others if they are thought to be passing along bad information.
When one openly questions information, others sometimes step in publicly to support the questioner, as did the two in this example.
This verifying work had direct impact on the spread of this report.
Some time later, after attempting to confirm the information by contacting his source, @sergegilles determined it to be a rumor and shared that with the network, which then worked to spread the retraction--though significantly less broadly than the original report.
Within a dCog perspective, the work of verifying speaks to the issue of "what information?"
Through their public, collective work to confirm information, the crowd works as a collaborative sensor network for good and bad information as well as relevant and actionable information.
The descriptive account corroborates previous quantitative research suggesting that large-scale patterns of activity can be used to identify rumors on Twitter after a disaster .
Though the examples presented here all revolve around the Twitter platform, verifying work moves to  other parts of the information system as well, as volunteers look to triangulate reports and find outside sources to confirm.
In interviews, some voluntweeters reported calling numbers listed as contact information in tweets to verify that information was true and still valid.
Directed-to accounts also included media and celebrities who voluntweeters felt could further amplify the report-- e.g.
Twitterers also passed tweets on to accounts of other voluntweeters, hoping to continue to move the information if not directly to, then at least closer to someone who could use it.
Voluntweeters intentionally moved information across nodes in the network, attempting to push it directly to nodes that could use it, or move it closer to such nodes.
While amplification activity is a mass broadcast out to every node in the network that an account can reach, routing includes identifying what information as well as where to send it.
Routed tweets may carry a stronger, more focused signal than mass broadcasts, with recipients being more likely to tune in--while a typical Twitterer may see thousands of tweets a day while monitoring a popular hashtag stream, they will receive a much smaller number directed to them.
Structuring, or adding structure to information, is another component of crowd work, one that addresses both "What information?"
Adding metadata to information and entering it into a form or a spreadsheet are types of structuring, as is TtT translation.
Focusing on individual transformations, each act of translation into TtT syntax takes place as a combination of first, the identification of actionable or otherwise relevant information; and second, the performance of one or more transformations that reconfigure the information into a state of increased structure.
The following example from the Joplin TtT Collection demonstrates:
In this example, @medmrsmith initially tweets this report of an emergency animal hospital announcing that it will accept animals.
Within minutes, the information bounces off three other Twitterers who retweet the text and give attribution to an upstream author, though the original author is soon excluded.
Eventually the tweet is translated into TtT syntax by @CrisisMappers, who tracks down the original author and also cites the author immediately upstream.
Here the cognition is two-fold, measurable in both the form of the information and the movement of information across different nodes in the network.
Cognition also occurrs through the actions above--the many retweets whereby nodes in the network acted to pass on the information.
This relaying activity, a product of amplification, is a feature of a collaborative information-processing system where different nodes have different information-processing capabilities.
Tweets are essentially ephemeral, but retweets serve to keep information alive by repeatedly posting it to the public stream .
Though the intermediary accounts might not have used the information themselves, their work to rebroadcast information can be seen to increase the odds that it will reach the account of someone who can use it.
Though TtT is one  way of structuring tweets, it is not the only way.
The most common form of structuring on Twitter is simply adding hashtags.
Often, volunteers comb the Twitter stream and add event hashtags to relevant information before retweeting.
Tag-added RTs allow the original content to show up in hashtag searches.
Digital volunteers can also be seen, across events, developing their own, more complex hashtagging systems.
An interview with one voluntweeter revealed a subgroup of those volunteers to have created a system where they would tag tweets with #rescuemehaiti to call them to the attention of response agencies and other digital volunteers.
Members of that sub-community tuned into this stream of #rescuemehaiti for source information for their other coordination activities.
This example of user-driven structuring shows activity similar to TtT translation work occurring "naturally" within digital volunteer communities.
During response efforts after the Alabama tornados in the Spring of 2011, Twitterers introduced special hashtags for categorizing certain types of response-related information.
Shortly after the Joplin tornado in May 2011, a handful of TtT translators, many with previous experience using the syntax, worked to identify tweets with actionable information and translate them into TtT syntax.
In the above example, a veteran digital volunteer, identifies information that might be useful to affected people and creates a TtT tweet by adding three TtT tags  and reorganizing the tweet text to match the prescribed format.
The consistent word order between the original and the translation suggests a copy and paste technique.
For practiced TtT translators, using a series of micro-structuring actions like adding a few tags and copying-pasting pieces of text, it can take several seconds to a few minutes to generate a tweet like this.
These transformations create new representations that are later circulated through the system.
During TtT deployments, software processes TtT-formatted tweets into public spreadsheets and Google Maps.
Few cases of TtT translation are as simple as the base translation case: TtT translators recognizing information entering the system for the first time and rapidly translating it into the format.
Information often takes a less direct route from original source to structured state.
The following example demonstrates this effect, revealing an important role that the larger network plays in relaying the signal through the information space until it reaches a node with the potential to process it.
More than 1000 tweets were sent containing one of the two suggested terms .
Weeks later, when Joplin, MO was struck by a devastating tornado, digital volunteers from Alabama encouraged those responding to the Joplin event to use variations of those earlier tags , which many new volunteers did.
User-driven tweet structuring can be seen as a selforganizing human computation system providing real-time information processing.
Structuring also taps into previous work, like amplification and verification, of other volunteers in the network:
CrisisMappers, who work by structuring and synthesizing information into maps .
Information filtered by one network or community becomes input for another.
HR volunteers often notice new events by seeing tweets from others in their personal networks.
They also incorporate information gleaned from these connections into their resources.
And other groups may get information for their resources from HR.
The cognitive system of HR is plugged into a much larger system that works to process information during crises.
This suggests the emergence of a multi-tiered system where some volunteers monitor incoming streams to identify and amplify actionable information and other volunteers tune in to those amplification efforts and then add structure to the information, sometimes through multiple transformations.
The cognitive system works to process information in realtime during crisis events through the collective action of individual nodes that transform information by moving it from one place to another, rebroadcasting it to keep it alive in a temporal context, or altering its form by adding microstructure to its textual content.
Figure 1 shows the network of connections between the 339 Haiti voluntweeters.
Previous research suggests this network was as an emergent one--only a small portion of links between voluntweeters for Haiti had been established before that event .
Within the dCog view, these connections and this emergent organization can be seen as  a "cognitive architecture" , a collection of features of the physical-social-digital environment that shapes the cognitive processes of the group.
The emergence of this organization shows this architecture to also be shaped by the activities of the group.
Due to the public nature of tweets, the affordance of nonreciprocal ties, and the ability to send public tweets to the attention of any account, connections can and do develop between people who were previously strangers.
Across the entire network, many nodes are already connected, but there remain an immense number of potential connections.
For voluntweeters, their digital volunteer work--i.e.
In another view, these activities are these connections.
And once connections are established between nodes, information may move more freely between them.
Thus, the practice of crisis tweeting determined how this structure  emerged and what it looked like.
The structure, in turn, shaped how information moved during the event, demonstrating a reciprocal relationship between action and structure, one described by Giddens .
Synthesizing information is a primary activity of the Humanity Road organization.
HR devotes considerable effort to creating "situation reports" during active disaster events, where they bring together multiple types of information, including damage reports, nearest airports, location and capacity information for hospitals and shelters, lists of local government and response media accounts, etc.
Synthesizing is the work of pulling information together from disparate sources to create more complete representations of an unfolding event.
At the micro level, synthesis work is again enacted as transformations of representations, and like many of the activities described above--e.g.
The HR team works together to filter information, identify important pieces, synthesize them into a single resource, and publicize that product of their work to affected people, responders, and other digital volunteers.
They complete this work together within conversations in Skype windows as well as through tweets, emails, and other channels.
Significantly, the synthesizing work of Humanity Road volunteers is also embedded within and connected to other digital volunteer communities and the massive connected crowd surrounding them.
Volunteers pull information from other Twitter accounts, media reports, official websites, and blogs.
Though CRUDEM did not use Twitter directly, one volunteer there, Sarah Kane, turned to ICT to beacon, sending mass email messages and posting to forums in an attempt to bring patients to the hospital.
URGENT: We have a full-service hospital in Milot, Haiti that is *not* being utilized!!
Hopital Sacre Coeur... We can take up to *200 injured patients* immediately!
We have operating rooms and beds.
As of yesterday, we have received only two patients that came by car.
Please get the word out to news organizations to get rescue teams...
It makes no sense to be 25 minutes away by chopper with beds and doctors waiting to help!
Volunteers worked to move information from other sites onto Twitter and also to amplify messages posted there.
Over time, they added more information to the tweets, e.g.
As these tweets show, volunteers often directed information about Sacre Coeur to those they thought could help.
They also used TtT syntax to structure tweets, sending 66 TtT tweets and retweets about the hospital.
Other structuring activity moved to Ushahidi, a "crisis mapping" platform that was accepting reports about Haiti via SMS and a web portal .
Someone, perhaps a digital volunteer, added information about Sacre Coeur to the map on January 16.
Later tweets linked to this Ushahidi report.
In addition, two CNN iReports were created about Sacre Coeur, both by individuals unaffiliated with CRUDEM.
The first was posted by a woman in Haiti on the morning of January 15.
Later that morning, information in that post began to spread through the tweet streams of digital volunteers.
CNN picked up the story of Sacre Coeur for the first time that evening, mentioning the hospital on air during the AC360 program.
There's apparently a hospital north of here that actually has room for patients.
It's a hospital called Sacre-Coeur, it's located in Milot...80 miles north of Port-au-Prince...We are told, I've not seen this with my own eyes but we're told that it's fully operational ...but again, it's far away.
A lot of people can't get there.
Kane continued to send email messages, until at least January 18, pleading for organizations to bring patients to Sacre Coeur.
Echoes of these posts show up in several different interactive spaces on the web.
As with the excerpts above, several of Kane's email messages were posted within the content of blogs and websites of other small organizations and media outlets.
In at least three instances, individuals who were not connected to the organization posted information about Sacre Coeur as comments to other blogs and articles in mainstream media.
For example, the following was added as a comment to a New York Times blog on January 15 :
It is not clear how CNN reporters first heard about Sacre Coeur, but they and other mainstream media were often the focus of CRUDEM's beaconing as well as digital volunteers' directing activities.
Both groups appear to have perceived those channels as having the ability to further amplify their messages.
This activity shows digital volunteerism in the form of relaying and amplifying, similar to what this paper has demonstrated on Twitter, occurring elsewhere online.
Not surprisingly, traces of CRUDEM's beaconing behavior also show up on Twitter.
The first tweets with links pointing to the CRUDEM website appear on January 13, and more than 600 tweets were sent about the hospital between that day and February 1.
Eventually, patients began to arrive in Milot.
On January 16, the day after the CNN report, the U.S. Navy delivered one group of injured people to Sacre Coeur, an event remarked upon in a Facebook post by CRUDEM that also included another plea for more patients--suggesting that the coordination problem had not yet been fully resolved.
The USCG airlifted two groups of patients, nine total, to Sacre Coeur on the 17th, a day that witnessed the most Twitter activity about the hospital .
On January 18, while Kane's pleas for patients continued to spread throughout the web, the USCG began to deliver a steady stream of patients.
On the 23rd, tweets began to contain requests for supplies for the facility, which had by then begun to exceed capacity.
Previous studies were careful to avoid claims of impact by digital volunteers during Haiti , as it is difficult to connect social media activity to actions on the ground.
However, evidence in the digital traces analyzed here suggests a role for social media and digital volunteers in delivering patients to Sacre Coeur.
According to CRUDEM's Facebook page, Kane eventually made contact with a USCG Commander, and after that the USCG began to coordinate a steady flow of patients to the facility.
It is unclear in the digital traces exactly when or how the connection was made, but CRUDEM credits social media.
That the USCG first contacted CRUDEM through Kane, a volunteer who was neither located in Haiti nor acting as an official leader of the organization, suggests that Kane's social media posts--and the efforts by others to help distribute the information in those posts--played a role.
It is likely that CRUDEM's message reached people who could act on it through multiple paths.
With repeated movement across platforms and media, there was considerable redundancy in the network.
It may be hard to assign credit for generating this connection to a single node of the digital volunteer network or to a single post or digital artifact.
However, if digital volunteers had not been acting on this information, the connection may not have happened, or it may not have happened as quickly--a critical concern.
Traynor recalls that a member of one USCG helicopter team, during one of their first patient deliveries, remarked, "God, had we only known you were here earlier!"
To answer the question posed earlier, social media did not deliver patients to Sacre Coeur, but volunteers did use these tools to coordinate action that saved lives.
The perspective advocated here views this not as any individual act by any one person, but collective action by--and collective intelligence within--a network of people, connected through ICT, who helped organize the information space through many small acts of transformation.
Using the theory of distributed cognition as a methodological framework, this paper shows how seemingly simple actions from individuals collectively organize the information space.
This research extends the dCog perspective to examine collective action within the massively connected information space of social media and the surrounding Internet.
Though a previous study on collective intelligence in social media spaces used this theory as part of a broader analytical frame , this paper explicitly employs dCog as a methodological framework for examining the work of digital volunteers.
The dCog framework offers an effective tool for thinking about how this work is coordinated and organized--how these individuals are able to come together as remote response organizations in some instances and massive sensor networks in others.
It allows us to conceptualize how this organization emerges without preplanning and without any single individual or node having a complete grasp of the entire system.
Heverin and Zach describe how, in the wake of violent crises, individuals come together on social media sites to make sense of the event, a collective sense that can only develop in interaction with others .
Digital volunteers go beyond collective sensemaking to collective action, so their goals may be different, but the processes whereby they achieve those goals are similar.
Using the dCog methodological framework, we see how local actions create global effects, and how the cognition of the system extends far beyond the cognition of any individual.
DCog also gives us a lens through which to view this emergent activity, by focusing on transformations of information.
This approach fits well with the affordances of social media platforms that leave the digital traces of many of these transformations in public view and allow us to easily "step inside the cognitive system" .
Collective intelligence can be seen to emerge from the individual actions of digital volunteers to relay, amplify, verify, structure and synthesize information.
These actions also form a cognitive architecture  for the volunteer network, one that is itself plugged into the cognitive architecture of the larger information space, and one that structures future actions, e.g.
Digital volunteerism is becoming an established feature of the online ecosystem after disaster events.
Collective intelligence, along with the related concept of "crowdsourcing," has become a popular term for characterizing crowd activity online.
But what is collective intelligence and how does it work?
Describing his view, Franks wrote, "all intelligence involves rational manipulation of symbolic information" .
But it also continues, in event after event, to take on new forms and emerge within new networks of individuals.
This research offers a detailed description of the core activities of digital volunteerism and explores the utility of using dCog to both analyze and conceptualze this collective activity online.
This work would not have been possible without the support of Project EPIC at the University of Colorado.
I thank Leysia Palen for her guidance throughout this multiyear research effort, and Ken Anderson and Aaron Schram for helping collect the Twitter data used in this analysis.
I also thank Ed Hutchins for his early guidance, the reviewers of this paper for their thoughtful feedback, and Taylor Scott for his feedback on a late draft.
Early research for this paper was supported by an NSF Graduate Research Fellowship and NSF grants IIS-0546315 and IIS-0910586.
Engelbart, D. Augmenting Human Intellect: A Conceptual Framework.
Engelbart, D. Augmenting society's collective IQs.
Franks, N. Army Ants: A Collective Intelligence: A neural network seems an apt analogy as a colony of army ants navigates the tropical rain forest.
Fritz, C. E. & Mathewson, J. H. Convergence Behavior in Disasters: A Problem in Social Control, Committee on Disaster Studies, National Academy of Sciences, National Research Council, Washington DC, 1957.
Central problems in social theory: action, structure and contradiction in social analysis, University of California Press, Berkeley, 1979.
Disaster Relief 2.0: The Future of Information Sharing in Humanitarian Emergencies.
Washington, D.C. & Berkshire, UK: UN Foundation & Vodafone Foundation Technology Partnership, 2011.
Artificial Intelligence: The Very Idea, MIT Press, 1986.
Heverin, T. & Zach, L. Use of Microblogging for Collective Sense-making during Violent Crises: A Study of Three Campus Shootings.
Hollan, J., Hutchins, E. & Kirsh, D. Distributed cognition: toward a new foundation for human-computer interaction research.
Hutchins, E. Cognition in the Wild.
Hutchins, E. The Social Organization of Distributed Cognition.
