Figure 1: Summary of findings:  Surface convexity increases pointing accuracy and  concave surfaces are subject to larger error offsets.
This is likely caused by how concave surfaces hug the user's finger thus resulting in a larger contact area.
As researchers and engineers create these future touch devices, the question arises of how to design usable interfaces for them.
Unfortunately, there is no empirical data about the human factors of touch on curved surfaces yet.
On flat surfaces, touch is comparably well understood.
In particular, there is a series of studies investigating the factors responsible for the inaccuracy of touch, including the fat finger problem  and the  perceived input point model .
While this paper is only a first step, our ultimate goal is to create similar metric for the usability of object surfaces of arbitrary shape and curvature.
Such a metric would allow industrial designers to assess the usability of devices, similar to how the measurement of wind resistance has brought rigor to the design of the shape of cars.
Touch on arbitrary shapes is of very high dimensionality, because device, hands, and the way they can make contact are all of very high degree of freedom.
As a first step, we select a tractable, self-contained subset of variables, namely, single touch on spherical shapes, as these already fit existing devices.
We present a user study in which participants acquired targets on surfaces of different curvature and at locations of different slope.
We report how surface curvature affects pointing accuracy .
Recent advances in sensor technology have allowed touchenabling non-planar surfaces.
Examples include capacitive sensors in Rekimoto's Smart Skin  and in Apple's Magic Mouse, resistive sensors in the UnMousePad , and FTIR-based sensing in Mouse 2.0 .
We also have started to see non-planar touch screens, such as Sphere .
For large touch surfaces, such as Sphere, surface curvature is comparably small.
The smaller the device, however, the stronger the average curvature becomes, as illustrated by Figure 2.
The surface of the DI-based Mouse 2.0 corresponds to a O15cm sphere and by sensing touch through an optical fiber bundle, FlyEye  manages to touch-enable a O 4cm ping-pong ball.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Advances in sensing technology are currently bringing touch input to non-planar surfaces, ranging from spherical touch screens to prototypes the size and shape of a pingpong ball.
To help interface designers create usable interfaces on such devices, we determine how touch surface curvature affects targeting.
We present a user study in which participants acquired targets on surfaces of different curvature and at locations of different slope.
We find that surface convexity increases pointing accuracy, and in particular reduces the offset between the input point perceived by users and the input point sensed by the device.
Concave surfaces, in contrast, are subject to larger error offsets.
This is likely caused by how concave surfaces hug the user's finger, thus resulting in a larger contact area.
The effect of slope on targeting, in contrast, is unexpected at first sight.
Some targets located downhill from the user's perspective are subject to error offsets in the opposite direction from all others.
This appears to be caused by participants acquiring these targets using a different finger posture that lets them monitor the position of their fingers more effectively.
Curved touch devices include relative pointing devices, such as the aforementioned Mouse 2.0 , and absolute pointing devices/touch screens, such as Sphere .
Many other sensor concepts could be adapted to non-planar surfaces, such as GelForce, a device that extracts directional pressure from touch .
Several researchers have found systematic effects that cause a touch device to sense touch at an offset from the intended target.
The Shift technique includes a corrective offset that compensates for differences between target location and the perceived input point .
Wang and Ren found that finger posture and motion impact the size of the contact area .
Holz and Baudisch found that differences in finger roll as well as differences in users' mental models result in additional offsets.
They generalized the concept of offsets into the generalized perceived input point model .
Follow-up work by the same authors  explains error offsets as a conceptual mismatch between users and devices: users target by placing a fixed point located on top of their fingernail over the target.
Touch devices, in contrast, determine the contact point as the center of the contact area between finger and device.
In addition to the rigid devices mentioned earlier, curved surfaces also occur as a side effect of deformable devices, including Organic User Interfaces, such as Paper Windows .
Objects may either be deformed by users, such as the optically sensed PhotoelasticTouch , Gummi , or even human skin , or objects may be deformed using a device, such as inflatable buttons .
While the majority of non-planar devices are still inputonly, we are starting to see the first non-planar or deformable touch screens, to date primarily using projection .
Touch is related to  grasping, which is touch with the support by an opposing thumb.
Examples of graspable interfaces include Bar of Soap  and FlyEye .
Because of the presence of systematic offsets, researchers have started to specify touch inaccuracy using two variables, i.e., offset and spread  .
Since we use this metric to report our results, we discuss it in additional detail.
Each targeting interaction produces a contact point, generally computed as the center of gravity of all points in the contact area, e.g., the center of an oval fitted to the contact area .
All contact points together can now be summarized using two variables:
Offsets can be compensated for by applying corrective offsets, which is a method for increasing the accuracy of a touch device.
Offsets are therefore particularly relevant for device designers.
Modeling target acquisition has a long tradition.
Fitts' Law models targeting time for one-dimensional targets .
Grossman and Balakrishnan's probabilistic pointing models two-dimensional target acquisition .
Touch screens were initially considered inherently inaccurate because of the softness of human fingertips and the occlusion of the target by the finger .
Touch screens were, however, adapted to highprecision pointing using localized CD ratio adjustments  and extensions that pre-
Figure 3: We report targeting error as offset and spread.
Note that this assumed button is centered on the centroid, not the target.
The findings in this paper allow us to extend this reasoning about offset and spread to curved surfaces.
In this section, we attempt to generalize what we know about touch on flat surfaces to curved surfaces.
We use this to derive the hypotheses for our user study.
On flat surfaces, a finger of given posture always makes contact with the surface the same way.
When we generalize to curved surfaces, the curvature of the surface affects the shape and size of the contact area.
As illustrated by Figure 4, convex surfaces curve away from the finger, resulting in a smaller contact area.
Concave surfaces, in contrast, hug the finger, which leads to a larger contact area.
The observed variations in finger postures prevented us from formulating a clear hypothesis on surface slope-- since flat surfaces offer nothing to reach around, hookshaped finger postures had not been studied here.
Which posture would lead to better targeting was hard to predict.
In addition, the individual patches of a curved surface have different slopes, which causes the finger to make contact with the surface at different angles.
Our initial hypothesis was that users would maintain a constant finger posture, as shown in Figure 5a.
For downhill slopes  this would have caused their fingers to form a flatter angle with the surface, yielding a larger contact area between finger and surface, and thus would have potentially caused larger offsets.
To be able to analyze the impact of the factors discussed above, we needed a device that could observe the exact contact area between the finger and the touch surface in high resolution.
Since diffuse illumination  delivers only vague contour data, and capacitive sensing  is hard to manufacture for high and non-interpolated resolution, we opted for a custom design based on FTIR , technology previously used, for example, in Mouse 2.0 .
FTIR offers high resolution, a comparably crisp contact area outline, as well as reliable recognition of contact.
On the flipside, FTIR starts bleeding out light with increasing curvature, which required us to make a series of modifications.
During piloting, however, we found that the finger contact area was largely unchanged across downhill and uphill facing slopes.
Closer inspection revealed that our assumption about the finger posture was wrong.
Instead, participants had targeted on downhill slopes with a hooked finger, as illustrated by Figure 5b.
This posture allowed participants to hit the target surface at a roughly constant angle, which helped them minimize the contact area between their finger and the touch surface.
Figure 6 shows our prototype device which we call curve touch.
The basic FTIR design consists of the three familiar elements:  an acrylic touch surface,  a set of 8 bright white LEDs on each of four sides that inject light into the acrylic and  a high-definition web camera that observes the touch surface from below.
As for all FTIR devices, a finger touching the surface causes the LED light to escape at the contact area, which is observed by the camera.
We processed the resulting image using OpenCV/Emgu.Cv.
To obtain exact surface curvatures, we deformed the acrylic using a series of stamps, as illustrated by Figure 7.
We heated the acrylic locally using a heat gun .
Once malleable, we stamped shapes of the desired curvature into the acrylic .
Resting the acrylic on a larger ring allowed us to create the hemispherical target surface as well as a smoother transition to its periphery, which helped reduce light leakage .
We obtained best results using 3mm acrylic sheets, which are thin enough to allow for easy deformation, yet still thick enough to allow for the injection of light.
To support multiple curvatures, we created different top units, each of which consisted of a differently deformed acrylic sheet with illumination .
Snap connectors made from Lego bricks assured precise positioning of the top unit yet allowed replacing top units quickly.
We also added a flat top unit to obtain a total of nine surfaces: a flat unit plus four curved units that could be flipped to serve as convex or concave shapes.
FTIR is most commonly used with a compliant surface layer to increase the frustration of light on contact.
Unfortunately, the strong curvature of some of the shapes we used made it difficult to obtain accurately fitting compliant surfaces.
We consequently dropped the compliant surface from our design.
Instead, we used silicone spray to increase frustration when necessary.
The small fixed-focus lens offers a high depth of field, thus a clear image for all shapes.
However, perspective effects make the curvature of the touch surfaces appear distorted.
In particular, surface patches on convex bulges appear larger, because they are located further away from the camera; in addition, tilted surface patches appear deformed, because of foreshortening.
A universally applicable correction for this distortion would require switching to a 3D representation of the surface.
Since we were only concerned with the relative position of contact points with respect to the target, however, we treated the respective patch of surface as if it were flat, which allowed us to scale with a simple linear transformation.
We first restored the apparent size of the respective patch by scaling it proportional to its distance to the camera lens.
We then stretched points by scaling them with the corresponding patch ratio.
Light leakage is inherent to all waveguides and only depends on curvature.
It was not an issue at the actual bulge because the remaining light was strong enough and because we eliminated brightness differences by thresholding.
In this study, we investigated the impact of target curvature on touch accuracy.
Participants acquired targets on the curve touch.
Using different top units, we varied curvature in nine levels from convex to flat to concave.
By using multiple targets placed across the curved surface we also varied slope.
Our goal was to test the hypotheses discussed earlier, i.e., to determine how curvature and slope impact offsets and spread.
We took the following three measures to minimize the impact of other potential factors.
First, participants kept their heads in a fixed position above the touchpad, as shown in Figure 11, which controlled for parallax.
Second, the use of a footswitch allowed us to avoid artifacts common with other commit methods, such as inadvertent motion during take-off.
The unified button and target acquisition using the footswitch helped reduce participants' cognitive load.
Finally, participants were told to focus on accuracy not on speed; consequently, we did not record task completion time.
Figure 11 shows the apparatus, consisting of the curve touch device, a screen presenting instructions, a numeric keypad for starting trials, and a foot switch for committing trials.
To compensate for the depth of the curve touch device, it was mounted on a tripod, bringing its touch surface to the same height as the table.
The screen was located 50cm behind the curve touch and the keypad 30cm behind and right of it.
The curve touch device, screen, keypad, and foot switch were driven by a PC running Windows Vista.
Curvatures were implemented using the five top units .
We varied slope by using targets at different locations on the curved surface.
8 targets were organized in a ring located at 45 zenith angle for each curved surface; in addition there was a single target at the apex.
To prevent participants from  biasing their targeting towards open space we added a second ring of unused/fake crosses further outside.
In addition, participants were told that there was no penalty for getting close to other targets during targeting.
Note that there was no reason to include real distracter targets though.
Distracters have a major effect on adaptive input techniques, such as magnetic targets , but not on unmodified touch.
For each trial, participants were presented with a diagram illustrating the target to acquire .
Participants then pressed the enter key that was highlighted using red tape on the numeric keypad  with their right hands and committed by pressing the foot switch .
We assured that all participants were seated so as to reach the device at a 45 angle as shown in Figure 11.
Participants then acquired the target on the curved surface with the same  hand  and again committed by pressing the footswitch .
This completed the trial and played a sound.
When participants activated the footswitch twice, i.e.
Participants then had to repeat the trial.
Errors were rare in the study .
As common in this type of study , participants did not receive feedback about the touch location registered by the device.
This ensured that the participants acquired the target based on their own mental model of touch, rather than being trained by the device during the study.
Participants performed 6 trials for each curvature.
Curvature was counterbalanced within participants using a partial Latin Square design.
The order of targets was randomized.
Each participant completed all conditions: 9 curvatures  9 target orientations  6 trials = 486 trials per participant.
Participants performed 5 minutes of training before the experiment.
They were allowed to take breaks every 54 selections.
They completed the study in 45 minutes or less.
This observation matches finger direction offsets previously observed on flat surfaces  and supports our hypothesis H0.
The overall effect shows reasonably clearly in Figure 13, where most contact point clusters are offset to the bottom right with respect to their target.
An exception is the concave O49mm shape.
Unlike any of the other curvatures, it showed virtually no global offset, but target-specific offsets towards the center.
We discuss this effect in more detail below, and investigated it in a brief follow-up study, also presented in this paper.
To understand this relationship better we performed linear regressions .
These results support our hypothesis H1, i.e., error offsets indeed decreased with convexity and increased with concavity, as suggested by their differences in contact area .
These findings integrate nicely with the related work on flat surfaces , while generalizing from flat to curved surfaces.
Figure 15 illustrates spread across curvatures.
Note that we computed spread on a per-user basis.
Intuitively, this means that each bar indicates how closely the contact points of a single user are collocated for a target on the respective curvature.
For a device to exploit this it needs to employ a per-user calibration, as suggested by .
Post-hoc multiple means comparison tests found the significant differences shown in Figure 15.
The left half of Figure 15, i.e., the one depicting accuracy on convex shapes, is in general support of our hypothesis H2: spread indeed decreased with increasing convexity.
The concave shapes, in contrast, came out unexpectedly.
Rather than spread increasing further with concavity, spread eventually even decreased.
Figure 16 suggests one possible explanation for this effect.
First, a tight cavity confines the finger, which provides users with tactile feedback that can help adjust the position of their finger.
Second, the stronger the curvature, the shorter the part of the bowl that is actually concave.
The space around the bowl has to be convex in order to connect the concave bowl to the rest of the surface.
For very strong curvatures, users' fingers fill out the concave part, so that variations in finger posture lead to changes in the contact area on the convex part, where it leads to smaller changes in contact area, thus reduced spread.
This effect is inherent to the nature of curved surfaces: unlike flat surfaces, curved surfaces are finite and the stronger the curvature, the smaller the surface.
This holds for concave, as well as convex, as illustrated also by the FlyEye shown in Figure 2.
Post-hoc multiple means comparison tests  found that the offsets of downhill slopes were generally smaller than the offsets of center slopes, which in turn were smaller than the offsets of uphill slopes.
As apparent also in Figure 18, however, this effect was entirely caused by the concave surfaces.
As illustrated by Figure 19, participants acquired different targets using different finger postures.
For targets located on downhill slopes, participants were more likely to employ a hooked finger posture, while they were more likely to use a straight finger to acquire targets located on uphill slopes.
When analyzing slope, we grouped target locations that resulted in similar finger postures, as shown in Figure 17.
One possible explanation for the smaller offsets on downhill slopes is differences in finger posture, i.e., that a hooked finger leads to smaller offsets than a straight finger.
On flat surfaces, touch inaccuracy has been attributed to users' inability to monitor the soft fleshy bottom of the finger .
As illustrated by Figure 19, users pointing using a hooked finger can see that bottom side.
The now invisible side, i.e., the fingernail, is less malleable and thus suffers from the fat finger problem to a much lesser extent.
The order of target orientations was randomized.
Each participant completed all conditions, i.e., 3 finger postures  17 target orientations  6 trials = 306 trials per participant.
Participants performed 5 minutes of training before the experiment.
They were allowed to take breaks every 34 selections.
They all completed the study in 30 minutes or less.
In summary, by adding curvature as a factor, we have generalized the concept of error offsets from flat surfaces  to curved surfaces.
We found that error offsets depend on curvature  and slope .
Both factors influence error offset, but there is an interaction and most of the error offset of concave targets comes from the uphill slope, where users are forced to target using a straight finger.
The effects of curvature on spread, in contrast, are moderate.
There appears to be an effect for convex targets.
For concave targets in contrast, multiple confounding factors compensate for each other.
As discussed earlier, we speculated that the smallness of the error offsets of the concave targets was caused by participants targeting using a hooked finger.
To verify this assumption, we conducted an informal follow-up study with a small number of additional participants.
Participants again repeatedly acquired crosshair targets of different orientations.
Our main hypothesis was that the lack of offsets on concave surfaces was an artifact of participants employing different finger postures.
To investigate this, we varied finger posture this time.
Figure 20 and Figure 21 show the raw data, i.e., all contact points obtained during the study by fingertip, flat finger, and free conditions.
As in the main study, the overall error offset of the free condition pointed towards the center rather than in the direction of the finger .
This held across all targets including the additional ring of outer targets.
For the fingertip condition the finger direction offset was equally small .
In the flat finger condition, however, we did see a major offset in the direction of the finger .
We used the same curve touch device, screen, button, and footswitch setup as in the main user study .
We limited the study to the O49mm concave surface, which had displayed the pattern most clearly.
Participants performed the same task as before.
To obtain additional data for the slope variable, we broke the single target ring at 45 zenith angle from the previous study down into an inner ring at 30 and an outer ring at 60 zenith angle for an overall 8 outer + 8 inner + 1 apex = 17 targets.
This caused them to acquire targets using a straight finger for the uphill targets and to hook their finger for the downhill targets.
This forced them to use a straight finger also for downhill targets.
In order not to influence participants in the free condition, we ran the free condition first.
We then counterbalanced the following fingertip and flat finger conditions.
We reconstructed participants' finger posture in the free condition by comparing the contact area sizes for each touch with the fingertip and flat finger conditions.
Figure 20b illustrates that participants effectively targeted with the fingertip throughout; a slight tendency towards using a flat finger in the bottom right was weak enough that it had little effect on the error offsets.
Our findings indicate that the curvature of touch surfaces impacts targeting in terms of spread/minimum button size and in particular in terms of systematic offsets.
This information can help designers of curved touch devices improve their devices.
As future work, we plan to study the impact of shape on more complex interactions, such as grasping.
New findings in this space may one day provide the missing link between HCI and the disciplines that have discussed form factor and shape all along, such as industrial design.
The results of this informal study indicate that the error offsets in the concave condition of the main study are indeed an artifact of finger posture.
By switching between a straight and hooked finger, participants always targeted using the finger tip, thereby targeting more accurately in the sense that offsets were reduced.
What remains is the question why the more strongly curved concave conditions seemed to benefit less from the hooked finger posture .
Figure 22 attempts to explain this by illustrating an effect we observed during piloting For strongly concave surfaces, a hooked finger posture introduces additional targeting errors when it accidentally touches the opposite side of the bowl .
Most pilot users avoided the issue by switching back to a straight finger posture.
This avoids the accidental touches, at the expense of reintroducing the increased offset error of the straight finger.
Knowledge of these offsets allows engineers to compensate for these effects by coding corrective offsets into their device drivers, which will increase device accuracy .
Paper windows: interaction techniques for digital paper.
Holz, C. and Baudisch, P. The generalized perceived input point model and how to double touch accuracy by extracting fingerprints.
Holz, C. and Baudisch, P. Understanding touch.
Moscovich, T. Contact area interaction with sliding widgets.
Potter, R., Weldon, L. and Shneiderman, B.
Improving the accuracy of touch screens: an experimental evaluation of three strategies.
Rekimoto, J. SmartSkin: an infrastructure for freehand manipulation on interactive surfaces.
Rosenberg, I. and Perlin, K. The UnMousePad: an interpolating multi-touch force-sensing input pad.
Sato, T., Mamiya, H., Koike, H. and Fukuchi, K. PhotoelasticTouch: transparent rubbery tangible interface using an LCD and photoelasticity.
Sears, A. and Shneiderman, B.
