Browsing the web has been shown to be a highly recurrent activity.
Aimed to optimize the browsing experience, extensive previous research has been carried out on users' revisitation behavior.
However, the conventional definition for revisitation, which only considers page loading activities by monitoring http requests initiated by the browser, largely underestimates users' intended revisitation activities with tabbed browsers.
Thus, we introduce a goaloriented definition and a refined revisitation measurement based on page viewings in tabbed browsers.
An empirical analysis of statistics taken from a client-side log study showed that although the overall revisitation rate remained relatively constant, tabbed browsing has introduced new behaviors warrant future investigations.
While to some extent, tabbed browsing behavior can be achieved using multiple instances of non-tabbed browsers, but the pervasive usage of tabbed browsing behavior did not happen until major browsers adopted the tab feature.
In 2009, Dubroy and Balakrishnan  conducted a study on user behaviors in Mozilla Firefox browser, highlighting the significance of tab usage in revisiting web pages.
In 2010, Huang and White  investigated parallel browsing, specifically on how web searching tasks were performed with multiple tabs.
Both papers adopted the conventional definition for revisitation and did not point out how repeated page visits in non-tabbed browsers were different from those in tabbed browsers.
Browsing the web has been shown to be a highly recurrent activity .
Extensive research that has been conducted to understand user behavior and optimize the browsing experience focused on "web page revisitation", a term that refers to the repeated visits to previously visited web pages .
Previous studies, conducted mostly between 1994 and 2000, were mostly on non-tabbed browsers  and revisitation was defined as "the repeated loading of a web page as identified by its URL" .
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
From the user's perspective, the purpose of "visiting" a web page is to get information.
Thus, we propose the term "effective revisitation" to describe the repetition of obtaining information from a web page as identified by its URL.
Since the majority of web content is visual , we focus on revisitation of visual content in this paper.
A clear line needs to be drawn between the definition and the measurement of revisitation.
Our proposed definition explains what revisitation is, rather than how it is measured.
The conventional definition is somewhat misleading as it is actually a measurement of revisitations in non-tabbed browsers.
To understand why the conventional measurement for revisitation is insufficient under the tabbed browsing paradigm, several terms first need to be clarified: * Focused tab or current tab.
The current visible tab in a browser.
In tabbed browsers, only the tab that is being displayed is visible.
Non-tabbed browsers could be thought of as having only one tab, which is always in focus.
They only exist in a tabbed browser.
They contain opened pages, but unlike the focused tab, their content is not visible.
All tabs except the focused tab are background tabs.
A page loading event is recorded whenever an http request is sent to the server.
The effective revisitation rate  is calculated as the number of effective revisits   divided by the total number of page viewings .
The definitions of each term are listed below.
The total number of loading-based and tab-switching-based page viewings.
A subset of all page viewings.
Effective revisits are viewings of previously viewed pages.
The formula #EffRev/#View calculates the effective revisitation rate based on page viewings.
Note that the difference between total number of page viewings and URL vocabulary size  does not equal the number of effective revisits, as some URLs could have been loaded but never viewed.
The new definition and measurement prompted the following research questions: * Using the proposed viewing-based measurement, what is the revisitation rate under the tabbed browsing paradigm?
How does it differ from the results using the conventional measurement?
To answer these questions, we carried out a one-month study of 20 participants and their browsing behaviors in tabbed browsers.
In any single instances of non-tabbed browsers , all web pages are loaded into the only tab, which is always in focus; so they are displayed whenever they are loaded.
Therefore, the conventional measurement for revisitation is able to determine the number of page viewings through the concurrence of page loading events and page displaying events, given the assumption that page displaying equals page viewing.
In tabbed browsers, however, a page loading is not always a page displaying.
The conventional measurement cannot be used to determine the number of page viewings since it would introduce two types of errors: * Over-count of revisitation activities.
In tabbed browsers, a background tab can be closed without being viewed.
This introduces three types of over-count errors that will be counted as revisitations: Type 1.
A previously loaded-but-not-viewed page is loaded again and viewed; Type 2.
A previously loaded-but-not-viewed page is loaded again but not viewed; and Type 3.
A previously loaded-and-viewed page is loaded again but not viewed.
In all of these cases, the same page was loaded several times but viewed not more than once.
They are considered revisitations in the conventional definition but should be excluded under the new definition.
When users switch to a tab to display its content, which has been viewed before, no additional loading events are triggered.
The conventional definition does not consider this behavior as a revisitation; our proposed definition does.
To accurately measure revisitation in tabbed browsing, we propose to focus on page viewings instead of page loadings.
There are two types of page viewing activities in tabbed browsers: * Loading-based page viewing.
A web page  that is loaded into the focused tab is considered viewed.
A page in a background tab is considered viewed when the tab becomes the focused tab.
20 participants  from the university community took part in the one-month study.
All participants use Internet daily on Microsoft Windows Operating Systems with Mozilla Firefox as the primary browser.
Participants were instructed to browse the Internet as usual.
No additional demonstration or suggestion of using tabs was given prior to or during the study.
A total of 235,707 browser events were captured from the 20 participants over one-month, among which there were 89,851 page loadings and 127,344 page viewings.
We do not further distinguish the type of information users try to get .
How significant are the over-count and under-count errors when the conventional method is used to measure revisitations in tabbed browsers?
There are a total of 4,135 over-count error events .
There are 38,639 under-count error events , in which revisitation activities were done with tab switching alone.
Using the proposed viewing-based measurement, what is the revisitation rate under the tabbed browsing paradigm?
How does it differ from the results using the conventional measurement?
The blue bar on the right end of figure 1 shows the overall conventional revisitation rate  based on page loadings, which was calculated using Tauscher and Greenberg's method .
The red bar besides it shows the overall effective revisitation rate  using our proposed definition and measurement.
The bars on the left of the figure show revisitation rates using the two measurements for each participant.
Our calculation shows that the conventional measurement largely underestimates the amount of revisitation activities under tabbed browsing .
If we break down the effective revisitation of all 75,912 events into the two types of revisitation , the former comprises 53.0%  while the latter comprises 47.0% .
This shows that tab-switching-based revisitation, which was neglected in previous studies, is about as frequent as loading-based revisitation.
It reinforces the point raised by Dubroy and Balakrishnan  that tab switching should be considered an important means of revisitation.
These results show that conventional measurement suffers from both over-count and under-count errors.
The undercount errors are much more than over-count errors, giving rise to the overall effect that conventional measurement largely underestimates revisitations in tabbed browsing.
Has the frequency of users' repeated page visits changed in recent years?
We found four previous studies that explicitly addressed revisitation rate and present them chronologically alongside our study .
The first three studies used non-tabbed browsers, while the last two studies used tabbed browsers.
The study of Dubroy and Balakrishnan  is not included since it did not explicitly report revisitation rate.
Before the introduction of tabbed browsers, effective web revisitation activities were accurately measured as the loading of previously loaded pages.
This was done in studies 1, 2 and 3, all of which have revisitation rates of above 50%.
Did the introduction of tabbed browsers change this rate?
Study 4 suggested that there is a change: revisitation rate dropped to 43.7%.
However, this may be misleading since the conventional measurement for revisitation was used in tabbed browsing .
Our study shows that the effective revisitation rate has not dropped that dramatically  even with the introduction of tabbed browsers.
Due to lack of tab switching data from the previous studies, we are unable to calculate effective revisitation rates for study 4.
While our study results suggest possible reasons behind the noticeable difference between study 4 and previous studies, comparison across studies should be cautiously interpreted to consider the differences in methods and other possible limitations.
The purpose of this comparison is not to judge the previous studies, but to place our study in context and to highlight any significant difference to invite further investigations.
While it will be difficult to completely remove all issues in over and undercounting in any method of measurement, future researchers may consider reporting a percentage range, in which the actual revisitation rate resides with high probability .
In the future, our method of measurement could be further integrated into large scale analyses of web usage  or existing user behaviors such as back tracking , to deepen our understanding of tabbed browsing and to improve user experience.
While our proposed method of measuring web page revisitation shed new light into research on the topic, it is, strictly speaking, still an approximation of actual revisitation behavior.
It also has issues in overcounting and undercounting page revisits.
Our definition of revisitation is "the repetition of obtaining previously seen information," but what accounts for "obtaining information" needs further clarification.
Tab switching is one way of obtaining information from a web page contained in a tab.
However, users may switch through tabs to find a previously opened tab or click on a tab by accident.
In these cases, the tab switchings result in transient page views.
Users do not actually intend to obtain information from these pages.
These tab switchings should be excluded from the calculation, and one way to do so is by excluding page views that are shorter than a certain time threshold.
Table 2 tabulates number of page views, number of page revisits, and effective revisitation rates under different cut-off time thresholds.
As shown in table 2, although transient tab switchings increase the total number of page revisits, it is unlikely to significantly affect the overall revisitation rate.
While applying a time threshold can help to remove some of the transient pages, determining the exact time threshold is difficult due to different scenarios and individual differences.
Future research may use other methods  to more accurately tell whether the user is viewing the page to obtain information.
Undercounting may be caused by using multiple browser windows and revisiting non-visual contents of a page, e.g., radio stations.
While these two cases happened rarely in our log study, future research in web page revisitation should take them into consideration.
We propose a goal-oriented definition and measurement for revisitation under the tabbed browsing paradigm.
Our client-side log study shows that the conventional measurement for revisitation largely underestimates revisitation activities in tabbed browsing.
Although the overall revisitation rate has remained relatively steady over the years, tabbed browsing has introduced new behaviors.
In the future, these need to be taken into account in studies of web page revisitation and when optimizing the browsing and revisitation experience in tabbed browsers.
