This study explores how the design of visual display configurations relates to linguistic expressions.
Twenty-five participants performed a series of object identification and narrative Description tasks on either a large wall-sized or small desktop display.
Results revealed that during the Description tasks, large display users produced significantly greater rates of local deictic references than small display users, but in the identification tasks, the rates were similar for both large and small display users.
Implications for the design of interactive technologies are discussed.
We build on previous findings by Tan and colleagues  that suggest larger displays, independent of field of view, can invoke an egocentric perspective that influences a range of behavioral outcomes such as spatial knowledge and memory.
If an egocentric perspective is taken then we should also expect linguistic adaptations that demonstrate this shift in perspective.
Despite this seemingly natural connection between cognitive perspective and language use, surprisingly little work has been done to examine how particular display configurations relate to the pattern of observable linguistic expressions.
We report results that show how display size influences the distribution of particular referential forms used to describe the spatial attributes of an environment.
We discuss how these findings have important implications for improving the design of a wide range of technologies including those that engage in naturalistic conversation with humans , or those in which adaptations are based upon an understanding of the current dialogue state .
Finally, we propose that linguistic analysis offers a useful approach for researching the cognitive affordances of different technological factors across visual environments .
The way we speak and what we comprehend is intimately tied to the visual context in which we communicate.
Without a thorough understanding of how language and visual information interrelate, we run the risk of developing technologies that fail to support natural interactions.
For example, an automated conversational agent needs to generate speech and actions in line with natural human behavior.
When this does not transpire, studies have shown that people adapt their communication patterns  in ways that lead to additional difficulties for computing systems .
In this paper we examine how display size, controlling for field of view, can significantly influence language use and ultimately affect our interactions with visual environments.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Previous research has demonstrated benefits of using large displays that range from improved individual performance in complex tasks  and spatial tasks  to greater shared awareness  and more fluid social interaction  among collocated collaborators.
More recently, Tan and colleagues  examined tasks that could be performed from either an egocentric perspective  or an exocentric perspective .
They found that large displays biased users into an egocentric mindset associated with spatial performance benefits, while small displays encouraged an exocentric perspective without the associated gains.
In the study presented in this paper we reason that if display size can influence the perspective that we bring to a visual task, then we should also see significant shifts in the way we talk about a given space.
For example, when people share visual space they shorten full noun phrase descriptions to deictic pronouns , and they shift the distribution of local and remote deixis  according to whether the speakers perceive themselves to be physically co-present .
Byron & Stoia  provide evidence that spatial factors play a role during reference in virtual environments, showing that speakers tended to favor local deixis when they were closer to a given object and remote deixis when the hearer was closer to an object.
Kramer and colleagues demonstrate a relationship between perceived presence and the use of local and remote deixis, and suggest that the interaction medium also has an effect .
In this study, we were particularly interested in whether display size alone, controlling for visual angle , could influence people's cognitive perspective and ultimately the referential forms they use to describe the objects and attributes of a virtual environment.
We also expected characteristics of the communicative task along with spatial features of the environment to further influence deictic patterns .
In the Description Task, the participant produced a spoken narrative to accompany a pre-recorded two-minute video clip in which an avatar walked through the WoW environment in first-person perspective.
In addition to this open-ended narrative, the experimenter paused the clip at preset intervals to prompt the participant about an entity on the screen.
For example, when a knight character appeared in the scene, the experimenter asked: "What do you think about what he's wearing?"
Care was taken in the formation of these prompts to avoid providing spatial information.
The goal of this task was to elicit as much free-form spoken narrative about the environment as possible.
In the Identification  Task, the participant viewed a 30 second video clip that led up to a static array of objects.
For example, in Figure 2, a player walks into a storefront and stops just before the counter.
The experimenter then asked the participant to locate the position of a pre-determined object, in this case using the prompt, "The object is a set of five similar things, each half-full of liquid."
The participant was then given time to locate the object and describe its position.
The goal of this task was to force the production of referential expressions rich in spatial information .
Twenty-five  students and staff members from a mid-sized Midwestern university participated in the study.
Participants were native English speakers with normal or corrected-to-normal eyesight.
Participants interacted with the massively multiplayer online game  World of Warcraft .
Forty-four percent of participants had never played a MMOG and 20% reported having played WoW before participating in the study.
They were paid $10 an hour.
Near  and Far  object distances.
The third manipulation was Object Distance, which provided control for approximate visual distance to the objects of interest in the environment.
Duplicate clips were recorded such that most objects available for reference in the environment were filmed at a perceptual distance of less than 9.9 WoW yards  or between 11.11 and 28 WoW yards .
Figure 2 presents a still capture from two clips representing this manipulation.
Large  and Small  display setups.
Upon entering the laboratory, participants were first asked to complete the ETS Card Test to establish a baseline measure of visual-spatial abilities .
They were then randomly assigned  to either the Large or Small Display condition .
The projected image was 66" wide by 40" tall, while the image on the monitor measured 17" by 10.5".
In order to maintain the same field of view across the displays, participants were seated 30.9" from the monitor and 120" away from the projection with the chair height adjusted so their eye-level was at the center of either display 1.
The experimenter sat immediately to the right of the participant within his or her field of view so that it was clear they could both see the display.
However, only word count and gender were found to be significant factors and all other covariates were dropped from the final models.
As each participant completed four trials, observations were not independent of each other.
Therefore, participant, nested within Display Size, was modeled as a random effect.
The model of the rate of local deixis achieved a good fit to the data .
Manipulation checks showed that the ID task produced a higher rate of local deixis than the Description task =85.3, p<.001.
This was expected given that the ID task was designed to elicit object references.
Similarly, the Object Distance manipulation showed a marginal increase in the rate of local deixis used for nearby stimuli =3.71, p=.058.
The Display Size manipulation did not reveal a main effect difference between the two display conditions =.61, n.s..
Examination reveals that Display Size had considerable influence over the production of local deixis--but only when participants were engaged in the Description task.
However, when participants were engaged in the ID task there was no detectable difference in the rate of local deixis between Large  and Small Display conditions =1.36, p=.25 for the contrast.
The spoken corpus contained a total of 24,123 words, with an average of 964 spoken words per participant.
Two independent coders blind to experimental condition tagged all instances of local deixis  and remote deixis .
Both references to objects and to the environment were tagged , as well as uses of deixis following an object reference  and repeated references to objects .
References to events or objects not present in the scene were not tagged  nor were anaphoric uses of the terms .
The coders overlapped in their ratings on 10% of the corpus and inter-rater reliability across the codes was high .
Initial examination of our qualitative data revealed multiple instances in which large display participants used local deixis and small display participants used remote deixis to describe the same visual content.
The Description task excerpts below demonstrate this pattern.
However, further investigation revealed a more nuanced distinction.
The analysis examines the rate of local and remote deixis generated as the primary dependent variables2.
We performed a repeated measures analysis of variance in which Object Distance , Task  and Block  were repeated, and Display Size  was a between-participant factor.
This study demonstrates that referential forms can change depending on something as subtle as the overall display size .
It is instructive to note that we did not find effects across all task types or perceptual distances.
Rather, large display conditions were associated with greater rates of local deixis only when participants were engaged in a task involving open-ended narration.
When participants were forced to refer to objects in a static array, this difference disappeared.
These differences may be due to the referential constraints imposed by the task.
In the Description task, participants spoke freely about objects and could describe them relative to themselves; in the ID task, they often had to describe objects relative to one another.
Moreover, while this pattern of results occurred for both rates and overall counts of local deixis, we found no evidence to suggest that display size influenced patterns of remote deixis.
This is similar to Kramer et al.
It may be that when participants feel a greater degree of presence, their language reflects a higher engagement with the task.
Further investigation is needed to tease these ideas apart.
Our results suggest that the combination of display configuration and task attributes can yield a more immersive experience, or greater sense of presence, that translates into measurable differences in language use.
It is therefore important to consider all of these factors when designing interactive visual environments.
For example, if the goal is to develop conversational agents that interact naturally with humans, then agents need to not only understand referential patterns, but also generate natural responses and initial descriptions that match their speaking partner's situation model.
Failing this, people may overcompensate in unnatural ways , making successful interaction difficult.
The design of collaborative technology can also be informed by a better understanding of how visual context influences linguistic behavior, particularly in situations with high potential for referential ambiguity .
In this paper we show that subtle differences such as display size can influence language use, yet these linguistic adaptations are sensitive to particular task attributes.
These findings are crucial when considering the design of collaborative interaction spaces and highlight the need to better understand the relationship between technological affordances and language.
Future research could investigate the ways in which linguistic measures can be used as indices of cognitive mindset in interactive technologies.
