In this paper we describe MoBoogie, an application that allows users to manipulate and arrange music through movement.
MoBoogie is designed to foster experiences in creative expression for children and potentially adults.
The application responds to users' movements by changing variables in a continuous stream of music loops.
Results from this study suggest that the creative expressions arose in the joint space of movement and music, and did not primarily have to be in one form or the other.
This allowed users with limited experience in dance and music making to be creative in such forms of expression.
Phenomenology and pragmatist philosophy have largely informed such work, typically represented by Heidegger  and Dewey .
There is a long-standing tradition of research and practice applying computational technologies in artistic contexts.
In this note we explore the design of an interactive system to support creative expression through movement and music for users who are not trained or experienced in dance or music making.
This led to a system called MoBoogie, an Android-based cell phone application designed for children to construct and manipulate music through dance and movement, allowing for an open-ended exploration of full body movement and creative dance and music experiences.
While designing MoBoogie, we strove to support a kind of proto-artistic expression.
That is, we did not seek an interaction that results in a perfected or finished product, but rather a space conducive to having an experience in the act of expressing.
Such opportunities have the potential to encourage a desire to engage in creative expression, and provide experiences that engage users in the skills used in such expressions.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Throughout the design process we were inspired by Dewey's  notion of expression.
When writing about artistic expression, Dewey defines acts of expression and objects of expression.
Here, we are concerned with acts of expression, which, he says, are a function of both mind and body.
An act of expression is not purely emotional or intellectual, but rather, it is purposeful and evokes emotion.
Expression begins with what Dewey calls an impulsion: a "movement outward and forward of the whole organism to which special impulses are auxiliary" .
An impulsion is differentiated from an impulse because it is something we respond to as a whole, rather than in part.
For Dewey, expression is ordered; it is a whole act that is carried through to completion.
This suggests that to respond to an impulsion by expressing something requires some level of skill, and that skill is to be achieved through experience.
In the case of MoBoogie, we want to explore how technology can help inspire people to seek opportunities to engage in such a process.
We aim to foster the ability to act in an expressive manner, even if the expression itself does not yield an object of expression.
This kind of action may help young people and non-musicians or non-dancers begin to feel the intellectual and emotional rewards of creative expression; which, in turn, may lead them to seek future opportunities for creative experiences.
BodySpace  allows users to control a music player by placing a device on different body parts.
While not musical in the traditional sense, Williams et al.
These last two systems closely resemble the creative expression we hoped to foster, and they speak to our decision to use Dewey's framework for acts of expression.
McCarthy and Wright  draw extensively on Dewey in their discussion of experience, and this discussion parallels Dewey's ideas about expression in many ways.
While there is a parallel between Dewey's artist/audience distinction and that of designer/user relationships in HCI, creating systems such as Blaine and Perkins' or MoBoogie require thinking about the experience of being an artist rather than viewing art.
Central to that process was the character of the feedback e.g., precise vs. ambiguous changes in music, and the ways and extent to which the phone was responding to their movements.
While visual interfaces with extensive information reduced the size and increased the precision of movements, interfaces with sound based feedback through the music fostered more open-ended, full body movements.
As they progressed, this engaged them in what we felt was the kind of increasingly engaging loop of creative movements for which we designed the application.
Though space limitations preclude us from elaborating on how we arrived at each specific element of the design, we found that these design considerations capture a number of tensions: between visual and audio feedback, between the desire to express one's self and apprehension over public performance, between precise responsiveness and allowance for open-ended movement.
The next section describes the system design in which we attempted to balance these tensions.
A MoBoogie user is presented with a screen divided into colored thirds.
The thirds represent, from top to bottom, a melody, bass, and drum track.
Each of these three tracks corresponds to one of the three axes of the accelerometer.
The music for each track is generated from sets of interchangeable, pre-recorded loops that change as the user moves.
The simple display was designed to reduce the dominance of visual attention allowing users to focus on their movements and the music.
When a user moves the phone, MoBoogie calculates the difference between subsequent accelerometer readings.
If the difference along an axis surpasses a threshold and the current loop has played for a given interval, the track will randomly switch to a different loop in the same location.
The interval and threshold values were selected based on user tests to provide a comfortable level of responsiveness, providing possibilities to gain a sense of control over how the music changed while still being open enough to allow free expression.
Furthermore, the mapping of physical axes to music tracks encourages investigation of the workings of the application  while maintaining a space for free expression.
The user may touch and hold a track to mute it, or swipe a finger over one of tracks to lock it and prevent it from changing.
These two features provide the opportunity for increased freedom of movement while at the same time allowing users increased control over the music.
To gain a better understanding of how people might experience MoBoogie, we recruited ~100 children, ages 8 to 13 from local summer camps and eight of their adult camp counselors.
While we developed the application primarily for children, we were also interested in how adults would respond to MoBoogie, so we gave opportunities for the counselors to participate as well.
One important goal of this work was to explore tensions around the perceived locus of creative expression; would users consider the music generated by the device or their dancing and bodily movements as the primary form of expression?
To explore the design qualities of the kind of creative expression we aimed to elicit, we conducted several small-scale user tests.
In the first test we let users play with existing cell phone applications to explore issues of creative expression through movement and music with the sensing mechanisms of a state of the art mobile device.
Some of these applications responded to users' movements, while others allowed them to explore novel methods of generating music with GUI-style interfaces.
In the second and third tests we used an early version of MoBoogie.
In these tests we observed users individually and asked them to complete a protocol that was later adapted and used for the evaluation .
They were led through a series of movements, for example, they were told to swing the phone like a baseball bat or conduct an orchestra.
Then they were asked to play with the phone and explore how to move and make music with it.
We asked them questions during and after the test.
The children were divided into groups of between 6 and 10, and each group was paired with two researchers.
The first gave a short explanation of how MoBoogie worked, while the second assisted in asking and answering questions while video-taping the session.
The children were then given the opportunity to play, move, dance, and create music.
At the beginning of their encounter with the app, the children were given a series of direct instructions such as "move as if you were conducting an orchestra" or "move as if you were boxing."
The instructions served to show the children how to use the app while providing them an opportunity to move as a group, hopefully reducing any anxiety associated with dancing or moving creatively in public.
After the direct instruction, children were asked first, to focus on their movements, then to focus on the music they were making, and then to play in whatever way they chose.
Researchers intermittently asked questions of the children, such as: "How are the sounds related to your movements?"
The authors conducted a group video analysis that focused on aspects of creative expression such as the character of the users' movement, the influence of the music, and how they related to the interface.
Each author made notes on Post-Its about patterns or behaviors they saw, which were then iteratively and collaboratively grouped using affinity diagramming.
The resulting thematic groups form the basis of the following findings.
Creating and Owning - There were multiple examples of spontaneous, undirected movement.
We observed users stopping listening to the music, dancing, stopping, listening, dancing, and, with each repetition, becoming more innovative in how they moved and interacted with the app.
Despite the examples of spontaneous, dance-like, movement, some users focused primarily on the music as the creative expression/product.
When discussing their experiences with the researchers, subjects often referred to the music they "made" or "my" beat.
These feelings of ownership resonate with our early design efforts as well as other studies such as Bott et al.
Though they were effectively triggering events that randomly mixed prerecorded samples, many participants felt that they were creating their own new music.
Socializing and Sharing - Though they were instructed to use MoBoogie individually, some users spontaneously formed groups and explored movement together.
There were instances of social contagion, where one participant would start performing a particular dance move and then others would follow suit.
Some groups formed conga lines, moving the phones in unison.
Some users had participated in other camp programs in which they choreographed dances, so when they were playing with MoBoogie, they worked together and used pieces of their group dance.
In some instances, counselors organized spontaneous "danceoffs", wherein groups would organize in a circle and take turns dancing for each other .
We observed numerous examples of users sharing the music playing on their phones with others.
In fact, the ability to record and share what they had made was among the most requested feature for future iterations.
Users also watched other users, either to see what were acceptable ways to move, or to respond to other user's movements.
Some users made specific comments about why the sharing was important to them.
One user claimed that sharing the music with others was a way to share what he had "created."
This creation was something to be proud of, even if there was not complete control over the music.
Participants readily participated in co-creating dance moves, but they were reluctant to co-create the music.
For example, one participant would hold her phone up to a friend's ear, but when the friend reached for the phone, she would pull it back and prevent the friend from changing or manipulating her music.
This reinforced the sense of individuality and creative ownership described by participants.
As described above, one central tension was whether the locus of creative expression would be seen as the music or as the movement.
The themes below help explicate users' perceptions and experiences of the relationship between the music and their movements.
Learning and Playing - Heidegger describes a distinction between present-at-hand to ready-to-hand  in the use of tools and artifacts.
We saw something that appears to be related to these phenomena, but differs slightly.
Users often started off with simple shaking or swinging, listening closely between each motion.
After they were asked to try familiar actions , they would complete the motion and then listen intently.
As they became familiar with how the application reacted to their movement, they stopped listening between every motion and started actually dancing  more fluidly, using the phone not as an interface for movement and music construction, but more as what appeared to us to be inspiration for creatively expressing themselves through dance and music.
Users spent a significant amount of time and effort trying to understand how the application reacted to their movements.
This was true of the earlier user tests; however, in earlier tests, these manipulations were mostly conducted in a fairly mechanical fashion through simple, one-dimensional movements like horizontally swinging an arm from left to right.
When using this version of MoBoogie, these explorations were done in a richer and more creative fashion through full-body moves.
Here we return to the discussion of Dewey's definition of an act of expression.
Users engaged in purposeful choices regarding both music and movement.
These choices began with an impulsion, or a full body impulse.
Often, they could not pinpoint the nature of their impulsion, but they did feel a sense of ownership over the music as well as the movement.
They had the urge to share their expression with others.
These observations indicate that MoBoogie has the potential to foster creative whole body musical expressions among users.
The ambiguity surrounding the nature of that expression is potentially its greatest strength .
Users are not tied to an object of expression or a precise input scheme, but are free to experiment with the expression through open-ended whole body movements.
Our way of designing for bodily engagement was therefore not about trying to shape the interaction towards specific kinds of movements but rather about an overall process of letting dance and music interact to form a creative experience.
This can be described as engaging users in a positive loop of dancing that occurs as the music changes along with their dance moves, and as their moves are guided by the music they are instantly creating.
This reinforces a feeling of being in sync with the music.
MoBoogie was designed to provide opportunities for users to engage in creative expression; however, it does not encourage or demand that this expression result in the creation of a final or polished object of that expression.
Our evaluation shows that the open-endedness in how users could use their bodies to interact with the system together with the use of pre-recorded musical elements created a joint space in which users could creatively engage in movement and music.
MoBoogie users were compelled not only to use the application, but also to repeatedly explore how the application worked in conjunction with their movements.
This continuous discovery and exploration may have added to a sense of ownership and the desire to share their music and movements with others.
The inclination of users to share what they created indicates that the next logical step in the development of MoBoogie is to create an outlet for objects of expression.
This could be done through a social networking service of some kind that would allow users to record their work to share with others.
The tradeoff, in this case, might be twofold: first, while the creation of objects of expression may engender a more authentic act of expression in Dewey's terms, second, it may also shift the emphasis from expressing to creating an object of expression, losing some of the spontaneity of the act.
Focusing on the object of expression would also likely force that object into existing categories .
