Multi-touch gestures are prevalent interaction techniques for many different types of devices and applications.
One of the most common gestures is the pinch gesture, which involves the expansion or contraction of a finger spread.
There are multiple uses for this gesture--zooming and scaling being the most common--but little is known about the factors affecting performance and ergonomics of the gesture motion itself.
In this note, we present the results from a study where we manipulated angle, direction, distance, and position of two-finger pinch gestures.
The study provides insight into how variables interact with each other to affect performance and how certain combinations of pinch gesture characteristics can result in uncomfortable or difficult pinch gestures.
Our results can help designers select faster pinch gestures and avoid difficult pinch tasks.
The frequent use of pinch gestures makes them worth studying.
Although many studies have been conducted to investigate the accuracy and speed of traditional pointing methods, the performance of multi-touch pinch gestures is not well understood despite their ubiquity.
Furthermore, our current knowledge about pointing is insufficient, since pinch gestures involve a more complex sequence of movements than simple taps.
Therefore it is relevant and timely to look into the ergonomics and biomechanics of such gestures so that we can avoid suboptimal and awkward pinch gestures in future interfaces.
This paper contributes an empirical investigation of multitouch pinch gestures with a focus on performance.
Using an experimental methodology previously used for the study of rotations , we investigate the effects of variables such as direction, distance, angle and position.
When considering ergonomics, we report the variable combinations that result in gestures that are physically impossible to do with a single continuous movement.
The results characterize the effects of within-gesture variables for pinch gestures and can be used to draw implications on gesture design.
Multi-touch displays enable a large number of onscreen touch manipulations, with two-finger rotation, translation and pinch being among the most common.
In this note we focus on the pinch gesture, which is a common way to zoom in maps and pictures, or to scale objects.
We define a pinch gesture as a lateral motion expanding or contracting the finger spread .
The pinch gesture has become ubiquitous in touch user interfaces.
Multiple researchers have examined pinch gestures with different purposes.
For example, when examining userdefined gesture sets, the contraction and expansion of fingers is often used as a gesture for zooming .
This result has been confirmed in tabletops  and public display settings .
Others have investigated the transfer functions between a pinch gesture and the output on a multi-touch display .
Single touch targeted movements have been studied extensively with Fitts' law to establish the rate of transmission for different input techniques .
In terms of multi-touch movements, Zhao et al.
The model shows that there is a linear relationship between movement time and index of difficulty.
This paper focuses on the performance and ergonomics of pinch gestures.
Interaction with pinch gestures is based on coordinated movements of the hand and arm.
Ergonomic issues need to be addressed when determining the performance space of pinch gestures or we risk creating interfaces that may lead to discomfort.
Spreading the fingers in a pinch gesture involves abduction of the fingers.
If the end target of the gesture is at a large distance, this means that the users must abduct their fingers to outer positions, which is ergonomically inadvisable .
Moreover, the expansion and contraction of the thumb and index finger also requires the major and minor knuckles to rotate.
For example, Lozano et al.
These factors may affect the performance and physical difficulty of different multitouch gesture sets.
The experiment in this paper is based on previous work by Hoggan et al.
Their results showed effects of rotation diameter, spatial location and direction on movement time and ergonomic difficulty of multi-touch rotation gestures.
This paper furthers this research paradigm by investigating the pinch gesture instead.
By moving the tablet to different sectors, we simulated the effect of a larger display.
The number of levels for each factor was selected based on the size of a previous experiment , and by balancing out coverage of the design space and participant fatigue.
The participants sat on a chair positioned so that the participant's navel was leveled with the grid center and 5 cm from the grid edge.
All lateral and anterior movement of the participants' upper torso was restricted.
Participants performed all trials on a 24.13x18.57 cm Apple iPad 2 tablet.
The software used in the experiment recorded movement onset and finger touch-lift events, along with each contact on the table of the thumb and index fingers.
We conducted a within-subjects experiment to investigate the performance of single-handed dual-finger pinch gestures.
The dependent measures were trial completion times and ergonomic failure rate.
We study the effects of Angle, Direction, Distance, and Position, which cover most of the design space of pinch gestures on a surface.
The experiment explored the design space systematically, within an aimed movement paradigm, as in related work .
Participants had to place the thumb and index finger of their dominant hand on two circles.
They then had to expand or contract the fingers towards the target circles .
The factors described above determined the position of the target circles.
Each gesture was repeated three times as quickly and accurately as possible whilst ensuring that there was no loss of contact between the fingers and display.
Unsuccessful trials triggered an audio alert for the participants.
The participants had two chances to complete each trial correctly.
If the trial was too uncomfortable or considered "impossible", it could be skipped.
Participants had to touch a target marker on the edge of the display in between trials to `reset' posture and avoid cross-trial transfers.
Grid position determines the center point of each gesture.
We recorded 18,539 trials in total, for which we analyze duration and ergonomic failure rate.
Trials that were deemed "impossible" and trials in which there were contact losses are used as an index for an ergonomic failure rate.
Overall, 26.8% of the trials produced ergonomic failures.
The mean time per pinch gesture was 2.6 seconds.
Repeated-measures ANOVAs of duration and ergonomic failure rate revealed many significant main effects and interactions of the factors.
The most noteworthy results are discussed below and the rest are left to future reports.
As the pinch distance increases, so does the duration of the gesture and its ergonomic failure rate.
This is somewhat expected for time, but not for failure rate.
This could be explained by considering the abduction of the thumb and index finger.
Abduction  beyond a certain outer limit is very difficult to maintain, which can lead to contact losses during the gesture.
Although we only tested two distances, the optimal maximum extension will likely be below 90mm.
All angles used in the experiment were achievable.
However, the effect of the starting Angle differed in duration and ergonomic failure rate.
For duration, larger starting angles resulted in longer durations than small angles from 0 to 22.5.
For ergonomic failure rate, starting Angles of 0 and 45 led to significantly more failures than 22.5.
Interestingly, a crossover in duration between contracting and expanding directions was observed for the 22.5 angle, as can be seen in Figure 2.
This result also echoes results from Hoggan et al.
This result parallels what Hoggan et al.
The combination of both results is strong evidence to consider carefully the ranges of finger extension in any dual-touch manipulation.
It also suggests that further investigation of non-direct mappings between finger distance and zoom or scaling might result in increased efficiency and less ergonomic failures.
Contracting pinch gestures are, in general, faster to complete and ergonomically easier than expanding pinch gestures, probably because the average rotation amplitude of the index finger interphalangeal joint is lower for contraction than expansion .
The ergonomic literature suggest that movements that significantly deviate from a neutral position should be avoided .
Together with our results, this means that there is an advantage in selecting contracting gestures when possible, since stability and precision are required towards the end of the movement,
However, if the interface requires a pinch gesture at an angle beyond 22.5, the effect on duration is reversed.
Designers might want to consider avoiding these angles, or combinations of rotation and pinching that can turn beyond the recommended angles.
Additional experiments combining pinch with other gestures such as rotate and translate are left for future investigation.
Contralateral pinch gestures at the closer end of the display are the slowest with the most ergonomic failures.
These areas should be avoided for pinch gestures with the dominant hand, especially for expanding gestures.
Ipsilateral pinch gestures at the distant corner of the display are the least ergonomically problematic, but close ipsilateral gestures are faster.
This finding can potentially be leveraged by tabletop application designers to trade off efficiency and efficacy.
However, designers should also take into account the extra duration of the homing arm movement to reach those areas, which our data does not account for.
Furthermore, the movement required to reach the distant ipsilateral area of the display involves, besides wrist and finger muscles, the anterior deltoid  and higher levels of shoulder flexion are required to reach across the body , which might result in additional sources of fatigue.
This paper successfully applies the within-gesture variable methodology used by Hoggan et al.
Like multi-touch rotation gestures, withingesture variables such as distance, angle, direction and position have a significant effect on movement time and ergonomic failure rates of pinch gestures.
However, not all parameters are equally important and not all subsets of gestures are equally prone to ergonomic failure.
These findings can help application designers choose gestures that are easier and faster.
The results in this paper complement those by Hoggan et al.
However, further work is required to address more generalizable models of complex motor gestures that account for combinations of actions , and different user postures .
