Computer-supported fitness interventions for adolescents have the potential to improve adolescents' attitudes and perceptions about physical activity through peer influence and interpersonal accountability.
Past research has explored the potential of interventions based on competition and social-comparison mechanisms.
We present a new approach: school-based, pervasive social fitness systems.
We describe one such system: StepStream, a pedometerbased microblog we designed and deployed for four weeks with 42 US middle school students.
StepStream users improved their attitudes about fitness and increased their sense of social support for fitness.
The least-active students also increased their daily activity.
We show that our schoolbased social fitness approach performed comparably in attitude and behavior change to more competitive or directcomparison systems.
These results expand the strategies available computer-supported fitness interventions.
Our school-based social fitness approach to everyday adolescent health shows the potential for social computing systems to positively influence offline health behaviors in real-world settings.
One recent area of focus is pedometer-based fitness systems.
These systems automate data tracking, provide pervasive access to fitness data, and work to incentivize increased physical activity.
In general, youth-focused fitness systems in HCI have been designed to provide competitive or social comparison-based motivation.
These experiences are typically facilitated within a small group of close friends or a coach-led competition.
However, these approaches have some limitations.
Competition-based systems may motivate only top performers, providing little motivational support for other participants .
Participants in school-based fitness deployments that employ rewards and direct competition often return to predeployment activity levels after the removal of the deployment system .
Systems that leverage strong ties for close friends may not be able to reach a large number of students and are limited to cliques where there is at least nascent interest in improved physical fitness.
We see an opportunity for a different approach: schoolbased pervasive social fitness systems.
These systems, embedded in existing school and community practices, can leverage scalable, non-competitive social interaction to catalyze positive perceptions of physical activity and social support for fitness, while remaining grounded in the local environment.
Evidence from previous school-based fitness systems and social behavior change theory gives us reason to expect a school-based social approach might prove valuable, particularly the potential of non-competitive social support to enhance collective efficacy and observational learning.
To more fully understand the potential and possible limitations of this approach, we created a school-based microblog and pedometer system for middle school students.
We deployed our system--StepStream--for four weeks to 42 students attending the same US middle school in the Spring of 2013.
During the deployment, students wore wireless pedometers daily, accessed the system's website from home and at school, and met weekly at the school to use the website and socialize with each other.
As we will show, StepStream users improved their attitudes towards physical fitness and increased their sense of social support for fitness through the course of the deployment.
In this paper, we show how the design features of the StepStream deployment motivated a key population: low-
Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Publication rights licensed to ACM.
We show that our school-based social fitness approach performed comparably in attitude and behavior change to more competitive or direct-comparison systems, and we expand the strategies available for fitness deployments beyond competition and direct social comparison.
StepStream wasn't perfect--convincing students to log on from home proved more difficult than we anticipated, and overall step count improvement was modest.
However, our school-based social fitness approach to everyday adolescent health shows the potential for social computing systems to positively influence offline health behaviors in real-world settings.
Mueller's "exertion interface" concept , has been shown useful in lab and classroom settings.
For example, Berkovsky et al's Play, Mate!
However, there is little evidence that short-term exposure to exertion interfaces has significant long-term attitude and behavior change benefits .
In response, HCI health researchers have called for more focus on theory-based attitude change as a metric for success, rather than relying on short-term activity gains .
MacVean and Robertson's iFitQuest system  is an example of an exergame explicitly designed to increase self-efficacy for adolescent fitness.
Students played mini-games that encouraged them to run and jump around a common playing field.
The iFitQuest study showed encouraging improvements in participants' self-efficacy for fitness, their belief in their ability to meet fitness goals.
However, the sensor data indicated a novelty effect over time, with students gravitating to lower-intensity games as the study progressed.
Adolescent fitness systems in HCI seek to motivate behavior change through attitude change, while leveraging self-efficacy or social comparison theory.
Related systems generally fall into three categories: exertion interfaces, pervasive social systems outside the school context, and school-based competitions.
In this section we describe related systems and theories of behavior change, and then identify opportunities in theory and system design.
Most adolescent fitness studies in HCI focus on developing self-efficacy: the confidence an individual has in his or her ability to achieve a fitness goal .
Originally developed and validated for adults, self-efficacy is also an important component of adolescent-focused fitness interventions .
Social motivators may be especially salient for youth, as adolescents are particularly sensitive to peer opinion.
We highlight two common social motivation theories: social comparison and social support.
Social comparison theory proposes that people are motivated to adjust their behavior based on how others view them .
Thus, the theory suggests that adolescents will adjust their behaviors in a setting where they can compare to peers and superiors.
This tactic can have both positive and negative results.
For some, social comparison provides the boost they need to `keep up' with the crowd.
For others, social comparison may become demotivating, especially if the perceived average of others in a cohort appears unobtainable  .
Social support theory offers another social motivation strategy, arguing that positive social encounters and discussion are likely to lead to sustained behavior change .
Peers, parents, teachers and other people in childrens' lives can provide social support in many ways; prior work in HCI has focused on companionate , esteem  and informational support  .
Other adolescent fitness systems in HCI focus on direct social comparison.
These systems have mainly been deployed outside the school setting, focusing on small groups of close friends.
Chick Clique, for example, allowed up to four girls to see their own progress and that of three close friends .
Participants in the study wore pedometers and entered their step counts into the system.
These steps were immediately visible to other participants.
Chick Clique proved encouraging; the girls in the study felt supported and motivated by the social presence of their close friends.
However, such small-group systems may be challenging to scale: group selection appears to be important, youth must already have a supportive peer network willing to engage in direct comparison, and no such system has yet tackled the complexity of shifting friendships and relationships over time.
We have seen the benefits of the school as deployment site for adolescent fitness systems in our own work.
In 2009 and 2010, we studied one such system: a pervasive pedometer competition called the American Horsepower Challenge, or AHPC.
Developed by Humana Games For Health and sponsored by the Humana Foundation, the American Horsepower Challenge took real-world fitness data and fed it into a virtual environment .
Students could then access the game website, which allowed each student to check their individual progress as well as the progress of the school .
Both AHPC and iFitQuest are examples of a successful school-based deployment leveraging social support.
In our AHPC study, students averaged an increase in their step counts by approximately 900 steps .
However, we found the school-based structures that made the AHPC successful were largely emergent; the most successful schools were ones where teachers created social rituals and local incentives .
Moreover, we found the overtly competitive approach likely undermined the desired results.
For example, some schools chose physically fit students to represent the school and increase the likelihood of winning.
That said, the social benefits of the school as a fitness deployment site have thus far been underexplored in HCI.
As our study of the AHPC shows, the schoolhouse provides a structured way for students to engage with fitness technology, providing rituals, space and time for deployments .
By engaging students as members of a social institution situated in a local community, schoolbased deployments can leverage existing social structures to promote sustained fitness practices .
Prior systems designed for social comparison typically allow students to directly compare their activity with other individuals.
Observational learning effects, however, would tend to emphasize a comparison to the group.
Combined with collective efficacy, there is an opportunity to reflect group success back to the individual as a motivational tool without competition.
Additionally, few persuasive health systems design for peer social support , opting instead for the more egocentric model of social comparison.
Instead, pervasive social computing systems based on peer encouragement and social support, powered by observational learning, offer the potential to reflect a group sense of expertise and success back on the individual.
Based on our analysis of previous systems  and the social behavior change theory literature, we designed our own system: StepStream, an after-school program and social network site for middle school students to share and encourage everyday lifestyle activity.
StepStream allows participating students to check their daily and historical step counts, read congratulatory messages about the their fitness accomplishments and the accomplishments of their peers, write their own messages, and play a collaborative game.
Previous systems have taken advantage of self-efficacy theory to motivate behavior and attitude change.
However, other parts of self-efficacy have been underexplored in social computing systems for health.
Over the years Bandura and others extended self-efficacy to encompass a variety of social influences on individual behavior.
We highlight two: collective efficacy and observational learning effects.
A direct corollary to self-efficacy, collective efficacy describes an individual's "beliefs about the ability of a group to perform concerted actions that bring desired outcomes" .
Collective efficacy takes the social nature of individual effort into account, and focuses on the extent to which a student believes higher fitness levels are normal and achievable by her and her classmates.
Self-efficacy theory also offers a potentially less demotivating alternative to social comparison: observational learning effects.
Through observational learning  individuals can change their own behaviors in reaction to changes in social norms, rather than just comparing themselves to high-performing individuals .
Critically, observational learning effects have been shown to be especially effective in adolescent-focused behavior change applications  and adolescents' selfefficacy is more tied to an emerging sense of agency associated with their transition to adulthood .
To understand how adolescents from our target community think about technological approaches for encouraging everyday physical fitness, we conducted several formative participatory design studies over the course of three years.
In these studies, we worked with 112 students age 11-14 in small groups to generate storyboards and skits for pervasive social health games.
We also conducted a multi-week pilot trial of StepStream, and redesigned the system based on participant use and feedback .
Rather than just deploy pedometers and our web blog, we leveraged the school-based nature of StepStream to blend online and offline interactions.
We set up weekly afterschool check-in meetings in the school computer lab so participating students could meet and hang out, supervised by study staff and a teacher from the school.
We limited participation to students in one school, so everyone viewing an individual participant's message or activity was someone in their close or peripheral social sphere.
Weekly after-school meetings were a key part of the system design, and directly inspired by our formative work.
The strongest theme to emerge from our formative work was students' desire for `social presence'--the sense that their friends and classmates would be available to play and chat.
Students in our formative studies told us repeatedly how much they valued live interaction and the sense that their friends and classmates were present in a social health system .
StepStream tracked step counts as a proxy for students' everyday lifestyle activity.
Pedometers have often been used in social fitness deployments for youth, and we wanted the physical computing portion of our system to be robust, familiar to users and easily comparable to previous work.
Students wore FitBit Zip pedometers that store 30 days of activity and have a battery life of 3 months.
Daily step counts were uploaded to the website through a base station positioned in a common area of the school.
In StepStream, we consciously incorporated social communication in the website design.
This, we hoped, would provide more opportunities for social support.
As soon as students logged in, they were taken to the social stream, where they could see other students' messages, records of games other students had played, and congratulatory posts for students who exceeded their own baselines on a given day.
This design inverts the common approach in social fitness applications for youth.
StepStream focuses on what friends are saying and doing within the system.
Unlike most previous systems, StepStream was not overtly competitive; it offered no rewards for outperforming other students and there was no common leaderboard for direct comparison.
The American Horsepower Challenge, for example, showed students how their school was doing compared to other schools, and focused on direct raw step count competition.
Chick Clique showed users their friends' raw step counts in a persistent list.
We carefully limited students' visibility into each others' progress.
StepStream generated congratulatory messages for each student who walked above their baseline average.
However, raw step counts were only visible to the person who walked them; students could not see each others' raw physical activity.
Instead, they saw and shared activity points.
Each student received 400 activity points for an average day's steps.
When a student walked more than their daily average  the system generated a congratulatory message in the social stream for all to see.
Others could not see exactly how much the student had walked, but could see the student's personalized achievement.
This allowed StepStream users to focus on personalized achievement and general awareness rather than competing directly.
Instead of direct social comparison, StepStream enabled an indirect means of observational learning--and made way for students to observe general trends and learn from them.
Students could use their activity points to play PuddleJump, a racing game we designed for StepStream based on our formative studies .
We hoped this game would create a common experience and be a reason for students to log in from home, creating a collective sense of achievement within & between in-person sessions.
Each gameplay cost an average day's points.
In the game, students raced through multiple levels, and must jump to avoid puddles in the road.
As they played, students collected "stepping stones."
Once the students had collectively found enough stepping stones, a new level in the game was unlocked .
The game was single-player, but students could choose to play the `with' up to three friends .
When the student finished the game, their friends also got any stepping stones the student found during gameplay, and the website generated a gameplay message mentioning the player and friends in the stream.
The StepStream study is part of a multi-year project aimed at engaging schools and students in an urban community around health and social computing.
As part of this larger project, we have worked with students likely to face adult obesity.
We have employed a variety of methods to understand students' preferences and reactions with respect to social systems for fitness, ending with a month-long deployment of the StepStream system.
Along the way we have collected and analyzed design concepts, system usage logs, focus groups and interviews.
In the first meeting , we conducted pre-intervention surveys and distributed pedometers.
We showed students how to wear the pedometers and then took them to see the base station  and instructed them to walk past it at least once per day.
During the first week, we collected students' pedometer data from the base station but did not give them access to the system website, so we could establish baseline activity levels and give students a chance to get used to the pedometers.
On the day before the second meeting, we created a baseline average daily step count for each student.
We took the mean of their daily step counts for days where they recorded more than 1,000 steps.
This allowed us to set a personalized baseline for each student.
In the second meeting, we met the students in the school computer lab and gave students access to the website.
Students logged in and we showed them the various features of the site.
This introduction lasted about 15 minutes, after which students were free to use the system, chat and hang out for the remainder of the hour.
The researchers reset and replaced any malfunctioning or lost pedometers, and walked around answering questions.
We also held the third and fourth meetings in the computer lab, giving students time to interact with the system and report broken or lost pedometers.
In these meetings, students generally gathered in four to five clusters and then logged into the site.
The computer lab had five rows of 10 computers each, so students were able to sit near friends and chat.
The researchers spent the bulk of these meetings replacing pedometers and resetting passwords for students.
In the final meeting, students took a post-intervention survey and we conducted a focus group to talk about their experiences during the deployment.
Several weeks later, we met with students again and conducted three smaller focus groups with 8-10 students each.
Forty two  students participated in the study.
The median age for participating students was 13, and most students were in the 6th and 7th grade.
Although we didn't collect income information from the students themselves, 72% of students at the school qualify for free or reduced meals from the Title I program, a US federal meal assistance program targeted at children in low-income households.
Based on self-report, students in the study are not significantly more overweight than national averages .
Thirteen students  qualified as overweight  .
However, the students in our study face higher than average risks of becoming overweight or obese.
They live in a majorityminority low-income medium-density urban community with low walkability.
Significant race-correlated health disparities exist in their local community; for example, in 2010 68% of Black or African American adults in the county were overweight or obese, compared with 52% of White adults.
Students' Internet & social media use mirrored national averages.
Students reported going online an average of 2.65 hours per day, and all but two students regularly accessed the Internet from home.
For comparison, the 2011 Pew Online Teen Demographic survey reported that 92% of 1213 year olds go online .
We conducted a four-week deployment of the StepStream system in Spring 2013.
We met with students as part of an after-school program once a week, for a total of five meetings.
Before the first meeting, we set up a base station  and created accounts for each pedometer.
Each time students walked past the base station, the pedometers uploaded their steps.
In partnership with the deployment school, we created an official after-school program held immediately after school for one hour a week during the course of the deployment.
One teacher was present at each meeting as a representative of the school, but did not engage in the research activity and generally sat in the back of the room grading papers.
We distributed surveys before and after the deployment.
These surveys were designed to expose significant changes in participants' attitudes to physical activity, sports and fitness, as well as social support for fitness.
Our surveys are taken directly from prior work in physical activity promotion.
We also gave students a modified version of the "Social Support and Exercise Survey", a standard measure of peer social support for exercise.
To complement pedometer data, we surveyed students using the IPAQ measure for physical fitness, which asks students to report time spent exercising over the last 7 days .
These measures have been used extensively within the physical activity literature, and were first used in HCI by our previous study of the AHPC.
We drew our questions directly from the AHPC survey to facilitate cross-study comparison.
We compared pre and post surveys using the Wilcoxon Signed Ranks test for within-subjects designs.
We analyzed students' average steps per day, looking for overall improvement and correlations with other variables, such as baseline steps per day.
Following best practices from the physical activity literature, we imputed missing data using the baseline average  and performed repeated-measures ANOVA tests for significance .
After the deployment concluded, we conducted four focus groups: one with all participants, and three with smaller groups of 8-10 students each.
In the focus groups, we sought to understand whether or how StepStream changed the way students think and talk about health and fitness, and to better understand how they fit the deployment into their daily lives.
We focused on gathering students' individual experiences of StepStream, and we probed them to tell us about their use of the system outside of the weekly meetings.
We concluded by asking students what they would change about StepStream.
StepStream users reported increased enjoyment of physical activity and increased peer support for fitness.
Students used StepStream within and between our after-school meetings, and exercised regularly throughout the deployment.
Students enjoyed the game, but played it less often than we had hoped.
We also saw indications that participants with lower initial activity levels made the most improvement in step counts over the course of the deployment.
In this section, we report the results of our surveys, focus groups, and log data analysis.
Since health behavior change theories all focus on attitude change as a prerequisite to sustained behavior change, we were particularly interested to see how StepStream may have influenced students' perceptions of their own abilities, comparison to other students, and fitness in general.
Overall, the results from the surveys were encouraging.
Compared to a pre-deployment survey, StepStream users reported increased enjoyment of physical activity .
Social support indicators were also encouraging: overall, students were more likely to think of their friends as partners in their everyday fitness.
We asked about peer social support in the focus groups and free-response section of the survey as well, and students shared a variety of ways this social support manifested.
One typical such response came from a student who told us "My mom bought a pedometer and we walked together."
Another shared "Sometimes when you walk with your friends it's like more fun than doing it yourself."
Students also reported feeling a greater sense of fitness expertise as a result of StepStream.
Compared to the prestudy survey, students in the post-study survey reported that friends were more likely to ask them for ideas on how to get exercise .
One student even reported being mildly chastised for her enthusiasm:  "my teachers and family and friends were like stop ."
Another student told us that he valued the ability to connect with others similarly interested in fitness.
We saw no statistically significant changes in more deepseated or long-term attitudes, such as participants'
We also collected log data from the system including logins; articulated friend relationships and their changes over time; posting; even lurking.
We qualitatively analyzed students' messages using an iterative coding method where two researchers independently coded each message, then agreed on a common set of codes, and then independently coded a second time with the common code set.
We also performed descriptive quantitative analysis of logins and message frequency.
To analyze students' step data, we concentrated on a subsample of 21 students who ended the study with sufficient baseline and post-baseline data for analysis .
Critically, our subsample did not appear to be more active: average steps per day for the sub-sample  were almost identical to the overall average .
The in-the-wild nature of schoolbased fitness deployments means students may often lose or forget to wear their pedometers on certain days, and focusing on a sub-sample with more robust step count data is a common procedure in youth-focused pedometer-based deployments .
For example, in the AHPC only 66% of students qualified for step data analysis .
It is also possible that some of the increase in students' interest and enthusiasm could be attributable to participating in a pedometer trial itself.
However, the changes we did see were encouraging.
Adolescents' attitudes to social support for fitness are difficult to change, and statistically significant improvements in these attitudes do not always occur, even in otherwise successful systems .
In the AHPC, for example, students' reported levels of fitness enjoyment did not increase, and while students reported increased social support from teachers, social support from friends and parents stayed the same .
Meeting days also saw the highest non-meeting logins: 7 each, compared to an average of 3 non-meeting logins per day overall.
Web site activity continued regularly through each meeting.
Students sent an average of 7 messages per minute during these meetings, peaking at 9 messages per minute about 40 minutes in.
We gave no additional instructions during the meetings, and students could easily have logged in once and then abandoned the system for the rest of the hour.
We therefore interpret students' messaging activity as an indication of interest beyond doing what they were told.
As expected, some students posted messages about health.
1 in 10 messages was healthrelated.
However, a majority of the messages in StepStream were primarily phatic in nature, that is they conveyed little `content' but were instead intended for social grooming, identity presentation or emotion display.
Many messages were variants on `welcome' such as "HI ^ ^", "HI THERE!
Although they peaked in the first session, these `welcome' messages continued throughout the study.
1 out of every 3 messages was a `welcome' message.
We also saw evidence of inter-personal statements in the stream.
For example, some students even tried to start rumors of a relationship between two other students.
Students used StepStream naturalistically, chatting and playing with each other throughout and between in-person meetings.
We expand on these issues in the discussion section.
StepStream appeared to help those most in need of elevated fitness levels: those whose initial baselines were below the group average.
We found a moderate negative correlation between improvement over baseline and starting baseline .
The overall trend for all subjects was modest.
Students averaged 6137 steps/day in the baseline period and 6465 steps/day while using StepStream, but the difference was not statistically significant.
However students whose initial baselines were below the group average  improved their daily step counts by an average of 1,088 steps/day while using StepStream .
Similar improvements have been seen in adolescent pedometer programs in the health promotion literature; in these studies, an increase of more than 1,000 steps/day is considered significant, when combined with improvements in psychosocial indicators.
It is also common for these studies to show significant improvement for lower activity youth with only modest improvements overall .
In our previous work, students in the AHPC improved their daily step counts by 828 steps compared to baseline, and the lower 50% improved their daily step counts by 1364 steps/day .
The social stream in StepStream was an even mix of social discussion, physical activity posts and gameplay reports.
A total of 502 posts were generated during the deployment.
Students could create free-form public messages in the website using a prompt box at the top of the page, and the system also generated posts when students played a game, marked each other as friends, and when students had an above average step count.
Students used the website the most during the after-school meetings.
65% of logins occurred during the meetings, and 35% of logins occurred between meetings.
System use followed a consistent pattern during the course of the deployment.
We also looked at the pedometers as physical manifestations of the StepStream system.
Students took their pedometers  with them everywhere they went.
In our observations and focus group discussions, students reported being emotionally attached to their pedometers.
Upon entering the computer lab for the weekly meetings, we were often met with a short line of students with devastated faces, apologizing for having lost their pedometers.
Overall, about half of the students in the deployment lost their pedometer at one point.
This was partly due to the nature of pedometer deployments; any youth-focused pedometer deployment will result in substantial pedometer loss.
Students wore their pedometers in some surprising places.
One student told us "I went to bed and when I woke up I had like 112 steps.
And I was like `I sleepwalk!'"
Another student kept her pedometer close at hand during the night "It was like the middle of the night and I needed to go to the bathroom, so I put it on to get steps.
So I went to sleep and then I woke up and it was on."
Gameplay was the one area in which StepStream performed below our expectations.
While students played PuddleJump throughout the challenge , gameplay mainly took place during the in-person meetings.
Overall, 70% of games were played during the meetings.
Students played the game an average of 5 times each over the course of the deployment.
Students also used the social aspect of the game: they had the option of choosing up to three friends to play with, and after the first day, all gameplay sessions were `with' at least one other user.
However, we designed the game to be played two to three times per week; we hoped to extend the social presence of the in-person meetings into asynchronous, daily use.
While students enjoyed playing the game, they seemed to prefer not to play it when others were not around .
This result was disappointing because we were counting on the game to generate a sense of collective efficacy outside of the weekly meetings and to act as a light incentive to wear the pedometer daily .
Fortunately,  the meetings themselves became important events for establishing collective norms.
This result may be due in part to students' persistent desire for live interaction.
We knew from formative work that participating students would value live interaction and that the social presence of their peers would play a key role in the system's success .
This preference for live interaction is reflected in our focus group discussions and surveys as students told us they wanted their friends to be in the game with them live, and in person if possible.
Students may also simply have tired of the game; we are not professional game designers or game researchers, so the game itself was merely designed to be "good enough" to act as a diversion and give students another reason to log in between meetings.
We based the game's design on similar games created by students in our participatory design studies , but one simple game may never have been enough to generate significant interest on its own.
In focus groups and surveys, many students told us they wanted to see a greater variety of games in future versions of the system.
In our own future work, we plan to take this suggestion to heart.
Overall, our study results provide evidence that the combination of the StepStream website, pedometers and regular after-school meetings created a system that allowed students to socialize around fitness.
Our study also raises interesting questions about school-based social fitness systems for youth, particularly around the social support mechanisms at work, the in-person component of the deployment, and the promise of "hanging out" as a strategy for sustained long-term use.
Users of StepStream reported higher levels of peer social support for fitness after using StepStream.
We suspect a combination of features within StepStream itself may have impacted students' sense of peer social support.
There were at least two features of the website designed to generate this sense of peer support: automated congratulations and gameplay success messages.
Students who logged into StepStream were likely to see a mix of messages from other students, congratulatory messages for other students, and successful gameplay sessions.
We suspect that this combination of real messages and physical activity reports created the feeling that students were hanging out around fitness, if not actually talking about fitness.
Students' messages made the site feel alive, and the gameplay and step achievement posts weaved in health-focused content.
This in-person social support complemented social support occurring outside the schools.
In our surveys and focus groups, students told us they made time to exercise together and talked about the system with each other on occasion.
However, offline discussion alone was unlikely to be responsible for the level of change in social support we observed with StepStream.
For comparison, in the AHPC-- which relied almost exclusively on offline means of social support--students reported little improvement in peer social support .
Taken together, the social support implications of StepStream are heartening; students can be reluctant to talk about health topics, and a system that can engage them without forcing artificial discussions may prove more sustainable in the long term.
To the extent that StepStream improved students' sense of social support and attitudes towards fitness, it seems to have done so because of the school-based meetings and students' time together.
While students engaged with the system daily by wearing a pedometer, about two thirds of website logins occurred during the three weekly one-hour afterschool meetings we held in the school's computer lab.
We designed these meetings to primarily be check-in sessions, where students could log in and check their steps, share a tip about how to get steps or an encouraging note, and seek help with pedometer replacements or repair.
But in the course of the deployment, we came to realize the meetings had a more significant role: as digital events and catalysts for blending online and offline social interaction, with fitness as a backdrop.
The meetings occurred right after school, and students arrived energized and ready to socialize.
Although we were not able to observe every conversation, the general topic of these conversations was often anything but health.
Mainly, the meetings seemed to serve as a space to "hang out" with friends and classmates, with fitness in the background.
That students would use a social system for this grooming, chatting and play makes sense--hanging out is what adolescents do online .
However, StepStream was an important and constant backdrop in these meetings.
Most students left StepStream open for the whole hour, checking in with the social stream.
They posted messages and played games throughout the meetings.
Students would break to chat with each other, then look back at StepStream and post or play another game.
Students were more than simply attending a meeting, or sitting alone together glued to their screens.
If anything, during the meetings students were together together: hanging out in small groups throughout the computer lab while monitoring and responding to the social stream.
StepStream shows the promise of a social computing approach to make important attitude and perception changes in the short term.
We designed our system to encourage peer social support and observational learning effects without relying on direct social comparison or competition, and this produced encouraging increases in key attitude, social support and physical activity measures.
By letting adolescents `hang out' around fitness without proscribed `top-down' motivational techniques, we provided opportunities for observational learning effects.
However, a month-long study is not long enough to show true health behavior change or to encounter longer-term novelty effects.
Students' self-efficacy for fitness remained largely unchanged, and providing a non-competitive sense of collective efficacy  provided more challenging than we'd anticipated.
Additionally, our oneschool study design means we can't directly compare competitive and collaborative design features within our deployment.
Still, our study shows that a blended online/offline social approach to adolescent fitness offers an encouraging model for others, and a valuable lesson for longer-term studies.
To truly test this approach, we hope to run a multi-site deployment over a longer time span.
This will let us manipulate individual design features and test the long-term potential of our approach.
If adolescents adopt a social health system into their normal "hanging out" behaviors, such systems have the potential to shape those interactions and foster new norms.
This is a delicate process: StepStream took a light touch, advocating personal improvement and discouraging competition.
It's possible that a more proscriptive or overtly curricular approach might be rejected, but when done appropriately, these sorts of `digital events' hold great promise for youthfocused social health deployments.
In carving out a blended online/offline space with fitness as the backdrop, StepStream appeared to foster a `new norm' around fitness, and targeted opportunities for observational learning.
Students observed each other playing the game, hanging out in the fitness system, and being congratulated for getting steps and internalized this.
While hanging out together, students undoubtedly engaged in social comparison, but without leaderboards or step counts, their opportunities for competition were  reduced.
Additionally, StepStream appeared to avoid the initial novelty effect often associated with the introduction of a new technology, in which participant interest in the system wears off and activity slows.
Within the study period, we saw little evidence of such a novelty effect .
Sustaining middle school students' interest over even a month-long program can be challenging.
However, structuring our deployment as an after-school program allowed students to periodically re-connect, and allowing students to hang out without `doing work' within the meetings may be a key reason for students' continued engagement through the end of the deployment.
In this paper, we introduce school-based social fitness systems for everyday adolescent health.
Our approach-- embedded in existing school and community practices that privileges collective awareness over competition-- leverages observational learning effects and collective efficacy, and blends online and offline activity and interaction through website and intervention design.
Bandura, A. Self-efficacy: Toward a Unifying Theory of Behavioral Change.
Baranowski, T. and Jago, R. Understanding the mechanisms of change in children's physical activity programs.
Physical activity motivating games: virtual rewards for real activity.
Biddiss, E. and Irwin, J.
Active video games to promote physical activity in children and youth: a systematic review.
Healthenhancing physical activity and sedentary behaviour in children and adolescents.
Taken Out of Context: American Teen Sociality in Networked Publics.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, ed.
About BMI for Children and Teens.
Social Support Measurement and Intervention.
Assessment of Health Games in Secondary Schools: An Investigation of the American Horsepower Challenge 2009-2010.
Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA, 2010.
Festinger, L. A Theory of Social Comparison Processes.
Physical activity attitudes, preferences, and practices in African American, Hispanic, and Caucasian girls.
Hardman, C.A., Horne, P.J., and Fergus Lowe, C. Effects of rewards, peer-modelling and pedometer targets on children's physical activity: A school-based intervention study.
Health, DeKalb County Board of.
2010 Status of Health in DeKalb Report.
A controlled evaluation of a school-based intervention to promote physical activity among sedentary adolescent females: project FAB.
Klasnja, P., Consolvo, S., and Pratt, W. How to evaluate technologies for health behavior change in HCI research.
Lubans, D.R., Morgan, P.J., and Tudor-Locke, C. A systematic review of studies using pedometers to promote physical activity among youth.
Macvean, A. and Robertson, J.
Understanding Exergame Users' Physical Activity, Motivation and Behavior Over Time.
How Individuals, Environments and Health Behaviors Interact: Social Cognitive Theory.
In Health behavior and health education: theory, research, and practice.
Design strategies for youth-focused pervasive social health games.
The work of play: supporting a pervasive health behavior change intervention for us middle school students.
Exertion Interfaces: Sports over a Distance for Social Bonding and Fun.
Designing for Spectators and Coaches: Social Support in Pervasive Health Games for Youth.
The Place for Ubiquitous Computing in Schools : Lessons Learned from a School-Based Intervention for Youth Physical Activity.
Measuring physical activity in children with pedometers: Reliability, reactivity, and replacement of missing data.
Saelens, B.E., Sallis, J.F., Black, J.B., and Chen, D. Neighborhood-based differences in physical activity: an environment scale evaluation.
Sallis, J.F., Prochaska, J.J., and Taylor, W.C. A review of correlates of physical activity of children and adolescents.
Peer Models and Children's Behavioral Change.
Encouraging physical activity in teens Can technology help reduce barriers to physical activity in adolescent girls?
This is not a onehorse race: understanding player types in multiplayer pervasive health games for youth.
Adolescents' development of personal agency: The role of selfefficacy beliefs and self-regulatory skill.
