Prior knowledge is a critical resource for design, especially when designers are striving to generate new ideas for complex problems.
Systems that improve access to relevant prior knowledge and promote reuse can improve design efficiency and outcomes.
Unfortunately, such systems have not been widely adopted indicating that user needs in this area have not been adequately understood.
In this paper, we report the results of a contextual inquiry into the practices of and attitudes toward knowledge management and reuse during early design.
The study consisted of interviews and surveys with professional designers in the creative domains.
A novel aspect of our work is the focus on early design, which differs from but complements prior works' focus on knowledge reuse during later design and implementation phases.
Our study yielded new findings and implications that, if applied, will help bring the benefits of knowledge management systems and reuse into early design activity.
Due to the large volume and diversity of design knowledge produced even for a single project, designers must rely on external methods of storage and retrieval .
This has spurred much research into systems that enable rapid access to and promote reuse of prior design knowledge; as such systems may improve design efficiency and outcomes .
For example, case-based repositories represent an important class of design knowledge management system .
A second class of system allows the decisions and rationale relating to the construction of design artifacts to be captured .
The decisions can be traced to support redesign and maintenance efforts.
Emerging systems such as Wikis and blogs also show promise for managing design knowledge.
However, despite many technical advances and availability of these systems, they have not been widely adopted for managing design knowledge.
A key reason, we believe, is that user's needs and practices for managing and reusing design knowledge have not yet been adequately understood.
In this paper, we report results and share anecdotes from a contextual inquiry that investigated the practices of and attitudes towards managing and reusing design knowledge.
The study consisted of semi-structured interviews with 14 professional designers and an online survey receiving 28 responses.
Participants came from several creative design domains such as graphics, industrial, and interaction design.
One novel aspect of our work is our focus on the creative design domains, where problems are often ill-defined and there is no one right solution .
We chose these domains because they are widely practiced, would benefit from improved knowledge management, and have been understudied relative to the engineering domains for knowledge management and reuse.
Another novel aspect is our focus on reuse in early design activity, which differs from prior works' focus on the late design and implementation phases.
Analysis of the interview and survey results yielded several important findings.
Prior knowledge is a designer's greatest resource .
For example, during the early phases, designers draw from their own and others' prior knowledge to formulate the design problem, generate ideas, and evaluate alternatives .
By "prior knowledge," we are referring to the concepts, lessons, and representations captured in the myriad artifacts created or collected in the process of solving a particular design problem as well as in the designer's own memory.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
These and other findings were distilled into actionable implications that can improve the design of knowledge management systems.
Though not exhaustive, the implications provide a large and important step towards bringing the desired benefits of knowledge management into the early stages of creative design work.
Case-based systems bring computational processes to design repositories .
With effective representation and indexing, these systems aim to help designers find solutions from prior problems that may be useful in solving a relevant new problem .
Despite many technical advances, these systems have not been widely adopted by designers in the creative domains, especially during the early conceptual stages.
We believe this indicates a lack of understanding of the work practices and needs of designers in these domains.
Design rationale systems allow decisions reflected in design artifacts and related deliberations to be captured and traced .
This information can then be later accessed to support maintenance and re-design efforts.
However, it is not clear how well this type of information would meet the needs of designers during the conceptual stages of creative design, when they are generating new ideas and seeking inspiration.
Activity capture systems focus on the capture and retrieval of design history during the current project .
For example, the Workspace Navigator captures context along with design activity for an ongoing project in a dedicated physical workspace .
The captured information can be accessed for understanding the design process and recalling decisions.
In contrast to this class of system, our work focuses on understanding how designers collect and reuse knowledge from their own and other's prior projects.
Reuse of existing components and patterns is a common practice in many engineering design domains; especially to solve complex problems  and assist in decision making .
Though supporting systems address many issues related to using prior knowledge, their focus is on the detailed design and implementation phases, when designers are seeking solutions to defined problems.
However in early design, the problems are typically ill-defined and designers are usually seeking directions rather than specific solutions.
In sum, many types of design knowledge management systems are available, but few, if any, have been widely adopted for creative design.
We argue this is because such systems 
To help overcome this obstacle, our work contributes understanding of designers' attitudes toward and practices of knowledge management during the early stages of creative design.
Design knowledge typically refers to the conceptual ideas, lessons, and representations captured in the design artifacts created or collected when solving a design problem .
In the engineering domains, reuse of design knowledge offers many benefits.
For example, solutions from prior problems can provide useful starting points for new problems , serve as references for comparing or explaining new ideas, and provide access to relevant design discussions .
Reuse can improve design efficiency and lead to higher quality outcomes .
However, how well the benefits of reuse can be realized depends on how well prior knowledge can be stored, accessed, and retrieved .
Reuse is important in all stages of design, but it can be particularly beneficial during the early, conceptual stages.
For example, reuse can improve the quality of decisions made in early design, on which subsequent decisions will be layered , and can help foster divergent thinking .
Though reuse has been well-studied in the engineering design domains, there has been little research on knowledge management and reuse practices in the creative design domains, especially for conceptual design activity.
Our work contributes to filling this gap.
Our goal is to better understand the benefits and practices of reuse during the early stages of the creative domains and how systems can be developed to allow these benefits to be better realized.
Existing knowledge management and reuse systems for design fall into four broad categories: organizational memory systems, case-based design and rationale systems, activity capture systems, and component repositories.
Organizational memory systems record solutions to welldefined and recurring problems and users can interactively navigate the repository to find needed information .
However, these systems do not support storage, retrieval, or reuse of the myriad artifacts typical for creative design.
Researchers have conducted several studies of knowledge reuse in the engineering design domains.
For example, studies have probed the efficacy of case-based reasoning methods  and component-based design .
The impact of stored cases on decision making has been studied in software development , architecture , and manufacturing .
However, these studies have focused on late design or implementation phases when the requirements are better understood.
It is therefore not clear how well the results from these studies translate into the early stages of the creative domains due to differences in the types of problems addressed  or the outcomes desired .
Outside the immediate scope of knowledge management, there have been many other studies of design practice.
For example, Herring at el.
Researchers have also investigated the use of different representations of ideas during the Web design process , the communication patterns of design teams , and the social aspects of team work and the communicative roles of design artifacts .
In contrast to these and similar studies, our work is original in that we are studying designers' practices of managing and reusing design artifacts across project boundaries, and focusing on the early stage of the creative design domains.
Of the 14 designers interviewed, 12 came from three large design firms with a long-standing reputation for innovation.
The other two designers were highly competent freelancers.
The interview had 18 questions, probing designers' beliefs and strategies for creating, gathering, storing, and retrieving design artifacts.
Interviews were semi-structured in that a script was used but tangents and anecdotes were especially welcome.
Table 1 shows a sample of the questions asked.
Twelve of the 14 interviews were conducted in the designer's own workspace.
This allowed them quick and easy access to physical and digital artifacts 
One interview was conducted via phone and another via e-mail due to distance.
Interviews lasted at most 90 minutes.
At the onset of an interview, we asked a designer to briefly describe a recent or ongoing project, and to share artifacts and anecdotes from this project as much as possible to aid our conversation.
For example, one designer was working passionately on a new drug delivery device, another was engaged in designing a new line of luxury watches, and a third was creating banking interfaces for a youth audience.
To gain further information after the interviews and collect additional stories of knowledge management and reuse, we created an online survey.
The survey had 17 questions similar to those asked in the interviews.
The listed responses were informed by the interview results, but participants could write in their own.
Five questions were open-ended, e.g., describe your strategy for organizing design artifacts; describe a recent occurrence when design artifacts from past projects were reused, etc.
A link to the survey was posted on newsgroups, forums, and listservs.
Twenty-eight responses were received over two months.
Interview and survey participants indicated their primary domain of expertise as: graphic design , industrial design , interaction design , mechanical design , product design , communication design , and other .
This sample was highly experienced, with most having five or more years of professional experience.
The purpose of our user study was to develop deeper understanding of the practices of and attitudes towards managing and reusing knowledge during early design and to extract implications for supporting systems.
Our study consisted of interviews with 14 professional designers and a Web survey which received 28 responses.
Remuneration was $20 for an interview and a $10 gift card for a survey.
Generation and Collection How would you characterize a design idea?
How many ideas are typically generated?
What types of artifacts do you collect to help with ideation and from what sources do you collect them?
Storage and Organization What strategies are used for storing ideas?
How important is it to maintain a record of your past ideas?
How do you choose which ideas to store?
Retrieval and Reuse For what purposes do you review or reuse artifacts from your own or others' prior work?
From where are the artifacts retrieved?
How do you decide which artifacts to retrieve?
Experiences What experiences do you have with technologies that assist in long term management of artifacts, if any?
From your perspective, what would be the benefits and obstacles for adopting and using such a system?
Sample of the questions asked during an interview.
Similar questions were asked on the survey.
We report results of our study structured according to the main steps of knowledge management in early design; idea generation, collection of artifacts, storage and organization, and retrieval.
Though discussed separately, the steps often occur in parallel and their boundaries are not always clear, as design is complex and often ad-hoc.
We discuss results by drawing collectively from the surveys and interviews.
A core activity of the early design process is generating numerous design ideas .
Designers interviewed in our study reported that they typically generate a very large number of conceptual ideas for a given design problem, averaging about 50-100, but ranging anywhere from 2 to 2000.
For example, one designer was developing a new forward-looking website for a large public University, and generated a minimum of 5 "very different" directions.
Consistent with the concept of divergent thinking , designers expressed that generating multiple ideas helps them understand the problem, prevents fixation, triggers new thought, and creates "a rich landscape of possibilities."
Interestingly, most designers considered ideas relatively easy to come by, it was choosing the most promising ideas that required the most work and creative effort.
An idea was usually regarded as a `new direction' relative to the existing ideas rather than incremental modifications.
An idea was typically expressed via one or more sketches, storyboards, wire diagrams, physical mockups, or scribbled text phrases.
These artifacts were used for exploring the design space, communicating ideas to users, clients, and team members, and reflecting on the evolving idea space.
External artifacts included physical products exhibiting a particular function, digital photos or videos of anything that caught a designer's eye , visual templates, and color patterns and styles.
These artifacts were collected from diverse sources such as the Web; online repositories such as Flickr, Google Image, and eBay; design forums and blogs; paper magazines; and shopping excursions to local stores.
Finally, designers searched project-specific and external artifacts created or collected as part of previous projects.
I end up digging back through and even try to find connections.
I don't do it enough, but when I do it, I find it very valuable just to go back and look through my notes from previous projects because so often there's some connection between just what I was thinking or some spark."
Generating ideas typically requires substantial background research .
Designers stated that they spend many hours foraging for materials that inspire, support, or elaborate on new design ideas.
For example, Figure 1 shows a sample of the materials collected by a designer for inspiration.
This behavior reflects the perspective that creative insight comes from the prepared mind rather than `aha' moments .
Designers struggled to express precisely what they were looking for, but they described wanting to be aware of current visual trends, product styles, and new technologies.
This would help form new connections within the design problem and trigger new thought.
Designers characterized this type of background work as necessary and important.
Generating ideas in a vacuum was regarded as being too risky .
The quantity of artifacts collected ranged from a few dozen to several hundred.
Indeed, better support for this type of example finding behavior offers a rich opportunity for future research .
Foraged materials came from three sources; the current project as it unfolded, myriad external information sources, and internal project repositories.
As might be expected, project-specific artifacts included design briefs, user research profiles, competitive analysis reports, and client communications.
There was a strong and consistent belief that one of the best sources of inspiration was their own or colleagues' prior work.
Reasons included that these artifacts were created or collected by people they know and trust and that they would likely be of high relevance, e.g., the artifacts were from a past project for a continuing client or from a similar project for a new client.
It is difficult to separate past projects from external sources because artifacts stored with past projects may themselves have been collected from external sources.
Designers indicated that project-specific artifacts for the current design problem help them frame the initial problem space.
But they use artifacts from past projects, coupled with their own experience and intuition, for generating and evaluating solution possibilities.
Unfortunately, despite the value that designers placed on these artifacts and their desire to forage through them, this was rarely done due to ineffective access, organization, and sharing capabilities.
We also asked designers what additional information or artifacts they want to store, but currently do not or cannot.
Responses centered on wanting to store decisions, rationale, communications, and processes related to design artifacts as well as descriptions of how those artifacts were used or referenced in later projects.
For example, one designer said he wanted to have "records of brainstorming sessions and communication history" as a means for recalling decisions.
This is partly due to business reasons , but mostly because designers believed that these materials had immense intellectual value.
Even if they were unsure as to when or why these artifacts might be later retrieved, they were simply too valuable to discard.
For example, we observed entire bookcases , filing cabinets, and shoeboxes filled with design artifacts from prior work.
A lot of times even old artworks that might have communicated well but not as well for a certain phase or a certain presentation, I will keep it because I know I will reference it back...there's something that didn't pass but might work well with this presentation or ... be useful for certain things.
So I never throw anything away."
We asked designers to explain their strategy for organizing design artifacts.
The most common strategies spanned a mix of personal/shared and physical/electronic dimensions.
Personal-physical strategies included the use of paper notebooks in which designers sketch or write fleeting ideas and attach or glue supporting artifacts.
It also included the use of personal shoeboxes and office cabinets to store artifacts .
Shared-physical included the use of dedicated storage rooms and large cabinets accessible to all.
Personal-electronic strategies included the use of folders on personal work machines, blogs, e-mail, and bookmarks.
For example, electronic folders were typically organized using some combination of project title, date, and type of material .
Figure 3 shows how one designer uses a mail client for organizing design artifacts as this allows for people search.
Shared-electronic included use of centralized file servers and enterprise Wikis.
A designer typically employed a mix of strategies, varying by personal preference, project, and company.
Table 4 summarizes the distribution of survey responses.
One important problem with existing organization strategies is that there is no consistent structure or naming scheme.
Regardless of the strategy, designers universally called it `messy.'
For example, this is how one designer described a typical folder: "This is a mess.
How many `final' video, `final'
Table 3 lists the common reasons cited in the interviews and the number of related responses from the survey for why designers store design artifacts.
Aiding with future ideation, capturing the design process, and benefiting other designers were the main motivations.
Design artifacts thus clearly serve purposes over time that move well beyond the reasons for which they were originally created or collected.
For example, designers expressed that they would often review the collection of artifacts  to gain a sense as to the overall process that was followed and use that process as a template for the current project.
An interesting outcome relates to what was not mentioned.
Designers eschewed the reuse of solutions as-is from prior work as solutions for the current project.
Reasons included the persistent need to present clients with truly fresh ideas,
Reason for Storing Artifacts Responses Aid idea generation 20 Capture the design process 21 Share with and help others 19 Facilitate story telling 14 Reinterpret design ideas 14 Reflect on design process 13 Other  7 Table 3.
Reasons for storing design artifacts .
Reason for Retrieval Responses Aid idea generation 22 Gain inspiration 18 Share design information with others 16 Compare ideas 14 Reinterpret past design ideas 13 Reflect on design process 10 Search for expertise 7 Facilitate storytelling 7 Other  3 Table 5.
Reasons for retrieving design artifacts .
Retrieval and Search Figure 3.
Project artifacts organized in an e-mail client, allowing the artifacts to be searched by person.
Designers reported many reasons for retrieving artifacts from prior projects.
Table 5 summarizes reasons given in the interviews and the related responses from the survey.
Primary reasons included aiding the current process of idea generation, gaining inspiration for new ideas, comparing new to previous ideas, and proactively sharing information with colleagues.
Another problem relating to the use of centralized servers and Wikis is that designers were extremely apathetic about the prospect of having to upload all of their artifacts.
It was just not exciting or enjoyable, causing a severe lack of motivation.
Besides, clients compensated them for design and innovation, not for post project administration of files.
However, it was very intriguing that each firm represented in our sample was engaged in significant efforts to improve storage, organization, and reuse of design artifacts.
These efforts involved adapting the use of enterprise-scale Wikis and formalizing naming conventions and link  structures.
This confirms that there is a need and desire in the design community to improve the practice of knowledge management.
But it seems clear that such attempts will be largely unsuccessful without overcoming the contradictory work habits and motivational issues described here.
What we found is that it's very difficult to have that sort of management.
It's a social problem because we've got quite a bit of flux and there's new people coming and going ...
It's a technical problem because information storage and retrieval is quite a huge task and there's quite a few projects happening at any one time so even finding those assets and getting people's behavior to adjust to the need to go through certain steps to document, it's not easy... when you're doing a project that doesn't feel like its immediately relevant because you can't easily anticipate the benefit that might come from you, personally documenting this for somebody else two years from now."
There were also several findings that were unexpected.
First, Table 5 reveals that designers seldom retrieve prior artifacts for the purposes of storytelling  and reflecting on the design process.
Yet these were two of the main reasons that designers stated that they store artifacts in the first place .
The discrepancy is likely because only the artifacts themselves are stored, without the associated stories or surrounding process.
Though perhaps fresh in the mind of the designer at the time of storage, this knowledge dissipates over time .
Second, and perhaps as a consequence of the prior finding, we found that designers often review artifacts as a proxy for determining who to talk to about a particular design issue.
For example, a designer may browse CAD files  to determine who has experience with designing a particular type of medical device.
This was described as being more efficient and informative and less intrusive than broadcasting a company-wide request email.
For types of design artifacts, we found that project-specific documents, digital photos, sketches, Web pages, diagrams, and user profiles were retrieved most.
But it is difficult to attach a precise value to the retrieval of any particular material or retrieval instance.
Value must be thought of from, and perhaps measured by, a more holistic perspective, e.g., gain in personal design skills, more satisfaction with the process, improved camaraderie among designers, etc.
These types of measurements should be considered in future studies of design knowledge reuse in addition to the measures of process efficiency and solution quality.
Search was described as a necessary, but complex task for finding desired artifacts.
For electronic stores of design artifacts, designers searched using the built-in capabilities of their tool or operating system.
Searches were performed using known attributes of the desired item, the associated project, or people involved.
Table 6 summarizes responses as to which attributes are used most often.
Unfortunately, however, search was generally regarded as ineffective.
One reason is because designers often store information on their local machine for convenience, making those artifacts inaccessible to colleagues.
This ineffectiveness often translated into the use of ad-hoc strategies.
Here is what one designer reported doing: "First I try to find the project or bucket folder I would save it in.
If I can't find it that way, I search for it in spotlight.
If it is a recent file and I know the application I made it in, then I'll open the application, go to open recent file, then when I find it I'll do save as and change how I saved it so I will be able to find it easier next time."
Personal information management systems such as  offer one approach, but do not address designers' need to share artifacts or capture the process and history.
A second reason is that designers were often unsure as to exactly what they were looking for and therefore struggled to come up with appropriate search terms.
A third reason is that available search tools are text-based, whereas most designers are visual thinkers.
Visual search techniques such as CueFlik  would help, but techniques that would allow for visual foraging would seem most effective.
Despite being regarded as imperfect, search was still the dominant method used for accessing prior work.
We found that design knowledge management and reuse is much more of a social process than we had anticipated, or that the research literature, especially on case-based design, has indicated.
First, designers expressed wanting to browse other designer's prior work more than their own.
This can be explained in part because a designer's work is already embedded in their own memory, experience, and intuition.
Indeed, though it varied, many designers described looking back at their own work "rarely" and "almost never."
However, designers described a genuine and professional interest in wanting to access, review, and learn from other designers' artifacts and processes, describing design as a continual process of learning and improvement.
Also, we found that designers would be open to this type of sharing, assuming they could control what was available and who could access it.
Designers saw this as a form of reciprocity, e.g., to "pay it forward - help others who have helped me."
Second, designers reported that they often retrieved and shared design artifacts with colleagues that might benefit.
For example, as shown in Table 7, 18 survey respondents stated they share their own design artifacts with colleagues  or other designers on a daily or weekly basis.
This type of proactive sharing is initiated in response to knowledge requests broadcasted via email , reflections after group brainstorming, or meetings in which designers communicate progress and central obstacles for ongoing projects.
The shared artifacts then prompt conversation and facilitate storytelling.
Finally, the few designers who made the effort to locate artifacts on a central repository or Wiki were unaware of whether others ever directly accessed or benefited from the artifacts.
This could explain in part why other designers expressed lack of motivation for following their lead; they were unable to connect the effort of their contribution to the benefit that others received from it .
Reuse of prior knowledge is extremely valued in early design activity.
Designers collect and evaluate many types of information from many sources in early design.
Studying relevant prior work and existing designs is often the first and most important step .
We found that designers value prior design knowledge for generating ideas, gaining inspiration, becoming aware of new trends, and reflecting on past processes.
A critical point is that designers were not seeking specific solutions - they were seeking directions.
The main implication is that designers genuinely value reuse, but better systems are needed to meet their needs.
Designers want to know about the `stories' associated with artifacts.
Yet this is what designers were most interested in retrieving.
We learned that designers would compensate by trying to seek the person familiar with the artifacts so they could inquire about and learn the associated stories.
One implication is that a DKMS must provide a lightweight means for capturing stories with artifacts.
The challenge is that this always requires some effort from users, effort they would usually prefer to direct elsewhere .
One possible solution would be to link communication applications such as e-mail and IM clients to the DKMS .
This would allow designers to add lessons and stories with artifacts and reference these in the communication, which would be created and sent anyway.
Archiving these communications would require minimal individual effort but will create a rich and evolving shared external memory.
Capture the process in which design artifacts were created.
One valued reason for looking back at prior design artifacts was to gain a sense of the overall design process.
For example, designers look back to reflect on their style of design or to use it as a template for an ongoing project.
Storing artifacts alone fails to capture the design process.
A DKMS should provide a means for conveying the overall design process associated with the artifacts in a lightweight and informal manner.
For example, a DKMS could convey process through a structured visualization.
Discussions surrounding artifacts could be captured through the use of tagging or lightweight commenting mechanisms.
Search is necessary, but insufficient for retrieving prior knowledge.
Search and rigid navigation will therefore not suffice; as also learned in .
For a DKMS, in addition to search, one solution would be to employ the use of powerful information visualization and interaction techniques to support rapid visual foraging .
This would allow designers to explore the knowledge repository at their desired level of detail and reduce the burden of having to recall specific file names or locations.
Designers prefer to look at other designers' artifacts more than their own.
A designer almost always stores all of their artifacts created or collected for a project, but rarely revisits them.
Reponses about revisiting their own artifacts were "Not done much", "Rarely", and "Almost never".
In contrast, when asked about reusing other designers' artifacts, responses were similar to "Oh yes, definitely," "Absolutely", and "I do it all the time".
Designers feel that they know their own work well and therefore do not need to revisit it.
But looking at other designers' work allows them to gain new perspectives, compare and reflect on their own process, learn new design skills, and even find inspiration.
This finding indicates that a DKMS must emphasize the collaborative and social aspects of knowledge management much more than has been done in prior work.
For example, systems should integrate incentives for making past design artifacts available, perhaps borrowing techniques from .
Systems should also allow a designer to connect her sharing with the value gained by others, as this can also motivate contribution .
As designers often found desired artifacts by considering `who has done that,' a DKMS should enable people-centric navigation and search.
Also, the systems could allow social sub-networks to be formed as a way to facilitate repeated access to relevant artifacts from a person and as a means for reducing information overload.
Sharing of design knowledge is common and not limited within the design team.
Designers share design artifacts with colleagues in response to `requests for help,' and other designers via design blogs and forums.
Sharing is used to spark creativity, communicate ideas, and receive feedback.
A few designers even felt obligated to share their artifacts as a means of repaying the broader design community.
One implication is that a DKMS should allow designers to proactively flag artifacts for each other.
For example, to respond to a knowledge request sent via email, a designer could flag relevant artifacts in the DKMS, and a notification could be sent to the intended person.
Systems would thus support not just retrieval, but a form of lightweight pushing.
Inconsistent organizational style impedes reuse.
The use of messy and inconsistent organizational strategies severely hindered retrieval of prior design artifacts and discouraged reuse.
For example, even when designers did upload their design artifacts to a shared repository, others were unable or unwilling to decipher the organizational or naming strategy used.
This creates frustration and further impedes reuse.
A DKMS cannot assume or impose the use of consistent naming schemes or folder hierarchies.
Relevant design knowledge is often too disconnected from the project at hand.
Designers felt that prior projects were the most relevant sources of design knowledge, but reported relying on the Web and other sources  as these were immediately available.
Several of the designers reported that their company had some form of a design knowledge repository, but they had no idea where it was!
The implication is that a DKMS should be integrated with commonly used tools for the particular design domain.
For example, if a designer is creating a concept sketch with a design tool, other sketches from relevant or selected projects should be immediately accessible in the DKMS.
Alternatively, a DKMS should provide an applicationspecific overview of related artifacts when invoked from the tool.
Fourth, effective design knowledge management systems can encourage reuse  but it is important to point out that the ultimate benefit must come from designers' willingness to contribute to and use such systems .
For example, while almost all designers in our study expressed interest to review relevant prior designs during the conceptual stages, one designer considered this too constraining at this stage.
Even if a DKMS can greatly reduce the effort of finding relevant prior knowledge, it is the designer who is responsible for deciding how and when to use such systems in practice.
Finally, our methodology utilized contextual interviews and surveys because this was most appropriate for meeting our goal of understanding practices of and attitudes towards managing knowledge in early design.
Other methods such as in-situ observation could be employed to complement our results by providing more quantitative insights, e.g., which specific artifacts are accessed and how often.
Design knowledge management is a very complex topic and studying it typically requires a narrowed lens.
Our work is no exception.
First, we studied a subset of design domains; including but not limited to graphics, Web, interaction, and industrial design.
We chose these domains as they have been studied less in terms of knowledge management and reuse relative to the engineering design domains; but also produce large amounts of knowledge that must be managed.
The domains studied are unique in the types of artifacts created , but similar in that designers need to manage artifacts, processes, and decisions.
Our findings and implications thus complement study results in other design domains, e.g., .
Second, our research focused on early design activity, when designers are striving to generate novel design ideas.
The type of knowledge created, collected, and applied at this stage is informal, ad-hoc, and rapidly changing rather than captured in well defined specifications .
Our implications and systems derived from them are therefore most applicable for managing this type of early design knowledge.
Such systems will likely differ from those used for managing knowledge related to detailed design and implementation .
Further understanding is necessary to identify how such systems could be cross-referenced and integrated .
Third, we focused primarily on a particular form of design knowledge - ideas and representations expressed through all of the artifacts, examples, mockups, etc.
Though there was some intersection, our work did not explicitly investigate other forms of knowledge such as design rationale  and communication .
Any design knowledge management system must also reflect lessons from studies of these other forms of knowledge.
Designers routinely draw upon prior knowledge to solve complex design problems.
Such knowledge is often drawn from the ideas and representations captured in prior work.
It is also unclear how well emerging collaborative repositories such as Wikis will meet the specific needs of managing design knowledge.
The overarching contribution of this paper is that it offers further understanding of the practices of and attitudes toward knowledge management and reuse during the early stages of design in the creative domains.
Our findings were distilled into actionable implications for the development of knowledge management systems.
Though not exhaustive, applying these implications can move this class of system closer to real-world adoption.
We believe such systems have immense potential for improving design efficiency and the quality of design outcomes.
