This study employs hierarchical cluster analysis, strategic diagrams and network analysis to map and visualize the intellectual landscape of the CHI conference on Human Computer Interaction through the use of co-word analysis.
The study quantifies and describes the thematic evolution of the field based on a total of 3152 CHI articles and their associated 16035 keywords published between 1994 and 2013.
The analysis is conducted for two time periods  and a comparison between them highlights the underlying trends in our community.
More significantly, this study identifies the evolution of major themes in the discipline, and highlights individual topics as popular, core, or backbone research topics within HCI.
Since 2004, however, the field has grown at a high pace, due to the introduction of extended abstracts and electronic proceedings.
The popularity of mobile phones, ambient media and social technologies has shifted HCI research towards mobile and social interaction, while new issues involving humans, such as crowdsourcing and privacy have taken the spotlight.
We attempt to study and analyze HCI research foci transitions and reflect on their drivers and present status.
Our analysis relies on techniques from hierarchical cluster and graph theory, through the use of co-word analysis artifacts such as strategic diagrams and graphs.
Co-word analysis is part of the co-occurrence analysis methods.
It is a widely-applied bibliometric approach to describe the interactions among concepts, ideas, and problems and to explore the concept network within a scientific area .
A recently published paper of a co-citation analysis of the CHI proceedings  focused on authorship aspects of the proceedings and citation metrics for papers.
Here we focus on the concepts that reflect our community and their evolution over time.
Co-word analysis rests on the assumption that a paper's keywords constitute an adequate description of its content as well as the links the paper established between problems: two keywords co-occurring within the same paper are an indication of a link between the topics to which they refer to .
The presence of many co-occurrences around the same word or pair of words points to a locus of strategic alliance within articles that may embody a research theme .
More importantly, by measuring the association strength of terms produced in a specific scientific discipline, co-word analysis allows researchers to identify key patterns and trends within the area .
It is assumed that a specific keyword with adequate frequency refers to a particular research topic while a cluster or pattern of keywords refers to a specific research direction or research theme.
A change of research theme  as well as the change of research topics within a research theme implies a paradigm change.
The CHI conference has a long and rich history.
In the last 20 years alone its 3152 publications have shaped and defined the field of human-computer interaction, making CHI a flagship HCI venue characterized by its strong multidisciplinarity.
In this paper, we are interested in mapping how the landscape of the HCI field has evolved, as reflected in the record of CHI publications.
This simplified categorization makes it challenging to understand the field's evolution as a whole.
As the authors note, it is difficult to assess "marginal" contributions that are hard to precisely place.
HCI is indisputably a multidisciplinary field requiring a more in-depth analysis to reveal the intricacies of its evolution.
To contribute towards understanding the big picture of HCI evolution, we analyzed CHI's publications keywords since 1994, and for our convenience, we divided them into two 10-year periods: 1994-2003 and 2004-2013.
Publication rights licensed to ACM.
The main concepts we use in our analysis are keywords, networks, and clusters.
Keywords appear on research papers, and two keywords appearing on the same paper are linked to form a network  of keywords.
Analysis of this network helps us identify clusters .
Our co-word analysis reduces a large space of descriptors  into a network graph .
Co-word analysis has been widely utilized in mapping the conceptual networks of a diversity of disciplines, like business intelligence , consumer behavior , software engineering , patent analyses , biology , education , and library and information science .
As such, it makes sense to apply this technique to enrich our understanding of CHI.
Given a network of keywords, we can use network analysis and strategic diagrams to characterize the field.
Keywords and clusters have different properties, depending on how they are linked with each other.
For instance, bridges between two nodes  in a network perform a valuable function in allowing communication and facilitating the flow between otherwise isolated regions of the network, also known as structural holes .
The greater the number of bridges associated with a research topic or theme, the more it serves to connect otherwise isolated research topics or themes.
Keywords with a great number of structural holes serve as the backbone of the whole network.
If these are removed from the network, the whole network will collapse into a number of separated and unconnected research sub-fields, therefore losing its scientific cohesion and identity.
When computing a network's core-periphery structure, it becomes possible to determine which nodes are part of a densely connected core  and which are part of a sparsely connected periphery .
Core nodes are typically well connected to peripheral nodes.
Peripheral nodes are sparingly connected to a core or to each other.
In a keyword network it is expected that, as the body of knowledge grows, peripheral nodes become core nodes, thus allowing for the emergence of new peripheral nodes.
Research topics with a high core value delimit the main body of HCI knowledge, and represent important knowledge-growing points of the main body of the field.
In our work we rely on two graph theory concepts to map the field of HCI: density and centrality, defined as follows:  Density, or internal cohesion, measures the strength of the links that tie together the cluster of keywords making up the research theme.
This can be understood as a measure of the theme's development .
Density offers a good representation of the cluster's capacity to maintain itself and to develop over the course of the time in the field .
The higher the density, the more coherent the cluster is and the more likely it is to contain inseparable expressions;  Centrality measures the degree of interaction of a theme with other parts of the network .
In other words, it measures the strength of external ties of a research theme to other research themes, and can be referred to as a measure of the importance of a theme in the development of the entire research field .
The greater the number and the strength of a theme's connections with other themes, the more central this theme will be to the whole network .
By combining both concepts we then created a strategic diagram.
Strategic diagrams are two-dimensional plots that have been widely used in prior co-word analysis studies .
The x-axis shows the strength of interaction between a specific research theme with others .
The y-axis reflects the density of the research theme, or the internal cohesion of a specific research theme .
The location of a given research theme within this strategic diagram characterizes the theme in the context of the whole discipline: Quadrant I : both internally coherent and central to the research network in question.
Known as the motor-themes of the discipline given that they present strong centrality and high density; Quadrant II : coherent but low centrality themes.
These themes are internally well structured and indicate that a constituted social group is active in them.
However, they have rather unimportant external ties resulting in specialized work that is rather peripheral to the work being carried out in the global research network; Quadrant III : weakly developed with marginal interest in the global research network.
These themes have low density and low centrality, mainly representing either emerging or disappearing themes; Quadrant IV : weakly structured themes.
These are strongly linked to specific research interests throughout the network but are only weakly linked together.
In other words, prior works in these themes is under-developed yet transversal, with potential to be of considerable significance to the entire research network.
The ACM digital library provided us data on the papers published at the CHI conference between 1994 and 2013.
According to Bradford's law , a fundamental theory in bibliometric analysis, a small core of publications will account for a sizeable portion of the significant literature in terms of citations received , while attempts to gather 100 percent of it will add articles to the core at an exponential rate .
Considering the relevance of the CHI conference to the field of HCI, an analysis on the CHI articles should enable us to attain a fair overview of the field's development: a total of 3152 CHI articles  were published between 1994 and 2013, containing 16035 keywords  .
For a small number of papers we had to manually extract the keywords from the electronic version of the manuscript  using a script.
The sample was split in two datasets of ten years each, to investigate the paradigm change in HCI over the past 20 years.
The number of the papers published in 1994-2003  is smaller than the number of the papers published in 2004-2013 , suggesting that the research in HCI has grown considerably in the last ten years.
We manually standardized the keywords through synonyms mergence  and filtered broad items  .
The synonyms mergence considered the top 2029 keywords that appear at least twice in a dataset with regard to the merging of singular and plural forms of nouns, gerunds, nouns, abbreviations and acronyms.
The frequency of keywords follows a power-law distribution  with an alpha of 3.46 , indicative that the research structure of HCI in the past 20 years is a scale-free network, a network where a small number of popular nodes  act as hubs connecting other concepts.
These hubs shape the overall network, which in this case reflects the intellectual structure of HCI represented by and through keywords.
This scalefree characteristic suggests that a small number of popular keywords can capture major research directions and major influences in the field .
Therefore, in our analysis we retained only those keywords which appeared more than six times during 1994-2003, or more than 14 times during 2004-2013.
With fewer but popular keywords we could then reliably characterize the entire network of keywords.
First, we conducted hierarchical clustering using Ward's method with Squared Euclidean Distance as the distance measurement .
We adopted a supervised clustering method to reach as many clusters as possible while maintaining content validity and cluster fitness .
Each cluster represents a research theme or subfield .
The top-3 most frequent keywords are shown in bold, and are used to label each cluster .
In Tables 1 and 2 we show for each theme:  Keywords: the set of keywords that constitute this theme;  Size: the number of keywords in the theme;  Frequency: how often, on average, a keyword in this theme appears in our dataset;  Co-word frequency: how often, on average, two keywords in this theme appear on the same paper;  Cohesion coefficient: measures the extent to which when a keyword of this theme appears on a paper then another keyword of this theme also appears on a paper.
Indicates the similarity or dissimilarity of keywords in a theme.
Themes with higher cohesion coefficient are more developed or bridging research themes ;  Centrality: the degree of interaction of a theme with other parts of the network .
We calculate a localized version of this metric using the standard value 2 for the K-step reach.
Thus, our centrality metric evaluates how the keyword connects all other keywords that can be reached through 2 connections;  Density: measures the internal cohesion, or the strength, of the links that tie together the cluster of keywords making up the research theme .
To minimize the possible bias caused by the different sample sizes of the two periods, when calculating the overall network density, we rely on a binary version of the keyword cooccurrence matrix.
This matrix only uses values 1  or 0  to characterize every pair of keywords.
We constructed two strategic diagrams to visualize the cohesion and maturity of the research themes in HCI, using the centrality and density of each cluster as proposed by .
Comparing the intellectual structure of other fields , HCI lacks motor themes, and has lots of under-developed, but transversal research themes .
We also calculated the overall network density for each network, to analyze whether the whole research field became more cohesive or not.
The overall density of the HCI intellectual map has increased from 0.148 in 1994-
For each of the two periods in our datasets we constructed a granular network of keywords using the following procedure.
Each keyword is represented as a node in a graph, and we link together keywords that appear together on a paper.
In Figure 6 and 7 we show the result of this process for each of the two periods of analysis.
We note that in these figures the size of a node is proportional to the frequency of the keyword, and the thickness of links is proportional to the co-occurrence correlation for that pair of keywords.
Nodes of the same color belong to the same cluster, as presented next.
To reduce visual clutter we only show a subset of the complete networks, omitting weaker ties and isolated nodes.
A downside of this simplification is that, for example, "privacy" in Figure 6 appears to be disconnected from its own cluster.
This is simply because weaker links are not included.
Popular, core and backbone topics of HCI research We next focused our analysis on individual keywords rather than underlying themes.
Keywords or research topics were categorized as follows:  Popularity: how frequently a research keyword is used;  Core:  how connected is a research keyword with other topics;  Structural holes: how connected is a research keyword with other otherwise distinct topics, thus supporting the topic structure .
A higher core value indicates a topic that is well connected to other topics.
A higher structural holes count suggests a keyword that brings together otherwise isolated topics.
Topics with high scores on both of these metrics can be considered as the driving force for advancements in the field: without these topics, the field of HCI would be fragmented.
We show these results in Tables 3 and 4.
While previous work  has outlined major paradigms within the field of HCI, our work provides a novel perspective towards seeing the big picture within our discipline.
Our analysis has identified a number of research themes that are based on the co-presence of keywords on published papers - as opposed to a tacit interpretation of the field and its methods.
Thus, our findings reflect the research that was actually conducted and published, not how a researcher would subjectively or intuitively map the field.
Orthogonal to this analysis we add the dimension of time, and focus on analyzing our field in two distinct periods.
This gives us the benefit of hindsight when interpreting our findings for the first period , since we are able to validate our claims for that period on the subsequent period of analysis.
Yet some of these themes represent more traditional work that has remained relatively isolated .
In quadrant III we expect clusters that are emerging or fading.
Here we find theme B12 , which is most likely a fading theme judging by its relatively small frequency.
Finally, themes in quadrant IV are likely to be core and transversal for HCI.
Given that these large clusters have low density, they are evidence of field expansion during this time period.
We note that in the period 1994-2003 new conferences emerged from themes in this quadrant that went on to become mainstream, and so we may expect the same from these themes here.
In Figure 4a, quadrant II, we observe clusters A2 , A7 , A8 , A13  and A14  have a high density but low centrality.
This indicates that these research topics are fairly isolated from other research topics but internally well connected.
In particular, research in clusters A13 and A14 is less popular, and in hindsight we observe that in period 2004-2013 these clusters have disappeared.
In quadrant III, clusters A6, A10, A11 and A12 exhibit low centrality and density.
These are indicative of research topics that are either emerging or fading, with a higher likelihood of change.
In hindsight we can identify that one of these clusters was actually fading , while the other three emerging .
In quadrant IV, clusters A1 , A3 , A4 , A5  and A9  have high centrality but low density, sign of an important yet immature research topic in the field.
Their importance is evidenced by the frequency in which the keywords appear, often leading to more concrete research subfields.
In hindsight, new conferences were spun-off from these clusters: Ubicomp in 2001 and Pervasive in 2003 , and IUI in 1997 .
Surprisingly, we found no research topics in quadrant I, i.e., with a high centrality and density.
Closest to quadrant I we found cluster A5 , with a high centrality, reflective of an important area for CHI as a conference and HCI as a field in the early days of computer-human interaction.
Next, our analysis focused on specific topics or keywords.
A limitation of our previous analysis was that some of the research themes contained multiple and diverse keywords, making it hard to precisely characterize each theme.
Here we overcome this challenge by conducting a core-periphery analysis of individual keywords to more precisely map their role and evolution over time.
For the period 1994-2003, 14 of the 20 keywords appear as popular, core and backbone topics simultaneously .
This indicates a consistency between research interests, knowledge acquired, as well as effort to maintain the field.
In contrast, the research topics of "tangible user interface" and "user studies" are popular and core topics, but have a relatively low number of structural holes.
This indicates that whilst these research topics have the potential to prosper the field, they are not the `backbone' during the period.
As yet another example, research topics of "input devices" and "Fitts' law" are popular and backbone topics, but are not core topics, indicating that research on these topics has not yet effectively extended the knowledge landscape of the field.
Interestingly, research topics of "mobile computing," "empirical study" and "agents" were not popular or core research topics, but they played an important role in bridging different research efforts to establish an internally cohesive research field of HCI .
Lastly, despite the research on "two-handed interaction," "awareness," "hypertext" and "ethnography" effectively extending the HCI knowledge scope , a limited attention was given to these research topics .
In Figure 4b, in quadrant I we find B8 , the maturing theme relating to children and learning through the use of tangible and tabletop technologies.
Our analysis suggests that these themes are likely to become motor themes in the future.
In contrast, located in quadrant II are clusters B4, B10, B11, B13 and B14, clusters with high density but low centrality, well-focused and developed research topics, yet fairly isolated from other research topics.
Compared to the period of 1994-2003, we identified a higher number of keywords  as core research topics for the period of 2004-2013, indicating growth of the knowledge field of HCI .
Of the top 28 keywords, 18 keywords were simultaneously popular, core and backbone topics .
These results suggest that an increased attention towards these topics is required in order to develop and maintain the development of the field.
Many keywords are found to exist only in one group: "Fitts' law", "online communities," "HCI4D/ICTD," "interaction design," "usability," "crowdsourcing," "touch," "touch screens," "tabletop," "SNS," "wikis," "social computing" and "mobile computing."
These keywords indicate a paradigm change in the field, as they disappear or emerge.
In addition, despite their popularity, if the keywords are neither in the core or backbone topics, they are potentially a mismatch of research efforts.
In other words, most top research topics of the first ten years were replaced by new research topics in recent years.
The whole field witnessed a paradigm change during this period.
In parallel to the emergence of research themes, there are others that decline or merge.
For instance, "End-user programming," and "information foraging," from clusters A13 and A14, have faded from the landscape of HCI research as major independent research subfields.
A theme can also merge with others for several reasons, such as the introduction of novel technology leading to appropriation, or because a new advance is beneficial to both fields.
For example, in the early days of CHI, "annotation" from A12 took form in physical documents.
With the availability of collaborative tools, such as "wikis", and social "tagging" , annotation is now in the context of digital formats.
Another example is the merging of "computer supported cooperative work" from cluster A1 with "eye tracking" from cluster A11 resulting to cluster B5 in 2004-2013, as eye-tracking methodologies began to be used in collaborative settings, such as .
Research themes merging can lead also to new research topics: "ubiquitous computing," "augmented reality," and "ethnography"  and "visualization," "user interface design," and "cognitive modeling"  triggered the creation of three novel subfields: "mobile phone," "sustainability" and "ethnography" ; "ubiquitous computing," "privacy" and "mobile" ; and "visualization," "collaboration" and "user interface" .
Research on the older topics is now intertwined with these new topics, contributing to the appearance of several research directions like sustainability , large-scale ethnography  and ubiquitous public displays .
This means that HCI is becoming increasingly cohesive.
However, the field is lacking a major driving theme that could potentially accelerate this process, but instead consists of multiple themes competing for recognition despite cooperating with each other.
While the underlying dynamics of themes point to gradual maturity, the field has witnessed a recent explosion in the number of specific topics or keywords.
Overall keyword centralization has decreased from 31.04% in 1994-2003 to 26.79% in 2004-2013, indicating that the leading research keywords are constantly becoming less central in the network.
This is inevitable given that more new research connections have been established between different research topics in the later ten years.
For example, our analysis reveals that "social networks" and "crowdsourcing" are completely new research themes established during 2004-2013, located in quadrant II, clusters  .
However, this should not come as a surprise if the reader takes into account the emergence of several social networking web sites during this period .
Similarly, crowdsourcing presents itself as an emerging research theme in 2004-2013 even though the first publication with this keyword only appeared at CHI in 2009.
However, due to its rapid growth it has in merely 4 years positioned itself as an important emerging research paradigm despite its low centrality and therefore weak connection to other research paradigms.
During the same time period, in clusters B13 and B14, "multi-tasking" and "emotion" are hand -in-hand with the highest density.
As it stands, the only tradition in HCI is that of having no tradition in terms of research topics.
HCI has a long enough history for knowledge to accumulate, but to what extent has this happened?
Do prior studies help us when it comes to new technologies?
Judging from our findings the answer is no, when a new technology comes along it seems that researchers start from scratch leading to relatively isolated research themes.
There seems to be no single well-defined way to study a new technology in the context of HCI.
As a result, different approaches or perspectives are adopted when studying a new technology, leading to a relative fragmentation within HCI.
Reflecting on our own experience, we believe that the accumulated knowledge in HCI is almost exclusively grounded on very specific technological contexts.
For instance when it comes to improving the design of a mouse, previous studies on ergonomics are helpful.
But when the mouse is replaced by a touch-screen or voice input, previous findings on mouse performance tend to be inapplicable.
This is not an HCI phenomenon: the transition from gramophone to music tapes to CDs to iPods had a similar effect on multiple disciplines.
Due to the rapid pace of technology designed for humans, however, knowledge in HCI tends to be highly contextual instead of universal like in the field of biology or physics.
So we argue that by nature HCI research is like nomads chasing water and grasslands, making it challenging for the community to accumulate knowledge.
Of course, the Human in HCI does not change as rapidly as technology, even though practices and habits do.
Hence one potentially solid ground for HCI to develop accumulated knowledge is on the human aspects of HCI, and this was acknowledged in the session "celebrating the psychology of human-computer interaction" in CHI 2008 .
However, our analysis shows that this is far from likely to happen in the community, with no discernable research theme emerging on this topic.
Note that a motor theme should be derived from wellestablished knowledge , and have implications to new HCI topics .
Therefore, the existence of accumulated knowledge that is applicable to the context of new technologies is an important condition for the formation of motor-themes.
Based on the above discussion, we believe that the `nomads' nature of HCI research largely contributes to the lack of motor theme in the field.
A further insight from our analysis attests to the value of diversity in our community.
We identify many instances where topics merge or interact with each other in unpredictable ways, sometimes establishing new themes, sometimes declining.
This strong interaction is indicative of the adaptability of our community, constantly evaluating alternative approaches and attempting to conquer new ground.
A break up of the community would only hinder this process, making it much harder to cope with the introduction of new topics.
This diversity and constant state of flux is crucial in assimilating and dealing with new topics.
The polycentric nature of the knowledge map of HCI, as opposed to a unicentric one, reveals a key property of our community.
Our analysis of the keywords making up the various clusters suggests that when a new technology is introduced, our community tackles it and approaches it from a number of perspectives.
For instance, the introduction of tabletop technology prompted usability and Fitts' law studies, studies on security and privacy, studies on education and learning.
Similarly the introduction of smartphones and social media has been tackled from multiple perspectives.
This pluralism is a characteristic of our community, for better or worse.
In summary, our analysis suggests that the HCI community:  is having to deal with an increasing number topics that are externally driven ;  is responding to this challenge by maintaining a diverse yet intertwined research profile which remains in flux;  is gradually maturing in terms of its themes, but it is simply not transversally mature enough to undergo a meaningful breakup.
The diversity of the CHI conference, and more broadly of the HCI field, has often prompted discussion.
The diversity of the papers submitted to the CHI conference often backfires when authors feel that their work is not evaluated by `true' experts, or indeed by someone of an appropriate background.
Furthermore, researchers complain that some kind of work is "more valued", specifically raising the issue of one-off novelty experiments being preferred over laborious system development.
On the other hand, researchers feel that the diversity of the field is one of its key strengths.
Thus, the issues of rigor, diversity, and reviewing process become intertwined in discussion.
We attempt to relate our findings to this discussion and shed some light on the underlying processes of our discipline and how we should approach rigor and diversity.
First, our results show that HCI is a diverse field.
However, the field is diverse not in the sense that it consists of multiple disconnected research themes, like a pot-pouri, but in the sense that there are a lot of links within and between diverse themes, rather like a cobweb.
In fact, only a handful of clusters fall in Quadrant II  in Figure 4, with most large clusters falling in Quadrant IV  indicating an expansion of the field.
Our results also show that over time, the themes have become more cohesive, while at the same time there is a much larger number of topics or keywords in the discipline.
To a large extent, this is stimulated and driven by factors external to the community, for instance through the introduction of new technological products and services  that have a direct impact on humans' life.
As technology advances, and the rate of innovation remains high, we can expect this trend to remain: more new topics will constantly be of relevance to the HCI community.
The key insight we obtain from our results is that any breakup of the CHI conference today, or the HCI field, is likely to be pointless in a few years.
The community simply lacks the motor themes along which a potentially meaningful break up could be achieved .
Our community is slowly maturing in terms of themes, but is not transversally mature and the recent expansion of topics is likely to delay this process.
We considered only a single source of publications, the CHI conference, which despite being the flagship conference of the discipline has a strong geographical bias with most papers coming from the US, UK and Canada .
The fact that no journals were included in our analysis means that work on topics more likely submitted directly to journals is likely to be underrepresented in our sample.
Furthermore, the CHI conference has an acceptance rate of about 24%, so most papers that were submitted to CHI were eventually published somewhere else - and therefore not included in our sample.
Finally, a crucial issue is the extent to which keywords accurately reflect the contents of a paper.
It is not clear whether all authors follow the same approach for assigning keywords to their papers, and this is likely to lead to some inconsistencies.
Also, it is possible that some change of keyword frequency may come from a change in practices of how authors assign keywords.
However most of the keywords refer to specific technologies, rather than generic concepts that can be used interchangeably due to authors' habit.
So we feel that it is very unlikely that the change of major keywords during the two periods comes from authors' habits.
No research theme seems to be immune from the influence of evolution.
Rapid technology change, including the prevalence of mobile devices and technologies and the availability of new service like SNS and crowdsourcing appear as a sort of driving force.
From the perspective of the whole network, the study reported an enhanced cohesion of the field.
The overall network density increased while the whole network became more internally connected.
This implies progress towards the formation of a concrete research field of HCI as a whole.
However, the results also indicate unmatched research efforts on hot, core and backbone topics in recent years, suggesting an ongoing and rapid paradigm shift.
