This work begins addressing these questions by examining appropriation and repair from a somewhat different angle: as enacted in the provenance of materials and their historical and social value.
Drawing on social science literature , we examine restoration--the process of returning something to a previous condition--and consider how the material interactions may have some bearing on HCI.
We focus on book restoration  as a complex activity involving remaking longstanding, often quite intimate, media.
For example, in restoring a family bible, the owner may want to preserve evocative traces of the book's past  while enabling the book to be read and handled by future generations.
It is in the negotiation of a book's history and possibilities of its use--the careful balance of authenticity with longevity--that we find a sustainable design practice of an unusual sort, one that sheds some light on how digital technology might evolve over time.
The aim of this paper is, then, to enrich HCI design practices by considering how the social and material qualities of restoration affect the life cycles of personal media.
As technologies age, they experience wear and degradation, sometimes resulting in loss of functionality.
In response, parts are replaced and software is updated.
Yet restoration--the process of returning something to a previous condition, often regardless of its instrumental value--is a relatively rare practice with computational technologies.
The aim of this paper is to enrich HCI design practices by considering the material qualities of restoration.
We consider what makes a technology worth restoring and what constitutes the process of restoration by examining data collected from a three-month apprenticeship-based qualitative study of bookbinding.
Building on relevant literatures, we offer antiquarian books--long-established information technologies--as a lens onto the ways values are enacted through material engagements.
We conclude with a discussion of restoration's role in HCI.
From the rotary phone to the Walkman, technologies regularly undergo cycles of obsolescence.
Given the recent proliferation of broken, outdated or discarded devices, HCI has examined ways of supporting repair practices, both through sustainable design  and Do-It-Yourself  processes of customization and reuse .
Yet, in this research on remaking, issues of obsolescence remain.
What might it mean to restore old operating systems and software to their original condition, instead of, for example, simply upgrading them?
Might there be value in how technologies wear, rather than how effectively they perform?
How might HCI foster more longstanding relationships with digital technologies as they have developed with some traditional media-- such as manuscripts, photographs or books?
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
The first author visited seven bookbinding workshops-- four in the UK and three in the US--and conducted semistructured interviews with 13 key participants: five professional binders, five hobbyist binders, and three customers.
One of the UK workshops became a primary research site where the first author learned fine binding and book restoration over three months for an average of three days per week.
This autoethnographic approach was informed by previous HCI research exploring naval tactical command and control systems  and anthropological work by Coy  that found apprenticeship provides valuable insights into technical and social behavior.
During this period, the restoration work was documented through handwritten jottings, video and photos.
The first author also collected bits of bound and unbound material and restored one personal book.
Interviews and fieldwork observations were transcribed and reviewed by the authors--both meeting weekly to discuss the material and draw out relevant themes.
You know how these books can survive even when they're neglected for hundreds of years?
I mean, it's an amazing-- historically--it's an amazing technology.
As a way of passing on information.
You know, a book can be so durable that leather can fall off, the spine can fall off, the headbands can go, the first two pages can get torn.
But as long as those corners are on strong and those boards are good, and it doesn't get damp, you know?
That can knock around even for a couple of hundred years just like that, can't it?
This fieldnote excerpt reveals the particular relationship Kate, a binder, has to her customers and to the books she rebinds.
She is responding to a 19th century practice of sawing grooves into the spine of books for recessing cords in sewing, the subsequent stage of binding.
While to one binder certain coated pages could not be bound without sawing, to another binder sawing books at the head  and tail  of the spine mitigated damage to the book while sewing.
Kate disagreed with both claims.
For her, restoration should be "reversible.".
Having recently finished a set of catalogues for a customer who requested case-bindings , Kate and her co-workers proudly showed off their finished work: structurally supportive but removable dust jackets.
To Kate, the jacket solved the customer's problem  while "respecting" the book .
In working out how to balance authenticity and longevity we thus find contradictory ideas of appropriateness in restoration practice.
Offering an informative parallel, anthropologist Christina Krebs  describes how some museum artifacts are understood not as artifacts behind glass cases, but through their interactions in the social world.
Some Native Americans, for instance, felt conserving objects "arrests the life cycle of the object" :93.
Anthropologist Suzanne Kuchler  has similarly shown how the process of destroying wooden sculptures--allowing them to rot and release an odor  :633--allows those artifacts to continue to live on in Melanesian society.
They are given a longer life not through their tangible features, but through their shifting materiality and the performance of that materiality in everyday life.
These perspectives suggest that prolonging the life of an object by keeping it behind a case embodies just one concept of authenticity.
Kate's "reversible" restoration work--much like keeping a cultural artifact behind a case--might be seen as one construction of authenticity.
While Kate's sense of authenticity does not, in itself, constitute an intervention, her production of the catalogues without case-bindings altered her customers' relationships to the catalogues and book.
Her physically reversible work, thus, produced an irreversible intervention.
This paradox in practice reveals a shared understanding of authenticity: one remade through binding.
PRODUCING A WELL-RESTORED BOOK "When you close the book it should have a sense of weight about it.
And that's the way it should be  So I made the decision that I'd like to see--about to the longevity of it, as you know--in my collection of books.
If it had been for a customer than I would go along with what the customer wants."
This response illustrates how our participants appreciated the ways in which a book is made to last through its reconstruction.
An awareness to durability is demonstrated in the language used , binding activities, and aesthetic produced.
In the workshop, books were observed passing through several stages of production, including manual activities, such as folding paper, tooling activities, such as sawing and sewing, mechanical activities, such as chopping  and typesetting , and even digital activities, such as creating labels .
Each stage of restoration was readjusted based on several interwoven factors, such as the age of the book.
For a 16th century manuscript with an elaborate but deteriorating gold leaf title, a binder might keep the remaining gold leaf or overlay additional gold leaf by hand.
Whereas for a compilation of 19th century machine-bound books whose labels had fallen off, a binder might digitally design the label on a PC, print out several copies, and paste one on each book.
A book's original binding informed the approach to rebinding.
Other influential factors included: cost of the materials and labor, time and effort available to the binder or customer, physical condition of the book  and existing materials , style of binding , and--most importantly--the binder and customer's ideas of authenticity.
Making Authenticity I asked Kate if she ever sawed into the spine of a book.
I thought something had gone terribly wrong, but she was reacting to my question.
She explained that sawing the books was meant for putting cords in the books to keep the books flat, but that sawing is no longer necessary because flat tapes are now available.
She let me feel the tapes, which were a distinctly modern material--flexible and strong.
She would never do anything to harm the books if she didn't have to, she said.
Throughout the binding process, binders sought to increase the longevity of the book.
The language of "following what the customer wants" was frequently invoked when choices were justified after binding.
However, in practice, things became part of a dialogue between the binder and materials, mediated by the binder's tools and her manual use of them.
It shouldn't fall apart on the hundredth reading.
It should look as good as it did the first time it was picked up.
And most books now, obviously fail.
If you actually read them you'd destroy them on the first reading.
And even the really big prestigious books - cloth covered, and hard boards, case bindings - they fall to pieces.
Such attitudes toward restoration have remained a contentious issue within the fields of Art History and Architecture over the last two centuries.
Condemning restoration practices of the 19th century, notable Arts and Crafts scholar William Morris voiced legitimate concerns about the replacement of Medieval buildings with what he considered "feeble and lifeless forgery" .
His imagery of "stripping  a building of some of its most interesting material features" suggest some artifacts should not evolve with modernity but, instead, be protected from it through conservation.
Yet, how might a building be protected from decay and degradation without help from modern hands?
Such a view gives particular significance to the past while ignoring the inevitability of material and cultural change.
This excerpt from an interview with Varnaz, a customer who had a music book repaired three years ago, highlights the difficulties of justifying restoration.
While, notionally, his book was easy to find , in actuality it was difficult--indeed, impossible--to find again.
As Varnaz played music from this book since childhood, it embodied multiple layers of his past.
The particular mottling on the last five pages of the book indicated where Varnaz had spent the majority of his time: Bach's III Concerto, his favorite piece.
The book's distinctive smell, which he called "sweet" as he breathed it in deeply, reminded him of the many years of learning to play piano through which the book had endured.
The library label on the inside of the front cover revealed the book's origins: a school library, from which Varnaz stole the book when he was 13.
These material traces created continuity with his past.
Moving closer, the book revealed another layer of its history: a careful re-backing  by Sean, a restoration binder, three years ago.
Varnaz's book illustrates the materially embedded nature of memory and personal history.
Creating Age "My ideal is, if I bind a row of books, they look like that .
And you think: are they old, are they new?
So if you have new materials that resist being eroded by time, then you could have something that would last almost indefinitely at certain levels."
In our observations, reasons for restoration varied widely, from pragmatic goals  to emotive motivations .
Pages of books and handprints on covers triggered memories of particular settings from childhood  or celebratory moments .
One customer brought in a dictionary whose pages were beginning to unhinge from its spine, rendering the book unusable.
As a child, the customer used the dictionary to solve crossword puzzles with his grandfather.
Getting another copy cost only a few pounds, but the restoration would cost sixty.
For the binders, such work meant balancing two distinct goals: preserving the physical qualities of the book that make it an evocative sentimental object  and replacing materials that give the book a longer life in use .
Peter, a restoration binder, described this process simply:
There's a point at which you have to make a decision.
Am I going to have that repaired before the damage gets any worse?
And that's the decision you have to make.
As a collector you can't always conserve things just by leaving them alone in a box or a safe or an archive because sooner or later they are going to deteriorate.
After all, the sewing on most ancient books--15, 16, 1700s--they would've been sewing them with silk or cotton.
You know, not like modern sewing threads.
So, therefore, it's going to rot.
Paper might be okay, but sewing will rot.
You then have a book that's going to cost a great deal to repair.
Better to have it done beforehand, stop the problem, and get the book back together.
As we have seen, what it takes for a book to be worth restoring, and which aspects of the book one wants to restore, were carefully worked out in practice.
However, how to perform the restoration was an equal part of this negotiation.
Does restoring a 400-year-old book with a deteriorating spine entail re-binding the book as it would have been originally bound?
Does it mean re-binding the book so that it appears in its original condition?
Or does it mean creating a jacket and slipcase so that the book remains untouched?
A previously restored book raises further questions.
How these questions are answered in the process of binding is indicative of a well-restored book.
While working on a 19th century leather-bound book, we needed to replace the "red rot," the deteriorated leather that turns red over time.
What was the original color?
Sean saw dark brown; and I saw black.
The book was eventually covered in Nigerian goatskin, stained dark brown, and "sprinkled" with black paint .
These negotiations are reminiscent of how STS scholar Charles Goodwin described chemists' classification of color categories--working out what it means for something to be "jet black" .
Choosing how to make a book look old involved not only finding the appropriate balance between preserving what exists and extending the longevity of the book, but also attending to the material elements of the book that exposed some seeable quality of its past--grain,
Throughout our study, restoration bookbinding reveals itself as a set of complex and contested practices.
Durability of the book and respect for the book's history are two central concerns, continually balanced through human-material interactions.
In restoration work, books, as technologies, become agents of recovery--of fading techniques, of cultural traditions, and of intimate interactions.
Using the practice of book restoration as a lens onto interaction design, we offer two central concerns aimed at sensitizing HCI design to issues of restoration.
We found that it was materials that shaped the perception and performance of authenticity.
Meaningful traces were left on artifacts, naturally shaping them over time.
This arguably contrasts with many of our experiences with computational technology.
During this field study, the first author exchanged her mobile phone for a newer model, even though it was not falling apart.
Similarly, she had her laptop repaired when the screen unhinged, but did not care  to get the same laptop back; her hard drive was the thing of "material value."
In addition to focusing on recycling, reuse, and repair , HCI might attend to the making of authenticity as a materially and situationally specific event.
We argue that in valuing some materials over others, binders do not distinguish between form and function, content and container, or even digital bits and tangible atoms.
Rather, they are attending to how a technology's materiality enables certain constructions of authenticity.
It is through our continued interactions with material, and the impressions we leave on it, that deeper attachments evolve.
How might we look at the interactional qualities of hardware , software  or digital content , as a binder attends to those of paper, such as its grain, color, or thickness?
Just as someone might cherish a leatherbound camera , might they also treasure a particular laptop, graphics card or digital photo if traces of use were left on it over time?
By enabling continuous, multidimensional gestures among and within our technological practices, perhaps we can foster more historically and materially meaningful interactions.
Following from research in cultural anthropology , we found that the longevity of an artifact was not only made through materials, but also through its integration in social practice.
Here we stress the nuanced social configurations that enabled continued celebrations of ritual, not through static technologies but through actions surrounding and remaking those technologies.
Might we want to revisit an Apple IIe graphics program differently from a digital photograph of a deceased parent?
Might different experiences of game play result from using an original game console rather than an emulator?
Alongside online digital archives, such as the Wayback Machine , perhaps we can enable varying forms of interaction: ways of looking back through familiar mechanisms  and novel reinventions .
Our observations suggest such things should be seen as part of a process of actively constituting our connections to the past.
Looking forward, we offer this work as a different way of thinking about design in HCI--one sensitive to the ideas of longevity, authenticity and ways of the hand.
What it is that makes a technology functional and evocative is invariably woven into how the technology wears and becomes remade over time.
Our hope is that by describing how materials play into these processes of restoration, we inspire the design of more meaningful and enduring technologies in HCI.
Empowering products: personal identity through the act of appropriation.
Back stage on the front lines: perspectives and performance in the combat information center.
Sustainable Interaction Design: Invention & Disposal, Renewal and Reuse.
Memory practices in the sciences: MIT Press.
Apprenticeship: From Theory to method and Back Again.
New York: State University of New York Press.
In Discourse, Tools and Reasonsing: Essays on Situated Cognition.
Lauren B. Resnick, et al., eds.
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York: Springer.
In Defining technological literacy: towards an epistemological framework.
Liberating Culture: Cross-Cultural Perspectives on Museum Curation and Heritage Preservation.
Malangan: objects, sacrifice and the production of memory.
Morris, W. "Manifesto of the Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings".
Historical and philosophical issues in the conservation cultural heritage.
Learning from IKEA hacking: I'm not one to decoupage a tabletop and call it a day.
