Graphical password systems have received significant attention as one potential solution to the need for more usable authentication, but nearly all prior work makes the unrealistic assumption of studying a single password.
This paper presents the first study of multiple graphical passwords to systematically examine frequency of access to a graphical password, interference resulting from interleaving access to multiple graphical passwords, and patterns of access while training multiple graphical passwords.
We find that all of these factors significantly impact the ease of authenticating using multiple facial graphical passwords.
For example, participants who accessed four different graphical passwords per week were ten times more likely to completely fail to authenticate than participants who accessed a single password once per week.
Our results underscore the need for more realistic evaluations of the use of multiple graphical passwords, have a number of implications for the adoption of graphical password systems, and provide a new basis for comparing proposed graphical password systems.
Graphical password systems have received significant attention as one potential solution to the need for more usable authentication .
Graphical password systems take many forms, such as requiring the selection of target images from sets of distracter images  or requiring clicks on target regions of an image .
Graphical passwords are generally considered to be easier to remember and use than alphanumeric passwords because graphical passwords take the proven approach of relying upon recognition instead of requiring recall .
A separate advantage of graphical passwords is their natural appropriateness for situations where text entry is difficult or limited .
Some graphical password systems provide a level of strength  against password guessing attacks that is equal to or greater than typical alphanumeric passwords, but this is not a strict requirement.
Instead, it is clear that different approaches exist at a range of points in a trade-off between usability and cryptographic strength.
When password usability is important to an application, even a weak  password system can provide sufficient security when used as part of a larger multi-factor authentication system.
Widely used four-digit PINs, for example, are typically paired with the need to physically possess an ATM card and a limit on the number of failed attempts allowed before the ATM card is confiscated.
The continuing emergence of the mobile Web seems to promise many additional opportunities for multi-factor approaches.
A social networking site, for example, may want to reduce the burden of mobile authentication, but mobile text entry is relatively difficult .
The site might therefore require that a device initially be authenticated using an alphanumeric password, but then place a cookie on the device.
Future access could then use a combination of the cookie on the authenticated device and an easier graphical password.
As in the ATM card example, this cookie could be revoked after as little as a single failed attempt at the graphical password.
This system would allow people to easily access protected sites from their mobile devices, but even the use of a weak password will guard against illegal access to those sites by someone who might have found or stolen the device.
Most people find it difficult to remember alphanumeric passwords , a problem magnified by the fact that an average Web user has passwords on 25 unique Web sites .
This difficulty leads people to adopt a number of unsafe strategies, including writing passwords down, reusing the same password, using minor variants of a single password, or frequently reinitializing passwords upon failure to authenticate .
All of these behaviors increase the likelihood of passwords being lost, stolen, or compromised.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Figure 1: A person attempting to authenticate with a facial graphical password is presented a sequence of 3x3 grids of faces.
Successful authentication requires choosing the correct face from each set.
We selected facial graphical passwords for study in this work because of their commercial deployment in the PassFacesTM system  and because of their use in prior research .
Such a system is appropriate for many situations, including the desktop and in mobile situations where text input is more difficult.
Given the need for more usable authentication and existing interest in graphical passwords as a potential solution, we identify an important limitation of existing work: although there have been many studies of graphical passwords, nearly all prior work focuses on a single password.
People will need to remember and use many graphical passwords, just as they currently use many alphanumeric passwords, but no work has systematically explored the use of multiple graphical passwords.
This paper therefore studies 100 participants using multiple graphical passwords for more than a month.
We study facial graphical passwords, selected because of their commercial deployment in the PassFacesTM system  and because of their use in prior research .
Figure 1 illustrates the authentication process, which is based on the presentation of a sequence of 3x3 grids of faces.
Successful authentication requires that a person select the correct face from each grid in the sequence, and the length of the sequence can vary according to the needs of the application.
Such a system is appropriate for authentication in many environments, including the traditional desktop and in mobile situations where text input is more difficult.
We developed an email-based methodology for studying participant use of multiple facial graphical passwords, wherein participants agreed to receive one to four emails per week.
Each email provided a link to our study website and prompted the participant to visit and authenticate.
Participants thus accessed our facial graphical passwords in their normal environments from which they might access any other service.
By varying the frequency of email to each participant, how many passwords were issued to each participant, and the pattern of access for each participant, we systematically study the use of multiple graphical passwords.
Our study is the first of its kind, and our results demonstrate a clear need for future evaluations of graphical passwords to consider the more realistic demands of using multiple graphical passwords.
The contributions of this paper include: * We identify the need to systematically study the use of multiple graphical passwords, as nearly all prior studies of the memorability of graphical passwords are focused on the unrealistic use of a single password.
Participants who accessed a facial graphical password once per week required more attempts and more time to authenticate than participants who accessed a facial graphical password once per day.
Our findings include the fact that participants accessing four facial graphical passwords per week were ten times more likely to completely fail to authenticate than participants accessing a single facial graphical password once per week.
Participants who trained on multiple graphical passwords each week for a month were four times more likely to later completely fail to authenticate than participants who focused on their training a single password during each week of the month.
Participants who had used only one facial graphical password were still able to access that password four months after completing our study, but the success of participants who had used four passwords was strongly influenced by their pattern of access during training.
Our findings regarding frequency and interference show that field studies of graphical password systems are likely to overestimate ease of access if they do not study the realistic use of multiple graphical passwords.
Our findings regarding interference, training, and long-term recall also motivate a need for future field studies examining how people typically acquire and learn new passwords.
Evidence of our method's effectiveness can be seen in the results we present throughout this paper and in our high participation rate relative to prior work.
Existing interest in graphical passwords is motivated in part by results from human psychology research.
One such result is that human ability for recognition far exceeds that for recall.
Rock and Engelstein, for example, found that participants shown a meaningless shape were unable to draw the shape a month later , but could recognize the shape almost perfectly .
Another relevant result is that human memory for images far exceeds that for verbal material.
Standing shows that people can easily recognize thousands of images, that the superiority of images persists even in the context of large numbers of distracters, and that the ability to recognize images persists over time .
A full survey of potentially relevant psychology literature is beyond the scope of this section, as is a complete discussion of other approaches to leveraging recognition in usable security .
We instead focus on graphical password systems, studies of facial graphical passwords, and the limited prior work examining multiple graphical passwords.
They attribute this at least in part to the fact that many of their participants did not actually make up stories, but instead attempted to simply memorize the sequence, and suggest that graphical password systems should avoid relying upon recall of order.
Locimetric schemes present a single image, with authentication requiring clicking on regions of the image corresponding to a password.
One example of such a system is PassPoints .
A potential weakness of this class of schemes is the danger of using highly visually salient points that are "obvious" to an attacker .
Drawmetric schemes require drawing figures or doodles to authenticate.
Early studies of facial graphical passwords include work by Valentine .
This work shows that people are good at recognizing faces and can remember the faces from a single password for months after the initial training.
Brostoff and Sasse validate these findings in field situations .
They find that an attacker can guess 10% of chosen passwords within two tries, and 25% of chosen passwords within thirteen tries .
Because of this, our study assigns faces to participants.
Other work has examined concerns regarding shoulder-surfing  and attempts to verbally describe facial graphical passwords .
Cognometric schemes present a set of images, with authentication requiring selection of the correct images from the set.
Images might, for example, be random art images, pictures of faces, or photographs of scenes.
Different schemes vary in their selection requirements, such as whether images must be selected in a particular order.
The facial graphical passwords we study in this paper are a cognometric scheme, requiring selection of the correct face from a 3x3 grid of distracter faces.
Multiple sets of faces are presented in sequence, with authentication requiring selection of the correct face from each set.
We study passwords that use sequences of length five, but sequences of any reasonable length could be used.
Deja vu uses a set of automatically synthesized random art images .
Authentication requires selecting five portfolio images from a set of twenty-five challenge images.
In contrast to presenting sequences of sets of images, Deja vu presents all twenty-five images at the same time.
Authentication requires selecting the correct images, in the correct order, from the distracters.
In a study comparing ease of access using synthesized random art images versus natural photographs, Dhamija and Perrig found a 10% authentication failure rate after one week for the art images versus a 5% failure rate for the natural photographs .
We are aware of only two pieces of prior work that include multiple graphical passwords, and neither of these systematically examines the effects of password frequency, interference, or training.
Moncur and Leplatre compare the memorability of five picture-based PINs with five text-based PINs .
Their results re-affirm the advantages of graphical passwords, but all participants used the same number of graphical passwords in the same manner, and so no insight is provided into the effects of frequency, interference, or training.
Given the community's significant interest in graphical password systems, it is clear that additional work is needed to further our understanding of the effects of using multiple graphical passwords.
Our primary goal was to study the effects of the frequency of facial graphical password usage, the effects of interference resulting from the use of multiple facial graphical passwords, and the effects of different patterns of access when training multiple graphical passwords.
We therefore designed a four stage study:  a pre-study questionnaire examining participant demographics and current password strategies,  a five-week online study of participants accessing multiple facial graphical passwords,  a post-study questionnaire regarding participant experiences, and  a test of long-term recall conducted four months after the end of the original five-week study.
The core of our design is a five-week online study using email-based prompts to access the study website and authenticate.
The choice of an online study instead of a laboratory study is a trade-off, but we felt the online study would provide access to a larger participant pool, would mean people authenticated under more realistic settings, and would likely result in a higher retention rate than requiring people make multiple visits to a laboratory.
Participants received email in the morning, and the email contained a link to our study website.
Study emails were sent on Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday of each week, and the link in each email expired at midnight on the day it was sent.
Participants thus accessed our online study at most once per day and at most four times per week.
Upon accessing our online study via an emailed link, participants were presented with the facial password system shown in Figure 2.
As we have illustrated in Figure 1, authentication requires selecting the correct face from a sequence of 3x3 grids of distracter faces .
Note that the same sets of faces are presented whenever attempting to authenticate for a particular password, a requirement for preventing attacks based in determining which faces consistently appear across multiple login attempts.
Faces are, however, presented at random locations in the 3x3 grid, ensuring that participants need to learn the faces and cannot rely upon spatial positioning.
Participants were given feedback only after selecting a face from all five sets, and were allowed a maximum of three login attempts.
If unable to successfully authenticate within three attempts, participants were asked to retrain .
Because the facial graphical passwords in our study were not protecting sensitive information, retraining did not change a password but instead reminded the participant of the password and ensured they could authenticate using it.
Participants in the first condition, for example, authenticated only once per week during our five-week study, always using the same password.
Participants in the second condition authenticated three times per week, again always using the same password.
The third condition combines the first two, requiring authentication four times per week .
The fourth requires a single authentication for each of four different passwords each week, while the final condition initially groups the use of a password within a single week and then requires authentication using all four passwords in the final week.
Note that the arrangement of days within each week in Figure 3 is for illustration only, as each week's requirements were assigned to random days.
In the first condition, for example, a random day each week was chosen to prompt the participant to authenticate.
Similarly, participants in the fourth condition were prompted to access their four passwords in a random order each week.
Each password was associated with a mock website that had a distinct logo, name, and background color.
This was to ensure participants had a context to use in differentiating their multiple passwords.
We also ensured that no face appeared more than once in any of a participant's passwords or distracter faces, as discussed next.
Passwords were automatically assigned, as prior work has shown that allowing selection of faces results in a bias toward more attractive faces and toward female faces, significantly reducing security .
We use faces from the Face of Tomorrow dataset , which contains ordinary people  from a variety of ethnic backgrounds, including a mix of men and women.
We manually cropped the images from this dataset to show only the face.
This cropping is important because an intentional characteristic of facial graphical passwords is the absence of cues that stand out , thus making it difficult to write down or tell another person a password .
Our password assignment ensured there was no overlap of faces appearing in any of a participant's multiple passwords nor their distracter faces.
This was done by selecting faces randomly without replacement for each participant.
Our results may therefore underestimate interference among multiple services that draw upon the same database of faces .
Participants were shown their assigned password and trained in its use upon their initial attempt to authenticate for each of their multiple passwords .
Training consisted of showing a participant their assigned password, asking the participant to briefly think about each face, and asking the participant to authenticate using a version of the interface that highlighted the correct faces.
Training was complete when the participant could authenticate using their password without the assistive highlighting.
Our analyses find that attempts required is not normally distributed , so we analyze attempts required using the Mann-Whitney test .
The Mann-Whitney test is a non-parametric test based in ranking observations across conditions and then testing for differences in rank.
In cases where participants failed to authenticate within three attempts, we coded a value of 4 for attempts required .
Our final two measures examine the time to authenticate, consistent with prior work that has examined time as a measure of the difficulty of facial graphical password use .
In order to separate these measures from failure rate, we exclude cases where a participant failed to authenticate within three attempts.
The login time measure then considers the amount of time spent during a participant's successful attempt .
The total time measure considers the total time spent authenticating, including time spent on unsuccessful attempts.
Because our analyses find that login time and total time are both non-normally distributed, we again use the Mann-Whitney test throughout our analyses.
Our use of a rank-based statistical test also provides robustness against many types of noise that might affect time measures.
For example, our use of an online study means we cannot guarantee participants were not interrupted in the midst of authenticating.
Although we see no evidence of abnormally long delays and such a concern seems equally likely in any study condition, it is worth noting that a non-parametric test is extremely resilient to such outliers .
Similarly, our timing data includes the time needed to load the study webpage, but page load times were minor compared to login times and a non-parametric test will be unaffected.
We evaluate ease of facial graphical password access using four complimentary measures:  authentication failure rate,  number of attempts required for successful authentication,  the login time required in a successful authentication, and  the total time required, including time spent on failed attempts.
Our failure rate measure examines complete failure to authenticate within the three permitted attempts.
Facial graphical passwords are highly memorable , and so we expected failure rate to be our least sensitive measure.
Whether or not a participant successfully authenticated is a binary measure, so we use chi-squared tests throughout the coming sections when we analyze failure rate.
Our second measure examines the attempts required before a participant successfully authenticated.
We primarily recruited participants from the undergraduate and graduate students in our university's Asian Languages, Electrical Engineering, Computer Science & Engineering, and Material Sciences departments.
Participants were recruited via opt-in email and screened to ensure that they had no prior experience with facial graphical passwords or any other graphical password system.
Participants were compensated with a $10 iTunes gift certificate.
A total of 110 people agreed to participate, 34 female and 76 male.
Our demographic was mostly university students, and 69% of participants were ages 18 to 24, 18% were ages 25 to 29, and 12% were age 30 or older.
Participants were randomly assigned to conditions using a round-robin strategy to ensure balanced group size.
Our participation rate was quite good, which we attribute primarily to our email-based methodology and the fact that each day's session was very simple and could be completed quickly.
Of the 110 participants who originally agreed to participate, seven had low participation rates because they either never accessed the study website for training  or they completed initial training and then rarely or never returned.
Another three participants accidentally viewed faces from our site in a manner inconsistent with the study .
The remainder of this paper therefore focuses on data from 100 participants.
These participants responded to 92% of email-based prompts, and 60% of participants responded to every email-based prompt.
As a point of comparison, we note that Moncur and Leplatre report a 35% completion rate in a study of multiple graphical passwords that required visiting a Web page three times in four weeks .
Participants reported password management experiences that are typical of university students, affirming that password management is generally problematic.
Of our 100 participants, 79% reported forgetting a password, 98% reported reusing a password across multiple websites, 87% reported using simple variants of the same password, 65% reported using Web browser support for storing and automatically entering passwords, 51% reported writing down a password, and 52% reported using personal information, such as a birthday, in a password.
Only 11% reported trying dedicated secure password storage software.
When asked about their number of unique passwords versus the number of sites on which they had passwords, 90% reported having fewer than 10 unique passwords but 78% reported having passwords on more than 10 sites.
Some passwords must therefore be reused, indicating the ideal of a unique strong password for each site is far from reality.
Our second planned analysis examines the interference resulting from using multiple facial graphical passwords.
We planned several comparisons examining interference for frequent and infrequent passwords.
For the purposes of our studies, we define a frequent password as being accessed three times per study week.
We define an infrequent password as being accessed once per study week.
Our first planned analysis examines the frequency of use of a facial graphical password.
Figure 4 illustrates our planned contrast between daily and weekly use.
We intentionally analyze only the first four weeks of data in our weekly condition, matching the four study days within a single week in the daily condition.
Although studies of graphical passwords generally consider only a single frequency, we hypothesized that weekly access would result in more failures, more required attempts, more time spent on a successful authentication, and more total time spent.
The distribution of attempts required is non-normal, and a Mann-Whitney test finds that participants in the weekly condition required significantly more attempts  = 5.5, p = 0.019.
After excluding failures from our temporal analyses, both login time and total time are non-normally distributed.
Figure 5 illustrates our planned contrast between our single frequent condition and our infrequent distracter condition.
Note that we here analyze only data from the frequent password .
Data from the infrequent distracter  is not included in these analyses because we are focused on how the presence of the infrequent distracter affects the use of the frequent password.
We hypothesized that the infrequent distracter condition would result in more failures, more required attempts, more time spent on a successful authentication, and more total time spent.
A chi-squared test of failure rate shows that the infrequent distracter condition resulted in marginally more failures  = 3.3, p = 0.069.
The distribution of attempts required is non-normal, and a Mann-Whitney test finds that participants in the infrequent distracter condition required significantly more attempts  = 4.0, p = 0.044.
After excluding failures from our temporal analyses, both login time and total time are non-normally distributed.
Figure 6 illustrates our planned contrast between three conditions examining interference with an infrequent password.
The single infrequent condition provides a baseline against which we compare a frequent distracter and multiple infrequent distracters.
Note that our frequent distracter data is the same data from our infrequent distracter condition in the previous subsection, but we have reversed the roles of the two passwords to support the comparisons we make here .
Neither password was presented to participants as being more or less important than the other.
Similarly, all of the passwords in the multiple infrequent distracters condition were presented as equally important, and so all of them serve as distracters for each other.
This subsection's analyses are therefore based on data for all four infrequent passwords in the multiple infrequent distracters condition.
We hypothesized that our single infrequent condition would be the easiest of the three and that the multiple infrequent distracters would be the most difficult, as indicated by all four of our measures.
We analyze failure rate using chi-squared tests.
These show that multiple infrequent distracters resulted in significantly more failures than the single infrequent condition  = 13.4, p < 0.001.
A frequent distracter caused marginally more failures than a single infrequent password with no distracters  = 3.7, p = 0.054, and multiple infrequent distracters caused marginally more failures than a single frequent distracter  = 2.8, p = 0.093.
The distribution of attempts required is non-normal, and we analyze attempts required using Mann-Whitney tests.
After excluding failures from our temporal analyses, we find that both login time and total time are non-normally distributed.
Given the expected difficulty of multiple infrequent distracters, we also planned to examine how patterns of password use during training affects later ease of access to multiple facial graphical passwords.
Figure 7 illustrates this contrast.
Both conditions examine four passwords.
In the mixed condition, these passwords are trained in parallel, with each of the four being used once per week during the first four weeks.
In the grouped condition, the four passwords are trained in series, as each of the first four weeks focuses on a single password.
Our analyses in this section exclude data from these first four weeks.
Figure 6: We examined interference for infrequent password use by examining the impact of a single frequent distracter and multiple infrequent distracters on a single infrequent password.
Participants with multiple infrequent distracters were more likely to fail to authenticate.
Both distracter conditions required more login attempts, more time per successful login, and more total authentication time.
We hypothesized that the mixed condition would result in more failures, more required attempts, more time spent on a successful authentication, and more total time spent.
The distribution of attempts required is non-normal, and a Mann-Whitney test finds that participants in the mixed condition required significantly more attempts  = 5.7, p = 0.017.
After excluding failures from our temporal analyses, both login time and total time are non-normally distributed.
The lack of a difference in our time measures is difficult to interpret, but the more than fourfold difference in the failure rate is itself compelling evidence of the effect of the grouped training.
Prior work has suggested that a single facial graphical password can be successfully recalled after significant periods of non-use .
We sought to examine the long-term recall of multiple facial graphical passwords, more specifically the impact of interference and training.
Figure 8 illustrates our planned contrast of recall for participants in the single infrequent condition, the mixed condition, and the grouped condition.
We hypothesized that the single infrequent condition would be easier than both mixed and grouped, with mixed also being more difficult than grouped, as indicated by all four of our measures.
We tested long-term recall by emailing participants four months after the end of our original five-week study.
Prompts to authenticate were sent in separate email for each of a participant's passwords, and these emails were sent in a randomized order.
Of the 69 participants in the three conditions we study here, 50 responded to our prompts.
Our results show a stark difference in the long-term recall of a single infrequent facial graphical password versus multiple infrequent facial graphical passwords with mixed training.
Although every authentication participant in the single infrequent condition was successful, 14.3% of authentications in the mixed condition failed.
After excluding failures from this comparison, both login time and total time are non-normally distributed.
Contrary to our expectation that the grouped condition would be more difficult than the single infrequent condition, our results show relatively little difference.
Responses to our post-study questionnaire show that many participants liked the idea of using facial graphical passwords: 41% said they would "definitely" use a facial graphical password system, 32% said they would "probably" use a facial graphical password system, and 27% said they would not use a facial graphical password system.
Participant comments suggest a tension between the fact that participants generally were reasonably successful in using multiple facial graphical passwords versus the fact that some of their existing password management strategies  were inapplicable to this study.
For example, one participant described a feeling that they were guessing: "I found I often felt like I was guessing, but I usually guessed right, so I guess I remembered the right faces somewhere in the back of my mind.
However, I didn't feel very comfortable with my choices."
Another participant described a similar feeling that facial graphical passwords lack cues to help with remembering a password that has been partially forgotten: "The one time I forgot my faces, I was totally .
It wasn't like I could remember one of my faces and use that as a clue to remember the rest.
Each face seemed completely separate."
Some participants were surprised by their long-term recall of multiple facial graphical passwords.
A participant from the grouped training condition commented: "It's freakin' amazing that I remember all these!"
None of the participants attempted to record their study passwords, but 29% reported they would use screen captures, sketches, or notes to attempt to document a facial graphical password outside of a study context.
People typically have a need for many more than four passwords, so we might expect the effects of interference to be even more dramatic in a widespread deployment of graphical passwords.
We also note that the impact of interference was not limited to our most extreme contrasts.
Even our most mild examination of interference, Figure 5's addition a single infrequent distracter to a frequent password, resulted in a marginally greater failure rate, significantly more attempts required, and significantly more login time and total time to authenticate.
In contrast to typical studies that examine only a single graphical password, our findings underscore a need for more realistic evaluations of the use of multiple graphical passwords.
Given our young and technically-experienced participant population, our frequency and interference results might be considered a sort of lower bound: we have shown that ease of authentication is significantly impacted by frequency and interference, and the size of this effect might be larger with more heterogeneous populations or less frequent access.
Our findings regarding interference, training, and long-term recall motivate future field studies examining how people typically acquire and learn new passwords.
The interference associated with multiple infrequent passwords was greatly reduced by the grouped approach to training, an effect easily seen in both the fifth week of our study and four months later.
Although prior work has examined how many passwords people typically have, our results show it is also important to better understand the rate at which people acquire new passwords and the extent to which people are likely to have opportunities to practice a new password.
Informed by our results and future field studies, developers of graphical password systems will be able to study ease of access under more realistic training conditions.
In addition to informing more realistic evaluations of graphical password systems, our results have a number of implications for the adoption of graphical password systems.
The effectiveness of our grouped training, for example, suggests that applications employing graphical passwords might consider encouraging a burst of initial usage over the course of the week following creation of a new password.
As another example, our study design ensured there was no overlap of faces appearing in any of a participant's multiple passwords nor their distracter faces, but our interference results and participant comments in our post-study questionnaire suggest that it would be quite problematic if the same face appeared in multiple contexts.
More generally, both developers and adopters of graphical password systems should be wary of default image databases shipped with graphical password systems and the risk of increased interference if those databases are used on multiple sites.
We have presented the first study of multiple graphical passwords to systematically examine the effect of frequency of access to a graphical password, the effects of interference resulting from interleaving access to multiple graphical passwords, and the effect of patterns of access while training multiple graphical passwords.
The effects discussed throughout our results sections have a number of important implications for graphical passwords.
Our findings regarding interference show that field studies of graphical password systems are likely to overestimate ease of access if they do not study the realistic use of multiple graphical passwords.
Designers considering the role of graphical passwords in applications therefore need to be sure they have realistic estimates of the time that will be required to authenticate using a particular graphical password system.
Estimates that ignore the effects of frequency, interference, and training may be unrealistically optimistic and may lead to unacceptably cumbersome designs under realistic use.
Finally, our demonstration of the effects of frequency, interference, and training on multiple graphical passwords provides a new basis for comparing proposed graphical password systems.
We chose to study facial graphical passwords because of their commercial deployment  and their use in prior research , but similar studies should be conducted for other graphical password systems.
It is possible, for example, that other cognometric, locimetric, or drawmetric schemes are less susceptible to interference.
If a graphical password system were found that performed extremely well in our multiple infrequent distracters condition, for example, this would be a strong indication that the system retains its ease of access even with interference from multiple graphical passwords.
We have presented the first study of multiple graphical passwords to systematically examine the effects of frequency, interference, and training.
In contrast to prior work's examination of a single graphical password, our results underscore the need for more realistic evaluations of the use of multiple graphical passwords, have a number of implications for the adoption of graphical password systems, and provide a new basis for comparing proposed graphical password systems.
Users are not the enemy.
Adams, A., Sasse, M.A., and Lunt, P. Making passwords secure and usable.
UN warns on password 'explosion'.
Are PassfacesTM more usable than passwords?
A second look at the usability of click-based graphical passwords.
Proceedings of the Symposium on Usable Privacy and Security, , 1-12.
Davis, D., Monrose, F., and Reiter, M. On user choice in graphical password schemes.
DeAngeli, A., Coventry, L., Johnson, G., and Renaud, K. Is a picture really worth a thousand words?
Exploring the feasibility of graphical authentication systems.
Dhamija, R. and Perrig, A.
Deja vu: A user study using Images for Authentication.
Proceedings of the Conference on USENIX Security Symposium, , 4-4.
Dunphy, P., Nicholson, J., Olivier, P. Securing Passfaces for Description.
Proceedings of the Symposium on Usable Privacy and Security, , 24-35.
The Face of Tomorrow Face Dataset.
Florencio, D. and Herley, C. A large-scale study of web password habits.
Gaw, S. and Felten, E. Password management strategies for online accounts.
Proceedings of the Symposium on Usable Privacy and Security, , 44-55.
Ives, B., Walsh K.R., and Schneider, H. The domino effect of password reuse.
Moncur, W. and Leplatre, G. Pictures at the ATM: exploring the usability of multiple graphical passwords.
Proceedings of SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, , 887-894.
Morris, R. and Thompson, K. Password security: A case history.
A study of memory for visual form.
A comparison of perceived and real shoulder-surfing risks between alphanumeric and graphical passwords.
Proceedings of the Symposium on Usable Privacy and Security, , 56-66.
Valentine, T. An evaluation of the PassfacesTM personal authentication system.
Goldsmiths College Technical Report, 1998.
Valentine, T. Memory for PassfacesTM after a long delay.
Goldsmiths College Technical Report, 1999.
Wiedenbeck, S., Waters, J., Birget, J.C., Brodskiy, A., and Memon, N. PassPoints: Design and longitudinal evaluation of a graphical password system.
