Science studies scholar Bruno Latour suggests that contemporary democracy is shifting from "matters of fact" to "matters of concern": contentious conditions entwined with everyday life.
What is the role of human-computer interaction  design in this shift?
In this paper we draw from five design projects to explore how design can express matters of concern by communicating the factors and consequences of issues.
In the process, we consider the role of design in contributing to the formation of publics and discuss an emerging orientation to publics in HCI design.
In answering this question, four entwined themes are important .
The first is that contemporary democracy is object-oriented: it occurs through the stuff we make.
The second is that contemporary democracy is about matters of concern: contentious issues and their consequences.
Third, things are the association of objects and matters of concern: when the stuff we make is experienced in light of the contentious issues and the consequences surrounding that stuff, we are living in what Latour refers to as a kind of "dingpolitik."
Fourth and finally, these things can function to organize publics: groups committed to addressing an issue.
Understanding a bit about these terms sheds light on the significance of the exhibition title.
The phrase "Making Things Public" is shorthand for exploring the interplay of objects and issues, and how socio-cultural situations are disputed through collective endeavors.
Design is implicit in this endeavor of "Making Things Public."
The "things" Latour refers to and the ways they are "made public" do not come about by accident.
They arise through traceable processes where choices have been made.
For the exhibition, Latour and Weibel selected projects they interpreted as working to express matters of concern.
To an extent, design is taken for granted in the exhibition, as the images, artifacts, and systems are presented with minimal interpretation.
There is little inquiry into how these objects do politics or express matters of concern.
But as design researchers, this question of "how" is precisely what interests us: How can products and processes of design function to express matters of concern?
In this paper we explore some of the ways human computer interaction  design can function to express matters of concern.
We do this through a reflexive analysis of five design projects.
Each of these projects highlights different design tactics used to identify and communicate the multiple factors of an issue.
Taken together, they provide a set of descriptive examples and generative themes for HCI researchers and practitioners.
Before discussing the projects individually, we present the concepts of "matters of concern" and "design things".
Then, after presenting the design projects, we explore the relation between the endeavor of expressing matters of concern and recent work in HCI concerning publics.
In the 2005 exhibition Making Things Public: Atmospheres of Democracy, science studies scholar Bruno Latour and artist/curator Peter Weibel explored the ways artists and designers construct systems that express and enact current social conditions and imagined futures .
A mammoth book, with over 100 essays from social scientists and theorists, accompanied the exhibition.
Taken together, the book and exhibition document a constellation of thoughts and cultural production that wrestle with contemporary democracy.
What is common across the projects and essays is that they all seem to be probing the question: How does one "do" democracy in the 21st century?
Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
As HCI expands into social arenas and contested subjects such as sustainability, healthcare, and international development, HCI scholars and practitioners must understand the capacity of design work in these arenas.
Certainly building working systems is important.
However if we take the ideas of matters of concern and objectoriented democracy seriously, HCI has to extend beyond the planning and building of working systems--it has to engage with issues.
What is the difference between "matters of fact" and "matters of concern" and why is this of significance to HCI?
Matters of fact are conditions considered as objective data, separate from political conditions.
Matters of concern, in contrast, are perceived situations and their consequences; they are subjective experiences that constitute political conditions.
The distinctions between objective data and subjective experience are not absolute; they are constructed.
Recognition of this process of construction and how it affects knowledge and politics is one of the distinguishing qualities between matters of fact and matters of concern.
Consider climate change as an example.
Treated as a matter of fact, we can record various environmental conditions, compare and contrast these data, construct computational models with some level of assumed veracity, deliberate possible causes, and courses of action.
Treated as a matter of concern climate change includes all of that plus the lived experience and near-future effects of rising tides and fluctuating weather pattern, publically debated in the valuecharged and politicized forums of technology, economics, and religion.
Acting effectively in a democracy, requires engaging with topics as matters of concern--with the lived qualities of political conditions.
This does not mean abandoning rationality.
But it does means placing the experiential, the affective and the desired alongside the presumed objective.
What is the role of objects in addressing matter of concern?
Within politics, objects are typically not included in the debate themselves.
In contrast, for an increasing number of social scientists and theorists , this exclusion is a problem.
In their view, objects already participate in political debates.
Objects often function as expressions of matters of concern, encapsulating aspects of an issue to make them accessible to a broader public.
One of the many contributions of this scholarship is the distinction between design projects and design things.
The former are closed systems with clear and definable goals and timeframes.
They explain that design things are relational expressions that draw together humans and non-humans, resources and passions, in order to make issues manifest.
Put another way, we might say that design things are shorthand for design that does the work of expressing matters of concern.
Within HCI, the use of design to express matters of concern resonates with reflective , critical  and speculative design .
How design things function to express matters of concern is the fundamental question of our research.
Over the past five years we have taken a research-through-design approach  to this question--crafting design things to reflexively  examine this approach to contemporary democracy.
In what follows we present five projects and discuss how each attempts to express matters of concern.
Smog is Democratic was a media installation commissioned as part of the exhibition "Consequential Matters," at the museum of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
The purpose of the installation was to explore the issues of scientific representation, particularly with regard to pollution.
We sought to design a series of visualizations that combined the lived qualities of particulate matter with common forms of technical representation of pollution.
To that end, the media designs that were constructed for the installation were not intended to establish or prove facts.
Rather, the designs were interpretive and expressive, with the goal of considering how a range of sources and measurements of particulate matter might be aesthetically rendered in order to generate reflection.
The title of the installation, "Smog is Democratic" is taken from the sociologist Urlich Beck .
While some have argued that the claim "smog is democratic" is not accurate because the effects of environmental damage are unevenly distributed--in cases of environmental racism, for example--we find the phrase compelling and appropriate, for it communicates that the air around us is both shared and contested.
In working to express air pollution as a matter of concern, we began by considering how the sources and measurements of particulate matter might be displayed in order to generate reflection and debate.
Often the role of visualization as a technique is to clarify a scene.
Instead, as a deliberate design choice, data was used to obscure--to render the scene less visible.
The intention was both to confound expectations of what visualization does and also express the nature of the object under examination-- particulate matter in the air actually can inhibit visibility.
The data visualizations were based on air quality, smog,
Rather than resolving any tension between these themes, the design of the visualization was intended to collectively express their intermingling.
The location of the installation within the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention-- one of the institutions charged with assessing and communicating public health risks--added to the reflexivity of project.
Whereas some would normally expect only the most rigorous of data driven displays in this locale, what was presented was an array of designs that freely combined the objective and subjective.
Distribution in Time 1: Particulate Matter  and particulate matter data from 2008, maintained by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources.
This database records both predicted and observed smog alerts as well as daily ratings of the air quality index.
In each visualization, the data are used differently.
For example, in Distribution Over Time 1: Smog Alert Days Over Air Quality Index 2008 , a large format digital print approximately 40" by 20", the image is divided into 366 equal vertical slices, one for each day of 2008.
In the bottom half of the image, the slices are distorted relatively according to the observed Air Quality Index for each corresponding date.
In the top half of the image, slices that correspond to each observed smog alert have been removed .
Similarly, in "Distribution In Time 1: Particulate Matter 2008"  particulate matter data are used to generate the disruptions of the images in a video loop of a fly over of the city of Atlanta.
The distortion in that video loop has been modified according to the 2008 fine particulate matter data from a local monitoring site.
Each frame of the video corresponds to one hour of data.
The loop was displayed on a large monitor in the center of the exhibition and ran continuously.
In addition to these two visualizations, "Smog is Democratic" included a third visualization which was presented as a large format poster, as well as a reading area filled with books and periodicals about particulate matter from the CDC library, and an area displaying photographs of twenty-five sources of particulate matter.
Titled "Do You See What I See?
Through these media formats, and the installation as a whole, we sought to frame particulate matter as both a lived experience and an objective entity.
Like Smog Is Democratic the Pollen Calendar and Map sought to combine lived qualities of pollution with common forms of technical representation, but it added in the capacity for interactivity between people and social media.
The city of Atlanta, Georgia, has one of the highest annual pollen counts of any city in the United States.
Every spring, pollen blankets the city.
Pollen counts are orders of magnitude greater than the threshold set for a "High" pollen count by the National Allergy Bureau.
These numbers are reported daily on dedicated websites and other media channels.
The numbers report the facts of the daily pollen count and signal the dramatic nature of pollen in the city, but they fail to express the experience of living with pollen.
The process of measuring pollen count is laborious and expensive.
Every day, an expert must use sophisticated equipment to collect and tally microscopic spores from the previous 24 hours.
Because of the exhaustive nature of measurement, pollen counts are collected for large geographic areas only--at city or regional scale.
These measures may be useful for tracking wide trends, but their value is limited when applied to the variation between neighborhoods, as distribution and interaction with pollen is affected by conditions like tree cover, landscaping, wind patterns, architecture, and infrastructure.
In response to these common methods and forms of pollen counting and reporting we designed two tools: the Pollen Calendars and the Pollen Map.
As with other participatory sensing projects around environmental and urban contexts , we sought to provide users an opportunity to interpret their own sensing schemes, allowing them to use their own experiences in helping construct how information might create meaningful dialogues around issues.
As with Smog is Democratic, these design principles inverted the common methods and forms of counting pollen and reporting a simple data point.
Instead, we sought to design a sensing system that emphasizes the material qualities and lived experience of data in the world.
In addition, users of the map view photos that document the visible effects of pollen at a given moment.
We can speak individually of our own experience with pollen, but the Pollen Map provides a platform for aggregating and sharing a collective experience.
As this data accretes over time--images of pollen in situ, quips about streets turned yellow, vivid complaints about coughs and dreary eyes--the map becomes and ever-richer representation of the lived-experience with pollen.
Moreover, the Pollen Map has an enduring quality to it-- functioning as both an expression of the localized experience in the here and now, and also an archive, as users navigate backwards in time to previously posted and captured social expressions.
The Pollen Map, Pollen Calendar and Smog is Democratic share qualities and tactics.
These include the use of visualizations, integration of documentary photography as a form of expressive visual evidence, and an attentiveness to the materiality of the matter of concern.
This attentiveness to materiality signals a more general appreciation of the particular.
This is significant because matters of concern are not generic affairs.
They are distinguished by the factors that constitute them.
To express them requires a commitment to the particularities of the situation.
In these cases, the particularities are material entities and their qualities, and in order to make the matter of concern accessible, what is necessary is to place the particularities of the situation front and center in the designed thing.
Pollen Calendars are meant to provide a way for individuals to enact their own localized pollen measurements in a manner that calls attention to the materiality of pollen.
The Pollen Calendars are analog sensing platforms constructed from vacuum-formed plastic.
Each calendar is approximately 30cm by 20cm, and has 31 recessed wells and laser-cut labels that provide markers for the days of the week.
A sheet of clear acetate is affixed over the calendar and a flap is cut into it over each plastic well, allowing it to be opened and closed.
Each well is lined with petroleum jelly.
Pollen adheres to the jelly when the well is opened and exposed to air.
To be used, the Pollen Calendars are hung outside.
Each morning, users lift an acetate flap to open another well to collect pollen for that day.
The following morning, that flap is closed off with a bit of tape, and the next well exposed.
Given the size of many forms of pollen and the density of the pollen fall in Atlanta, the collection of pollen in each individual well is at times visible.
Under conditions when the pollen fall is both heavy and volatile, it is possible to visibly detect variations in collection over time--the wells create a natural sensor for pollen fall.
At the end of the month, the calendars are scanned.
Using a simple Photoshop macro, an image of each well in the month is extracted.
These images can be analyzed using a variety of software tools, or more simply compared side by side or sequenced together to generate an abstract slideshow of collected pollen for that particular location.
These images can also be tagged with a location and date and manually added to the Pollen Map.
The Pollen Map provides a way for individuals to view and compare the aggregate experience of pollen in different localities.
The pollen data reported is drawn from social media, and as such, provides a more personal and interpretive expression of the experience of pollen.
Specifically, the Pollen Map is an online digital map integrated with user-generated text and images.
A script searches Twitter and Flickr for geo-located content with relevant keywords and tags .
This content is scraped and stored in the Pollen Map database.
In addition, users can choose to tag tweets with the hashtag #pollenATL, adding the contents of those tweets, including username, timestamp, texts and images, to the Pollen Map database.
With the Pollen Map, users can navigate the text and images as they are sorted by time and location.
To try to build a relationship with existing metrics, the map's timeline can be "scrubbed" through and that day's pollen count is displayed beneath the map.
As people share pollen related content through Twitter or Flickr, that content is automatically aggregated and placed on the map.
The Political Grid project is a Twitter-based website where people respond to the tweets of politicians running for office.
The site was launched for the 2012 United States presidential election and followed the tweets of the two leading candidates, Barack Obama and Mitt Romney .
Upon registering at the website, users view the tweets side by side and then can choose to "vote" on any tweet based on two standards-- how much she agrees with the idea expressed in the tweet, and how important it is to her.
Each vote is cast along a scale, and then placed in a corresponding location on a grid .
Once the user votes on a given tweet they can see the results of others' vote on that same tweet, and across all of the tweets for a particular candidate.
They can also compare the candidates side by side.
Finally, the interface provides a simple word cloud that expresses the prevalence of terms within the tweets for each candidate .
Building upon current trends in visualization, using Political Grid provides opportunities for reflection through visualization  at multiple levels.
This repository reflects the changing  perspectives of individual users, candidates, and the collective field of participations, enabling multiple avenues for data analysis and reflexivity.
One can imagine the use of the system over an extended period of time, capturing and charting the changing affective sentiments of publics.
In thinking about the transition from matters of fact to matters of concern, Smog is Democratic, the Pollen Calendars and Pollen Maps, and Political Grid all contain what one would commonly consider facts--numerical datum.
Indeed, all the projects rely upon data for their representational forms.
Working to express matters of concern, then, is not a reactionary or naive rejection or manipulation of data.
Nor is it predicated on maintaining rigid distinctions between the so-called subjective and objectives qualities of a condition.
Rather, what each of these projects attempts to do is call attention to the interplay between the counted and perceived.
This interplay, this messiness in the construction of facts and issues is wellknown and well-articulated by scholars in many fields of the social sciences and humanities .
The challenge and opportunity for designers is to make this messiness accessible in experiential form.
Political Grid  individual scale, as a user can examine her political preference and the voting results of each tweet or voice in a greater detail.
At a broader level, among the collective of Political Grid users, one can compare votes, word frequency of tweets, and the temporal trends of voting.
Standard rhetorical strategies emerge: for instance, that Mr. Obama tends to tweet his own name and the word "President" but that Mr. Romney avoids mention of the president by name.
One can also see how each individual candidate is generally perceived through the clustering of tweet votes and their comparison between candidates.
But what is perhaps most significant in the project is the choice of the categories for voting.
These are not categories concerned with the veracity of the tweet, nor even their persuasiveness.
Rather, these are categories concerned with the affective orientation of the user towards the statement of a given politician.
What the design of the Political Grid attempts to do, then, is draw attention to affective aspects of contemporary politics through familiar channel of social media and relatively simply visual forms.
This purposeful and direct engagement with affective orientation is in contrast to much of the common treatment of politics in interaction design that strives for rational deliberation  or in HCI to mitigate the expression of "extreme" opinions .
This approach emphasizes the affective character of politics and argues that it is imperative to acknowledge and allow for the affect in political discourse and decision-making.
Rather than displacing the affective quality of politics, Political Grid puts it front and center.
Finally, a notable quality of Political Grid is that the interaction on the site does not simply end with voting.
The preceding projects shared similarities in structure--all involved data visualization, and to varying degrees, interaction with those visualizations.
The following examples shift toward participatory design.
The designed forms include workshops and hackathons, the experiential and material props made for those events, and the concepts and prototypes that emerged through co-design.
The GrowBot Garden project was a design research project reflecting trends in HCI around sustainability, DIY, and participatory design .
The central objective was to enable participants with no prior knowledge of robotics and sensing technologies to imagine how these technologies might be designed to better facilitate their practices and enact their desires and values.
This required developing scaffolding activities that would enable informed speculation.
The project took the form of a variety of workshops and extended participation in an arts festival.
While we were able to use and extend some previously developed tools with our participant, the novel subject matter of robotics and sensing combined with the culture and practices of small-scale local agriculture required the development of new activities for learning, discovery, and invention and a series of specific, deliberate design decisions regarding to the workshops' structure.
The full-day workshops provide a concrete example of the extended engagement between the design research team and the workshops' participants.
Participants ranged from laypeople interested in growing technologies to farmers, gardeners, cheese-makers, community organizers, and other food-producing stakeholders.
Additionally, a student studying soil science and two students of industrial design attended the event as participants.
The gender split among the participants was approximately equal, with a few more women than men.
Approximately half of the participants were between 20 and 35, with the other half ranging from 35 to 60.
The workshop began with a short presentation on the current state of the art of robotics.
We structured our visual survey of contemporary robotics as a dynamic conversation--participants were encouraged to speak out throughout the conversation, to openly make commentary, ask questions, and to chat among themselves and with us in real-time to the images being projected.
After the overview presentation, participants engaged in an exercise in which they created a physical model of their farm on a small rectangle of cardboard using craft supplies.
Taking turns, the participants stood up to describe their model and their growing practices.
We chose this tactic to ground the conversation in the practices of farming, to highlight the participants' intrinsic knowledge, and to provide a material basis for imagining robotics in their environs.
Next, we presented a series of learning stations designed to inform participants about the basic capabilities of robotic systems.
The stations were designed to be easy to understand and demonstrate sensing technology in a simple and straightforward manner.
For example, at one station, a computer with a webcam was used to demonstrate the basics of computer vision and sensing.
Using a simple program written in Processing, participants could select a specific color from the webcam feed, effectively isolating a single color range from the feed.
To make this demonstration relevant to growers and farmers, the station was stocked with a bowl of fruit to demonstrate how the technology could easily be used to identify the differences between apples, oranges, and bananas.
The afternoon was devoted to brainstorming, prototyping, and discussion of the prototypes.
Immediately after lunch, participants were asked to self-organize into groups for the afternoon activity, which we informed them would be about inventing new applications of robotic and sensing technologies for small-scale agriculture.
Each group delivered a their application concept as both a drawing and as a physical model.
After the brainstorming session, participants were given a quick overview of available prototyping materials.
Prototype from GrowBot Garden wire.
These items were displayed along two tables and a shelving unit, in a way that mirrored the lunch buffet: as an aesthetic collection of goods for their use and enjoyment.
In addition to these materials, tools such as wire cutters and screwdrivers were provided, and a table was used as a dedicated hot glue station.
After approximately two hours we stopped prototyping, and the groups presented their concept drawings and models.
Each group was asked to first identify the issue that was being addressed by their designs and then explain how the prototype would address that issue.
Eight prototypes were made and these fell into three categories of farming tasks or activities: irrigation/watering, mowing, and pest control .
The pest control prototypes most clearly engage in matters of concern.
Many of the participants were organic farmers and did not use pesticides, a practice that adds difficulty to dealing with bugs.
Also, as some of our participants pointed out, some insects can be beneficial to the production of plants.
According to one group, in an ideal world, a farm robot would be able to distinguish between the wanted and unwanted insects, and act accordingly.
This idea materialized as the BugBot prototype, which was designed as a roving robot that utilized fabric sails to brush insects off of leaves.
It included a computer vision system that could distinguish between different kids of insects.
When appropriate, the prototype could retract its sails so as not to disturb helpful bugs.
A related concept addressed pest control by distributing organic pest repellant through a rover.
This concept did not entail any fundamental new technology or activity, but rather the application of technologies currently used to assist in the use of pesticides to instead assist in the use of pesticide alternatives.
A third example, the Bio-Rover, was notable for the way the group envisioned the role of the robot.
This robot was to be outfitted with a series of sensors that would collect information about pests throughout the farm environment.
These prototypes are expressions of matters of concern for small-scale farmers.
Each prototype encapsulates a set of conditions for the farmer, communicating perspectives on how technology might address those conditions in ways that align with the farmer's values and practices.
In selecting conditions, participant-designers are bundling problematic relationships --both materially and conceptually.
These objects are then arguments: arguments for new sets of conditions where these formerly problematic conditions are eliminated through their intersection with designed objects.
A third group coalesced around rethinking zoning policy and was comprised of an academic computer scientist, an agricultural entrepreneur, a technology researcher, and a representative from City of Atlanta Office of Sustainability.
Over the course of the day, all the groups discussed, brainstormed, and diagrammed ideas.
Unlike a typical hackathon, we emphasized the early designing and planning phases by having materials available to produce conceptual work such as paper storyboards and wireframes rather than the production of code.
The groups presented their developed ideas twice over the course of the day.
These presentations included low fidelity materials, such as hand sketches and sticky notes.
Food Data Hack exhibits several key components of expressing matters of concern.
While the issues around Food Data Hack can be generalizable and found in different cities, the pre-event brainstorming and event introduction grounded the topic as a local matter of concern within the city of Atlanta, engaging particular, situated materials, relations, constraints, and opportunities.
In a similar way, the curation of attendees provided a way to scope and scale the event's impact.
As designers of the Food Data Hack event, we brought together people, their perspectives, and their broader organizational commitments as a way of articulating what is relevant.
These perspectives and commitments defined the matter of concern as existing in the relationship between technologists, designers, policymakers, growers, entrepreneurs, and officials.
Like many participatory design projects, The GrowBot Garden project and Food Data Hack expand design beyond the activities of professional designers and actively enroll others in the design process.
However in projects such as these, the design activities shift from contributing to the production of functional systems to participating in the production of experiential structures, activities, and props to support a collective speculation.
This is a new mode of community-based participatory design .
In this participatory design, the primary design task is one of developing support structures to undergird collective inquiry into matters of concern.
The designer becomes a facilitator, using her knowledge of design methods and processes to create the conditions for collective articulation of matters of concern.
Food Data Hack was a one-day hackathon on the topic of local food systems.
Specifically, Food Data Hack focused on the relationships between access to food, land use and zoning, and urban agriculture within the Atlanta, GA metropolitan area.
The goal of the event was to form small working groups around subtopics related to these issues.
These groups were tasked with developing means to address particular opportunities or gaps, with potential actions taking the form of concept sketches for artifacts, services, systems, and strategies.
During the planning phase, we invited the heads of two organizations, Atlanta Community Food Bank , and Atlanta Local Food Initiative , as well as a representative of the Office of the Mayor, to brainstorm the theme for the event.
During this conversation, the group identified land use and zoning as a contemporary issue for urban agricultural efforts within metro Atlanta, especially with regards to populations with low access to local agriculture and healthful foods.
The Food Data Hack began with a short breakfast where attendees conversed.
While this may seem inconsequential, these casual moments are important because they allow attendees to listen and interact more openly.
We deliberately invited a variety of people from what we perceived as non-overlapping communities: designers, developers, agricultural entrepreneurs, community organizers, local policymakers, and NGO representatives.
These groups brought different perspectives to the issues Food Data Hack was designed to address.
After breakfast, we briefly explained the overall purpose and theme of Food Data Hack.
The representatives from ACFB and ALFI further framed the day's activities with presentations.
This introductory session closed by asking attendees to self-select subtopics.
Six subgroups emerged, each around particular issues.
For example, one group formed around building an application for mapping underor un-utilized lands.
This group was comprised of a visual artist, two local growers, and an application developer.
A second group formed around the topics of fostering urban farm volunteers.
Each of the preceding "design things" attempts to express matters of concern: they convey lived experience, perceived consequences and desired futures.
One way that products and processes of design work to express matters of concern is by articulating issues and giving form to problematic situations.
This leads us to a notion of a public orientation in design--an orientation explicitly concerned with contributing to the construction of publics.
In his book The Public and its Problems, American philosopher John Dewey characterizes a "public" as a distinctive social organization, formed to address the conditions or consequences of a problematic situation or issue .
For Dewey, there is not a singular public, but rather a multitude of publics that form, take action, and dissolve.
The problematic situations or issues that give rise to a public do not need to be political.
They can be, and often are, formed around lived experience--for instance, the experience of living with pollen.
What characterizes these problematic situations or issues is that they are moments "where instinctive or habitual responses of the human organism to the environment are inadequate for the continuation of ongoing activity in pursuit of the fulfillment of needs and desires."
To articulate an issue or give form to a problematic situation is to identify and communicate the connections between the qualities and factors of a condition and its consequences.
What design adds to this endeavor is an experiential quality.
Smog is Democratic, Pollen Calendar and Pollen Map employ design to articulate issues of air quality and situations of pollution/pollen in an experiential manner.
By focusing on pluralistic methods of displaying different sources, quantity, and distribution of particulate matter data, Smog is Democratic expressed the ubiquity and longevity of particulate matter as an ongoing part of the lived experience of Atlantans.
The smog data was used to "blanket" the image of the city--distorting the view of the visualizations for all.
Pollen Calendar and Pollen Map achieve similar ends through different means.
In designing an object that democratizes the recording and sharing of pollen data, both the calendar and the map encourage users to interact with a matter of concern in a visceral way.
This interaction re-contextualizes the practice pollen data collection, measurement and recording, removing it from the realm of experts only, and re-casting it as a shared endeavor.
Without articulation, problematic situations and issues may remain muddled, unnoticed, or inaccessible.
But design events and activities of prototyping can function as a means of articulation.
At the GrowBot Garden and Food Data Hack events, participants came together to collectively communicate factors affecting small-scale agriculture and food systems.
In GrowBot Garden, the participants manifested issues through their prototypes, demonstrating how ag-tech design currently does not, but might in the future, align with their practices, e.g., those of pest management.
By coalescing the interests and metaphors of a computer scientist, an entrepreneur, a technology researcher, and a government policymaker at the Food Data Hack event, the group discovered that one of the impediments to local food systems was a different kind of code: zoning policy.
The relationship between publics and issues has received significant attention at the intersection of Science and Technology Studies , Design, and HCI.
For example, Noortje Marres has explored how technologies such as smart meters and eco-homes cohere publics concerned with sustainability .
Her research provides insight into the role of devices and systems in expressing an issue and providing objects with which to "materially participate" in that issue .
Similarly, within design studies DiSalvo has explored how speculative and critical design might contribute to the construction of Deweyan publics through the articulation of issues .
Within HCI, Le Dantec has explored design and publics through a series of projects and papers .
This work demonstrates the applicability of publics as a conceptual frame for describing and analyzing community-based HCI research as it unfolds across multiple contexts.
Lindtner has further extended the discourse on publics in HCI by using the work of Michael Warner  his theories of counterpublics to produce a novel interpretation of media sharing collectives .
Throughout this scholarship the concepts of publics and the articulation of issues have, primarily, operated as analytic frames.
They can also function as generative devices for initiating and guiding design activity.
Moves toward this can be found in the recent participatory design scholarship .
Increasingly, when we "do" HCI we are acting in fraught contexts such as sustainability, healthcare, or development.
In some situations, it may not be clear what the appropriate role for HCI design is, or even whether design is the appropriate response to a condition at all .
A public orientation takes a step back from the common design imperatives of providing solutions or initiating change.
Adopting a public orientation in HCI sets the articulation of issues and giving form to problematic situations as the primary design objective--the purpose of design becomes to identify the qualities and factors of a condition and make those qualities, factors and their relations experientially accessible.
Although this orientation may seem simple or obvious, we argue it is a meaningful shift in the purpose of design, with implications for practice and criticism.
From this orientation, the basis for assessment and judgment is not whether an issue or situation resolved through design.
Rather the basis for assessment and judgment is whether we now have a better recognition and understanding of the contours of the issue or situation.
We began this paper with the question How can design products and processes function to express matters of concern?
Drawing from the examples and with these ideas of articulating issues, giving form to problematic situations, and contributing to the construction of publics, we can begin to identify particular tactics and strategies.
For the practicing designer, a key task is to provide scaffolding or infrastructure to support articulation and form-giving toward the construction of publics .
This scaffolding is meant to support an active process of coming to know through experience the qualities and factors of a condition.
This scaffolding can take any material or interactional form depending upon the format of the design object.
For instance, this might include activities within a workshop or tools for reflective use.
It could also be material mediating the designed object itself, explaining its context or production.
For example, documents from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention library were gathered and presented as part of Smog is Democratic to provide background on pollution monitoring and representation.
The effect of a public design orientation is that artifacts, systems, and events function to expose and re-imagine constraints and parameters surrounding issues and problematic situations.
With the Pollen Calendars and the Pollen Map these systems were designed to re-imagine what processes and technologies might constitute environmental sensing and monitoring.
If we expand the data of environmental sensing and monitoring to include hyper-localized, coarse, and anecdotal reporting, how might our desires for and expectations of future systems and processes change?
Through these activities of re-imagination, designers and participants are engaging in prototyping new social, economic, and political arrangements.
With GrowBot Garden, for instance, modeling a process in which smallscale famers become actively engaged in the conceptualization and specification of agricultural technologies that support their values and practices was more important than any particular model of a robot or potential feature..
This prototyping of new social, economic, and political arrangements was even more pronounced in Food Data Hack, which explicitly sought to foster new working relations between stakeholders that might lead to innovations in the use of data to support small-scale agriculture.
Through this process, objects take on particular roles too: objects become arguments for alternate situations in which the problematic condition which give rise to publics have been reconfigured.
The models created in the GrowBot Garden project are perhaps the best examples: they demonstrate a possible future in which robotic products do exist that serve the values and value-driven practices of the participants.
In this paper we have explored the ways design might work to express matters of concern across a variety of formats, including media design, visualizations, workshops, and hackathons.
Certainly our examples are not exhaustive.
They merely begin to highlight some of the ways that we might use design to encapsulate and communicate the experiential qualities of matters of concern.
More work is needed to better describe, evaluate and critique these methods and forms.
Fundamental to the activity of expressing matters of concern is the articulation of issues and giving form to problematic situations, with the consideration that such articulation and form giving might contribute to the construction of publics.
Inspired by this idea we propose the term "public design" to characterize this work.
Public design is not meant to be new genre of design, such as speculative or critical design  or reflective design .
Rather, we consider it as an orientation in design applicable across genres.
That is, one could imagine a given speculative, critical, or reflective design as being more or less oriented toward the construction of publics.
This orientation can serve both analytic and generative purposes.
Analytically, one could assess the extent to which a given design operates to identify the qualities and factors of a condition and make those qualities, factors and their relations experientially accessible.
Generatively, one could set the design task as that of creating experiential scaffolds or infrastructure for coming to know the qualities and factors of a condition.
As a term, then, public design can be used to encapsulate a collection of design tactics and strategies, applicable to a variety of practices and genres.
Expressing matters of concern requires new approaches to design and HCI and sets new purposes and expectations for the field.
But why trouble with this?
By way of conclusion it is worthwhile to revisit the question that seemed to motivate Making Things Public : how does one "do" democracy in the 21st century?
That question also seems present throughout many domains of HCI and its numerous sub-fields.
There is no single answer to that question.
However, we believe that one approach, as a starting point, is to use HCI design as a means to make known the qualities and factors that comprise contemporary social conditions.
