Previous research shows that text entry by gaze using dwell time is slow, about 5-10 words per minute .
These results are based on experiments with novices using a constant dwell time, typically between 450 and 1000 ms. We conducted a longitudinal study to find out how fast novices learn to type by gaze using an adjustable dwell time.
Our results show that the text entry rate increased from 6.9 wpm in the first session to 19.9 wpm in the tenth session.
Correspondingly, the dwell time decreased from an average of 876 ms to 282 ms, and the error rates decreased from 1.28% to .36%.
The achieved typing speed of nearly 20 wpm is comparable with the result of 17.3 wpm achieved in an earlier, similar study with Dasher.
Majaranta and Raiha  provide a review of text entry by gaze.
According to them, most gaze typing evaluations have been conducted with novices using a constant, fairly long dwell time .
The reported typing speed has typically been fairly slow, from 5 to 10 words per minute .
The text entry speed of real experts has not been measured for any of the gaze controlled systems .
In a more recent study, Wobbrock et al.
They used a short dwell time of 330 ms, nevertheless, their result of 7 wpm is in line with previous research.
For experimental reasons, Wobbrock et al.
Spakov and Miniotas  studied automatic adjustment of dwell time.
Even though their results were encouraging there was some delay and involuntary variation in the automatic adjustment.
The participants would have wanted to change the speed more quickly.
Therefore, they suggest a trade-off on the extent of the automatic control to let the user decide when the duration is convenient.
We conducted a longitudinal study to find out how fast novices learn to gaze type when they are allowed to adjust the dwell time at will as they wish.
The method and a summary of the results are reported below.
Gaze typing  is a means of entering text by gaze.
In the most typical setting, the user points at the letters on the screen by looking at them.
A gaze tracking system tracks the user's gaze direction and transforms it to screen coordinates.
Such gaze control is most needed by people with severe motor disabilities, who have no or little control of muscles.
If the user is not able to press a manual switch or blink to select the focused letter, a command can be distinguished from casual viewing by dwell time, a gaze duration that is longer than the normal viewing time.
A long dwell time is good for preventing false selections but a long fixation on the same target can be tiring to the eyes.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Eleven able-bodied university students volunteered for the experiment .
All were native speakers of Finnish and familiar with the QWERTY keyboard layout but novices in gaze typing.
All participants were rewarded with four movie tickets.
To motivate the participants in the ten-day experiment, we informed them after the first session that the participant who would learn to gaze type the best would receive an extra prize.
The COGAIN ETU Driver, with a plug-in for Tobii, was used to implement the experimental keyboard and to save data.
The stimulus phrase was shown on top of the experimental keyboard .
The transcribed text written by the participant appeared in the text input field below the stimulus.
Letters were organized into a QWERTY-like layout, including keys for the most common punctuation.
Space, Shift  and Backspace were located below the letter keys.
The last row included the keys for adjusting dwell time  and a `Ready' key .
We decided to use a speed meter as an indicator of the typing  speed instead of  dwell time adjustment because it was considered more natural and easier to understand for the users.
When the speed indicator's hand was in the middle, the dwell time was 600 ms.
Thus, the steps to adjust the speed became smaller as the indicator moved to the right.
This enabled a rapid increase of speed with long dwell times and fine adjustment of speed with very short dwell times.
X is the step controlled by the user using the minus and plus keys that change the X by 1.
In the lower end, when the dwell time duration is long, the step is 160 ms and in the higher end  the step is only 25 ms.
An animated closing circle was shown on the key to indicate the progression of dwell time .
The color of the animation was chosen so that it disturbed as little as possible but was still easy to see.
When the dwell time run out , the key was visually pressed down and a `click' sound was heard.
The participants were told that they can ask the experimenter to remove the animated feedback if they find it disturbing.
The active selection area was bigger than the visible key in order to minimize potential problems caused by inaccuracy in calibration.
Thus, the key was selected  even if the measured point of gaze was somewhat outside of the key.
Each participant was first briefed about gaze control and the motivation of the study.
Before the actual test, the participants practiced gaze control briefly by playing three rounds of a simple board game  by gaze.
The participants were seated so that their eyes were approximately 50-60 cm from the monitor.
They were instructed to sit fairly still but their movements were not restricted in any way.
The gaze tracker was calibrated at the beginning of every session.
Re-calibration was done if needed but we tried to do it between phrases.
If the tracker had to be re-calibrated in the middle of a phrase, the phrase was ignored in the analysis.
The task was to type as many phrases as possible within the 15-minute time limit.
Finnish translation  of the 500 phrase set originally published by MacKenzie and Soukoreff .
The phrases were easy to remember, neutral everyday sentences.
Some of the phrases contained capital letters and punctuation; some only had lower case letters.
The phrases were shown one at a time.
After finishing the phrase, the participant selected the `Ready' key which loaded the next phrase.
The software was set to stop after the 15-minute time limit had passed and the participant had finished typing the last sentence.
The timer ran only during active typing, starting from the entering of the first letter and ending with the selection of the `Ready' key.
Participants were instructed first to memorize the phrase and then to write it as quickly and accurately as possible.
They were instructed to correct errors only if they detected them soon after the error occurred .
The dwell time duration was initially set to 1000 ms for all participants.
Participants were instructed to adjust the dwell time between sentences but they were able to adjust it anytime they wanted.
The use of special keys and the rules of correcting mistakes were explained in every session.
Each participant visited the laboratory ten times.
The sessions were organized so that there never was more than 2 days between the consecutive sessions, with a few occasional exceptions with 3 days between the sessions.
The first and the last session took about an hour with initial preparations, instructions and final interviews.
Other sessions lasted about half an hour, including preparations and a short questionnaire before and after each test.
In total, each participant gaze typed  two and half hours.
The typing speed was measured in words per minute  where a word is defined as 5 characters, including space and punctuation .
The grand mean for the text entry speed was 6.90 wpm in the first session and 19.89 wpm in the last, tenth session.
The dwell time duration was initially set to 1000 ms.
The grand mean for the dwell time was 876 ms in the first session and 282 ms in the last session.
The decrease in dwell time was especially rapid during the first three sessions .
Nobody used the minus key  in the first session but its use increased in later sessions when participants made minor adjustments both ways to find the highest manageable typing speed.
In total, the plus key was selected 229 times and the minus key 96 times.
The error rate was measured by comparing the transcribed text  with the presented text  using the improved minimum string distance  error rate suggested by Soukoreff and MacKenzie .
The MSD error rate does not take into account corrected errors.
The grand mean for the MSD error rate was 1.28% in the first session and .36% in the last session.
Thus, the error rates decreased even though the typing speed increased.
Overall, the error rate remained quite reasonable  throughout the experiment.
Keystrokes per character   measures the average number of keystrokes used to enter each character of text.
Ideally, each key press produces one character, meaning KSPC is 1.
If the participant corrects mistakes during text entry, KSPC is greater than 1 .
Thus, KSPC measures the overhead incurred in correcting mistakes.
The grand mean for KSPC was 1.09 in the first session and 1.18 in the last session .
The increase in the KSPC suggests that people had to correct more errors when the typing speed increased, however, the increase was not statistically significant .
The results are based on 10 participants.
One participant was a clear outlier that was excluded from the statistics but included in the figures .
Due to technical problems, we lost the data for one session of one participant.
The missing values were replaced with an average of the previous and the next session.
Analysis of a phrase started from entering the first character and ended to the selection of the `Ready' key.
We analyzed the subjective ratings with the nonparametric Wilcoxon Matched Pairs Signed Ranks Test.
In order to measure eye fatigue, we asked the participants how tired their eyes were before each test, and again after the test using a scale from 1 to 7.
The fatigue level was calculated by subtracting the first  value from the latter value.
There was no significant difference between the average level of the subtracted tiredness, which was .6 in the first session and .8 in the last session.
We also measured perceived speed, ease of use, and general fatigue after each session using a questionnaire with a scale from 1 to 7 .
There was an increase in the perceived speed , which is in line with the increase in the measured speed.
Finally, we interviewed the participants after the last session.
Participants felt that typing by gaze was fairly easy, easier than they had imagined, but clearly slower than using a conventional, hand operated keyboard.
Participants appreciated the QWERTY layout because of its familiarity.
All participants felt they had improved in gaze typing over the sessions, especially in the beginning.
All participants felt the typing speed adjustment was clear and easy to use.
Participants felt they had enough feedback of the gaze controlled selection of a key.
Auditory feedback was considered as either more important  or equally important  as the visual feedback.
Participants also appreciated the animated feedback and wanted to keep the closing circle even with very short dwell times; five participants tried gaze typing without the circle but only two had it turned off in the end of the last session.
Half of the participants experienced problems in using the Shift key: with short dwell times, participants experienced a delay in screen refreshing when the lower case letters were changed to upper case versions.
This caused disorientation and difficulty in selecting the next letter.
However, it should be noted that in the Dasher experiment, the speed curve was still growing rapidly after the ten sessions, suggesting a potentially significant increase in speed even after the two and half hours of practice.
It is hard and probably unfair to compare these totally different text entry methods.
However, our results do show that people can gaze type fairly fast and accurately using a simple, easy to learn on-screen keyboard, provided a fixed dwell time does not slow down the typing.
We would like to thank all volunteers who participated in the experiment.
We would also like to thank Kari-Jouko Raiha and Howell Istance for consultation and I. Scott MacKenzie for the use of his Java tools in analyzing the results.
This work was supported by COGAIN, Network of Excellence on Communication by Gaze Interaction  and partly supported by Academy of Finland .
The decrease was rapid during the first few sessions so that already in the fourth session, the average dwell time was down to 378 ms.
Correspondingly, the average typing speed had increased from 6.9 wpm to 16.2 wpm in the fourth session, with a reasonable low error rate of .37%.
Four 15-minute sessions equal to one hour of practice, after which the learning decelerated prominently.
Our study followed the method used by Tuisku et al.
Dasher  is considered as the world's fastest method to write by gaze .
