Exertion games are an emerging form of interactive games that require players to invest significant physical effort as part of the gameplay, rather than just pressing buttons.
These exertion games have potential health benefits by promoting exercise.
It is also believed that they can facilitate social play between players and that social play can improve participation in exertion games.
However, there is currently a lack of understanding of how to design games to support these effects.
In this paper, we present a qualitative case study that illustrates how networked environments support social play in exertion games and how this can help to gain an understanding of existing games and support the design of future games.
This work offers a preliminary analytical and descriptive account of the relationship between exertion and social play in such a game and highlights the influence of design with the aim of utilizing the attributed benefits of exertion and social play.
These games - exertion games - require physical effort from the player  and are at the centre of a new, popular genre of computer games.
From the early arcade game Dance Dance Revolution  through Sony's EyeToy  to today's Nintendo Wii , these games have created an interesting trend in games that involves exertion as part of the play mechanics.
These exertion games have been attributed with various benefits.
They are believed to contribute to physical health, addressing the obesity issue by encouraging energy expenditure from its players .
Furthermore, facilitating exertion in games is also associated with social play , in contrast to the isolated character of traditional computer games .
Exertion games are believed to attract a wider audience than traditional `hardcore' players and facilitate more social game experiences .
Exertion games are often played with others , and research has suggested that these games can facilitate engagement, but also transfer the quality of the game from "hard fun" to "social fun" .
These games are also believed to be particularly suitable for a social context .
In sum, exertion seems to facilitate a social play experience.
Given that exertion games resemble sports in a number of ways, most notably in creating a game that involves some form of bodily contest, it should not be surprising that exertion games can also support sociality.
After all, it is well recognized that sporting activities also have significant social benefits and sports games are associated with teambuilding, bonding and rapport experiences .
Although sports games can be a complex social phenomenon, through the evolution of sports games humans have learned how to utilize the social effects of sports and how to derive and include social benefits from and into their sports activities .
However, exertion games are a new phenomenon, and it is not clear how the associated social benefits manifest themselves in these new experiences .
Furthermore, exertion games are often mediated, which poses unique opportunities but also challenges for social play.
A lack of understanding of this relationship between exertion and social play can limit the development of games in this area, preventing players profiting from the benefits these new experiences can provide.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Prior work on exertion games and social play has mainly considered collocated participants.
However, networking advances can offer the benefit of expanding the range of available participants, enabling social play with friends and family far apart.
Also, traditional computer games have already embraced social play through networked systems .
Exertion games might therefore benefit similarly from the advantages of networking technologies.
On the other hand, mediated interactions can have distinct advantages and disadvantages when compared to face-to-face interactions , it is therefore not obvious if the social benefits attributed to exertion games are necessarily also applicable in such mediated environments.
In particular, there is a limited understanding of the role of the game's design in facilitating social play in exertion games.
The purpose of this paper is to contribute to this understanding.
Salen and Zimmerman frame games as social play when the relationships between elements in the game system are considered to be social relationships .
Although social play is an indirect, emergent outcome of players' experience with a game, and hence social play cannot be directly designed for, a game's design can contribute to the emergence of social play .
The authors propose that the users' actions were responsible for this change, however, others such as de Kort et al.
Furthermore, as their study only investigated limited exertion, it seems compelling to investigate what effects more severe exertion might facilitate.
The authors believe that social play can be designed for and propose "sociality characteristics" for games .
They are: the presence of others, opportunities for monitoring performance and actions, role and relationship, and interpersonal differences.
These characteristics were compiled before Lindley et al.
Unfortunately, the authors present no empirical evidence for their sociality characteristics.
Hoonhout and Fontijn on the other hand report on the design of an exertion game, and confirm that the "source of fun" was the social aspect , but give no further insights into how the game's design facilitated it or how it could be mediated.
Their work extends the player role  characteristic from de Kort et al.
We begin by describing prior work that laid the foundations for the investigation of social aspects in regards to exertion activity.
We then describe our focus of contributing to this topic by beginning to provide an understanding of social play in exertion games through the means of a case study.
It is a qualitative case study of "Table Tennis for Three" that describes how users experienced social play in a networked competitive exertion game.
We argue that exertion games can facilitate social play, even in mediated environments; however, the game's design plays an important role.
Our contribution includes design implications based on the empirical evidence that is aimed at supporting social play in mediated exertion games.
We conclude by suggesting a research agenda for future work on the investigation of social aspects and exertion.
The consideration of social benefits of physical play in interactive systems is grounded in theoretical work on the human body and how it interacts with other embodied beings.
Merleau-Ponty lays the groundwork by introducing a perspective that proposed that the mind and the body should not be investigated separately, but rather be seen as intertwined and mutually engaged .
He argues that this embodiment is a necessary precondition for social interaction, in which each person is participating in the same embodied existence as the other .
This link between sociality and exertion from a perspective of meaning making relates back to Heidegger's view that humans turn action into meaning.
The meaning is not inherent in the exertion, but made meaningful through the social context.
Research in HCI has built upon these philosophical investigations: Winograd stresses the social aspect of meaning-making when interacting with the world using computing devices , pointing at the existence of a social component inherent in our bodily interactions.
Working out together has been attributed with heightened engagement and fun, and it has been described as a facilitator to socialize .
Recent exertion studies on obesity intervention in high schools found improvements in students' social skills .
Research in sports games suggests many social benefits of exercising with others.
However, finding the right exercise partner is not always easy and lack or loss of sports partners can negatively affect participation levels .
Telecommunication advances can help people find suitable exercise partners, and some exertion games have emerged that accommodate geographically distant participants.
Fish'N'Steps is such an example.
It is a mobile application that encourages participation through the use of peer pressure .
The proposed system works in combination with a pedometer to motivate an increase of a participant's daily energy expenditure.
The system is more a performance measuring device than a game, and although the system supported an anonymous environment to protect the users' privacy, the participants reported that a face-toface introduction would have been better, as they wanted to know who the other players were, strengthening de Kort et al.
Shakra  also supports physical activity awareness in a mobile setting, and the authors report on the beneficial aspect of competitive progress exchange as encouragement to exercise more.
Based on a study, the authors have identified design requirements.
They agree with de Kort et al.
Synchronous exertion games often include a videoconferencing component to allow for verbal and nonverbal communication, however, not many empirical investigations exist that can provide guidance on what features of a design can facilitate uptake.
For example, exercise bikes have been networked to allow for distributed races in a commercial competitive environment.
The exertion component appears to offer unique uses of supplementary physiological data to enhance the distributed experience, as participants reported that the heart rate from remote riders motivated them to cycle faster .
Breakout for Two is a synchronous exertion game for two players with an integrated video communication channel.
An evaluation showed that players had a closer sense of connectedness as if they had played a keyboard-controlled game, and it has been suggested that the life-size videoconference contributed to it .
Prior work suggests that exertion games can facilitate social play.
Related work indicates that the game's design can play a contributing role; however, there is a limited understanding of how the design facilitates social play, in particular in mediated environments, as distributed games can extend the opportunities for social interactions.
Research designs have suggested design requirements for either exertion games or social play, but have yet to investigate these aspects together in order to provide empirical evidence for a deeper understanding of the issue, considering the unique opportunities and shortcomings of exertion in mediated communication.
Our work aims to narrow the gap by investigating the following research question: How can the design of exertion games facilitate social play, in particular in mediated environments?
We approach the research question by presenting a qualitative analysis of one particular case study.
This case study is a competitive exertion game called Table Tennis for Three.
When we frame Table Tennis for Three as social play, we refer to Salen and Zimmerman's approach that the relationships between elements in the game system are social relationships: the players participate in social play, communicating via game play, "in which a game becomes a context for stylized communication, mediated through social interaction" .
Our focus is on the internally derived social interactions, as they emerge from the game's design .
By analyzing player data from this case study, we derive salient themes that provide an insight into social play in exertion games.
We use them to generate design themes that are aimed at aiding others in analyzing existing and designing new games.
We acknowledge that our focus on one particular case study limits our findings, in particular to competitive synchronous games.
However, we believe our results can still serve as a valuable starting point for future investigations to continue building evidence to further support, refine, and add to the described observations.
The goal with this focused inquiry is to provide designers with transferable aspects of the application as well as inspire future work, as the field of exertion games is still in its infancy.
The players can either try to crack as many bricks as possible by placing the ball quickly or they can poach points from other players by waiting for the opportunity to snatch away points through hitting bricks that have been already hit twice by the others.
Each brick that is completely broken scores one point, and the running score is displayed along the top end of the projection.
Play continues until all bricks have been cracked three times and been removed from play.
At this point the player who has scored the most points is announced as the winner and after a delay of 15 seconds, the game resets all the bricks and play can recommence.
Each player has a ball, a paddle and a table tennis table.
The table is set up so that the ball can be hit against the vertically positioned opposite half of the table .
This setup is familiar to table tennis players who practice on their own by playing the ball against the board.
This backboard has projected images of eight large `bricks' on it.
These bricks are identical for all players, i.e.
These bricks are semi-transparent and are projected onto the backboard with a projector mounted to the ceiling.
In addition to the bricks, it also projects two video streams of the other players in the game.
One player is positioned on the left of the backboard, and the other on the right.
Each table has a set of loud speakers and each player wears a microphone so the three participants can converse with each other.
The backboard is equipped with sensors mounted on the back that detect when and which brick the players are hitting .
These bricks `break' when hit by the ball because the sensors register the location of the impact.
All three players see the same brick layout and the same brick status.
If a brick is hit once, it cracks a little.
If it is hit again , it cracks more.
The crack appears on all three stations .
If hit three times, it `breaks' and is removed from play, revealing more of the underlying videoconferencing: the player `broke' through to the remote player.
However, only the player that hits the brick the third and final time receives the point.
This offers players a number of strategies for winning the game.
We are presenting results from a qualitative approach to analyzing the social play of Table Tennis for Three.
We used video material of participants playing and interviews we conducted with them after the games.
Each team played for at least 30 minutes, however, only one player was recorded at a time.
If notable actions occurred on the remote end, this was observed through the videoconference.
However, the video from the conferencing system was not included in the analysis.
Videotaping the playing in action allowed us to record the social interactions the volunteers engaged in while capturing their exertion actions.
The players were brought together into one room after the game, where we conducted detailed interviews with all three of them together.
The interviews lasted from 20 to 60 minutes and contained open-ended questions about their experience and their interactions with the other players.
We took notes during the interviews as well as videotaped the session.
Participants were recruited through personal contacts, email lists and word-of-mouth.
The volunteers were asked in the advertising material to organize themselves preferably in teams of three.
If they were unable to do so, we matched them up randomly with other participants in order to have always three people participating at the same time.
We had one last minute cancellation; in this case we replaced the third player with a participant that had played previously.
The data of this team was not used in this analysis, hence we report on 39 participants in 13 distinct teams.
The participants were between 21 and 55 years old, whereas 26 were male and 13 female.
Their previous exposure to table tennis was varied: 1 has never played before, 14 have played less than 5 times, 18 between 5 and 100 times and the rest have played more than 100 times before.
We analyzed the video data using a coding process based on grounded theory  with the help of a database for all the video and analysis data.
We acknowledge that such an approach benefits from an open mind towards the data, but as we already had conducted evaluations on related phenomena before, we realize this is hard to achieve, even in generic grounded theory approaches , and researchers therefore often use mixed forms when coding data .
Consequently, we drew on sensitizing concepts from our previous studies and the relevant literature.
An iterative coding process was used to identify important themes and ideas.
We also used the notes and created affinity diagrams to further refine our concepts.
Play and interview data was investigated separately first, but then analyzed in terms of mutual theoretical constructs to create a hierarchical set of overarching themes.
Meaning has been used previously in investigations of embodiment, as it is constructed in practical acts of engagement with social and physical worlds .
As exertion interactions describe a quality of the interaction, meaning can help us understand this aspect, we believe, because "interaction creates meaning" .
Our players associated meaning to their exertion actions, but the meaning was only made meaningful through the social context.
The associated meaning arose from the exertion actions the players participated in, reproducing social interaction.
The players expressed meaning through hitting the ball with varying intensity, and they also tried to read meaning out of the way the opponents played.
Signs of exertion can indicate that one of them is exhausted and might make a mistake.
These are all examples of how meaning played an important role in regards to exertion.
We found with Dourish  that action and meaning is inseparable.
Table Tennis for Three could have been extended in this regard: players expressed that they missed additional opportunities to assign and express further meaning, highlighted by the example of Schadenfreude.
Players showed visible signs of exertion during the game, such as wiping off sweat of their foreheads and taking off layers of clothing.
Some players smashed the ball.
These smashes did not count more than a regular hit in terms of gameplay, however, players said they used these to send a message to the remote participants.
The game could have encouraged more physical play, as one player noticed.
He suggested implementing a function that would break a block twice upon a hard hit, in order to reward more intense exertion actions.
As another participant put it, there is "no reward" for playing with much exertion: if a player puts a lot of physical effort into a ball, the ball returns uncontrollably, and has to be collected from the back of the room, costing valuable time and therefore possibly points.
Users not only demonstrated signs of exertion, but also affective expressions in abundance: Most verbal interactions were of emotional nature and not in relation to play directly, such as swearing, yelling, or dismissing the other player, but sometimes also words of encouragement were exchanged: "You are not trying hard enough!
Most of these verbal exchanges were of a joking nature, with elements of mocking, teasing or "fooling around", characteristic of social sports games .
The players supplemented their verbal comments with a gesture, such as throwing their hands in the air to indicate they won.
One player jokingly made a fist to the other players, another participant put her tongue out.
Players often applauded others on their performance, and some performed little winning dances.
This was often accompanied by laughter, facilitating a humorous atmosphere.
The joyful atmosphere carried over into the interviews.
In particular, one team patted each other's shoulders and slapped each other comradely several times during the interview.
Another team initiated a group hug.
The exertion activity served as a starting point for social interaction, but it also affected verbal exchange negatively.
Players sometimes wanted to communicate verbally, but were not able to because they were too exhausted or too engaged in their exertion activity.
A player made this explicit by saying "hang on..." when the beginning of a new game interrupted his dialogue.
He continued his verbal exchange in the next break of the game after he recovered from his exhaustion.
Some players extended the breaks created by the game to accommodate their physical health needs; this often resulted in using these breaks for social play activity such as synchronizing start times .
The players used the opportunities created by the breaks for social interaction, in which arousal levels were often still high from the exertion activity that preceded them.
These breaks can facilitate dialogue as they precede events players can talk about, for example our participants often discussed the last ball played.
Players in non-exertion games also include breaks in their activities.
However, we argue that they are not as frequent as in exertion games, and are not motivated by a similar physiological urgency.
A computer gamer using a mouse might schedule a break to do some repetitive strain injurypreventing wrist movements, however, its duration and frequency is very different to breaks in exertion games.
Players in non-exertion games often chose to take a break, these games are not a necessity that their body demands.
If the players take a break, they want to regenerate from the cognitive demands of the game, in an exertion game, the  social interaction is a diversion from the main activity.
Metagaming is a social play phenomenon that refers to the relationship of a game to elements outside of the game.
One way that metagaming occurs "during a game other than the game itself...are social factors such as competition and camaraderie" .
Our participants played a metagame by verbally and non-verbally commenting on the other players' performance and turning the game into a social spectacle.
Another way of metagaming is what a player takes away from the game , we observed this in the retelling during the interviews.
The retelling of what happened in a game is an important part of a "lived experience" .
Players predominantly used their exertion skills in the games, so they drew on these skills again during the reliving of the experience.
This reliving of a "pleasurable kinesthetic stimulation" is believed to re-trigger the associated pleasurable emotions .
Re-enacting the exertion movements can also support the player's cognitive processes, helping them remembering certain parts of the game .
Players gave further meaning to these exertion actions by reliving and sharing them with others, the support for metagaming contributed towards a meaningful social play experience.
These exertion actions supporting metagaming are missing in gamepad-controlled computer games, and the players have to rely on their cognitive skills to remember their lived experience and associated affective responses.
We identified another aspect of metagaming that is not considered in traditional games.
Exertion can facilitate social interactions, but we have also observed that it can prevent players from engaging in dialogue, often simply because they are out of breath.
This led to a social aspect of metagaming `between games' that was unique to the exertion component of the games.
The players in Table Tennis for Three invested physical effort, which lead to muscle fatigue and physical exhaustion.
Metagaming during, between and after the games is an important part of social play, and the expressive character of exertion seems to be particularly perceptive to facilitating this.
Future designs should support opportunities for metagaming.
This can include, but is not limited to, allowing distributed participants to retell the exertion activity with their body.
Keeping a videoconference always on can support this.
Shorter sets in the game's rules could facilitate breaks for recovery and therefore social interaction.
Emotional comments such as "I didn't say go !
This became a distinct element of social play for many players, accompanied by friendly verbal exchanges and social comments: for example, one player was about to serve and initiated a serving movement, but stopped in-between motion, to provoke a `false' start, which resulted in loud laughter by all participants.
We have found evidence that the synchronicity of the exertion action the game afforded contributed to the sense of a shared activity.
The instance of the 'fake start` illustrates the contribution of exertion to this aspect: exertion actions require kinesthetic movements that include a range of motions , for our players it was a backswing,
Although only the contact with the ball "counted" towards the game, all elements form part of play.
A comparison with traditional gamepadcontrolled games might highlight the contribution of the exertion component: synchronizing play is more difficult with buttons, as they do not facilitate visible sequential movements  that remote participants could use as clues to negotiate shared activity, which in turn could lead to social play.
However, as Lindley et al.
This extends prior work by de Kort et al.
We have found that including exertion can facilitate social play as it can support coordination efforts that facilitate synchronicity.
This notion of surprise was appreciated by the players, as it has been previously recognized in physical play  and augmented mixed reality games .
Our findings in regards to uncertainty contribute to Gaver's claim that the physical environment can provide affordances for social interaction in games , and Hornecker's suggestion that "the richness of bodily movement" in combination with tangible interfaces is particularly beneficial for social interactions .
Exertion amplified the chances and outcomes of tangibles' uncertainty: tangibility can support uncertainty without exertion; however, the extensive, fast and forceful movements exhibited in exertion play facilitated these surprising moments for our players.
These chance encounters created further meaning for the players if they were shared, however, in our example it had to be made explicit through the videoconference, as the sharing mostly occurred through a participant expressing their surprise verbally.
In non-exertion digital game play, these chance encounters need to be artificially introduced as an element of chance is inherent in most games.
Game creators have to take special care in finding an engaging balance between believable chance and randomness for the players .
For example, in an exertion game such as the Nintendo Wii Sports Tennis, the ball on the screen might also be controlled by an element of chance; but it will be generic, as it will never bounce off the furniture that surrounds the player.
It will also not bounce off the racquet's frame in much unexpected ways, but if it does, the experience will be "fundamentally different", as players might not believe the probability by which it occurred, but rather assume a bug in the software .
Despite the players' best efforts, the ball often went unexpected ways: it hit the edge of the bat, and was diverted in the opposite direction.
The ball also often bounced back quicker than expected, but a quick reaction on impulse of the player was able to deflect the ball in a manner that resulted in an unanticipated trajectory of the ball.
The ball also often hit the edge of the table, being reflected off it in a surprising angle.
Players looked amazed at how some of their hits returned the ball.
These surprising situations are characterized by unexpected behavior of the ball that the players with their actions did not intend nor anticipate.
The challenging aspect of controlling the ball with the bat and the associated surprising actions that occurred contributed to the players' enjoyment, which was reflected in their verbal expressions: players often shouted short exclamations such as "yikes!"
This laughter was then answered with laughs by the remote players, and functioned as conversation starters.
Players then switched their attention to the remote end if they heard such a surprise expression.
Players adapted rules from traditional table tennis to suit the interactions afforded by Table Tennis for Three.
Three teams even referred to table tennis and its rules in the interviews.
Even though none of the teams discussed rules amongst each other before the game, they successfully engaged in gameplay by assuming the ball needs to be hit with the bat, cannot be returned volley, etc.
Nevertheless, players changed the way they played when an opportunity arose, such as when a player could not return the ball with their bat, but was able to catch it with their hand  to increase their chance of winning.
The players knew that this was `breaking' the rules, because they pointed it out if they caught someone: a player yelled out loud "You cheat, you are a cheater!"
One player explained that it is hard to play against someone who is better: "You have to cheat, you know, to win".
However, she was just collecting the ball at the side of the room.
This physical moving around affected the interaction between the players.
Although the players could still talk to and hear one another via the clipped-on microphone, verbal interactions stopped when they could not see the other person anymore.
This often led to a breakdown in conversation.
The players then re-established their dialogue when they were back in the picture.
Players appeared to transfer the `ideal' rules from traditional table tennis to the `real' rules of what made sense to them in this particular game by implicitly sharing this knowledge.
This has been described as transformative social play, in which players actively engage with the rule system in order to shift or extend their relations with other players .
The exertion aspect appeared to contribute to this, as it provided a variety of opportunities for `bending' the rules.
Some of our players showed dedicated player types behavior, such as extra zealousness toward succeeding at the game.
Two players were so eager to improve that they asked if they could stay on after the interviews to practice.
However, such a strong lusory attitude is believed to be vulnerable to cheating behavior .
Salem predicts an increase of this kind of behavior in mediated environments, as "a game is a kind of social contract" and face-to-face interaction implicitly police and enforce proper play, whereas with reduced presence of the other players, invoking the authority of the rules is limited .
We agree with Salen and Zimmerman that this aspect of rule-breaking is more likely to occur in exertion games; they attribute it to the "athletic nature" of the game .
Salen and Zimmerman compare it to a Chess game, in which a player will not gain advantage by having a little corner of the rook peek into an adjacent square.
A core form of social mechanism used to facilitate social interaction is awareness: people want to know what others are doing and letting others know what is happening .
Social awareness can provide a context for physical activities .
We use the term "awareness space" to describe the space the videoconferencing camera captures for the remote player, as this space analogy has been previously used in camera-based bodily interactions .
The camera space of the videoconferencing component in Table Tennis for Three is static, which led to the effect that the player could step out of the view of the camera, making the user "unsensable" for the camera, to use Benford et al.
When our players were stepping out of this awareness space, they were also leaving the social play space.
We also use the term `exertion space', borrowing a concept of performance space in interactive art  and define it as the physical area the exertion activity is performed in.
The exertion space did not match the awareness space in Table Tennis for Three, which affected social play.
In collocated exertion games, the exertion space and awareness space are usually interconnected.
In distributed games, however, these spaces might be disparate due to technical limitations.
In non-exertion games this mismatch might not be significant, as players might not move much.
In exertion games on the other hand, players' activities involve many large-scale movements, requiring an extensive exertion space, which might conflict with conventional awareness technology that is aimed at supporting focused awareness cues such as facial expressions.
Players' active engagement with the rules of a game forms an important part of social play.
Players might reshape the game structure by their actions, with positive and negative consequences.
Designers need to be aware that both the mediated environment as well as the exertion aspect, two core aspects of mediated exertion games, facilitate such rule-breaking.
We recorded 98 instances where players had to pick up the ball from the floor.
Less advanced players often had to interrupt their play to collect a ball.
Collecting these balls almost always resulted in the players leaving the capture area of the videoconferencing camera.
This often led to scenarios such as this: A player asks over the videoconference "Where did she go?"
We have observed that a mismatch of awareness space and exertion space can affect social play.
Future designs should consider that these spaces can be disparate in mediated environments.
In particular, the exertion space might be larger than the gameplay suggests, as players move around during and in-between games.
We have extended prior work that suggests a relationship between exertion and social play by providing empirical data that shows how this can be facilitated.
We have introduced the themes of uncertainty, synchronous exertion and meaningful exertion to de Kort et al.
We have also highlighted how the themes "metagaming" and "breaking the rules" from Salen and Zimmerman's work apply in the context of exertion.
These themes formed the basis for our investigations on the influence of design in such games.
It should be noted, however, that the proposed design implications are not intended to provide a comprehensive list.
We have only highlighted a limited set of concepts, based on data we found in our case study.
Other games might reveal additional implications, and not all of them apply to every game.
Furthermore, it should be noted that it is the players who create social play which design features can only facilitate .
An interesting aspect for further research is the investigation of the role of an audience in mediated exertion interactions.
We have observed how exertion can "turn the body into a spectacle", as studies have described the performance aspect of exertion games, highlighting audience negotiation and participation to entice social play .
Considering the audience could therefore be a valuable augmentation to our understanding of social play in mediated exertion.
We have presented a qualitative analysis of player observations in a mediated exertion game with a focus on social play.
We found evidence that exertion games can facilitate social play, even in mediated environments; however, the design of the game can be a contributing factor.
We extended prior work on social play and exertion by highlighting aspects of exertion games that can contribute to social play, which has led us to design themes that can be used to analyze existing and create future mediated exertion games.
Our work has implications for theory as it suggests influencing factors for a relationship between exertion and social play.
Furthermore, it offers starting points for future work that aims to utilize social benefits in mediated environments, as it can provide guidance on how to include exertion aspects, but also for exertion applications that are currently not supporting social play.
Our work might also benefit other domains besides games, as exertion has been demonstrated to support other tasks such as learning.
Anderson, I., Maitland, J., Sherwood, S., Barkhuus, L., Chalmers, M., Hall, M., Brown, B. and Muller, H. Shakra: Tracking and Sharing Daily Activity Levels with Unaugmented Mobile Phones.
Mobile Networks and Applications, 12 .
Toward a  Aesthetic of Video Gaming: The Case of Dance Dance Revolution.
Expected, sensed, and desired: A framework for designing sensing-based interaction.
ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction , 12 .
Bianchi-Berthouze, N., Kim, W. and Patel, D., Does Body Movement Engage You More in Digital Game Play?
Bortz, J. and Doring, N. Forschungsmethoden und Evaluation.
Design requirements for technologies that encourage physical activity Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in computing systems, 2006, 457466.
The essence and importance of timing  in fencing.
People, places, and play: player experience in a socio-spatial context.
Dourish, P. Where the Action Is: The Foundations of Embodied Interaction.
Eriksson, E., Hansen, T. and Lykke-Olesen, A. Movement-based interaction in camera spaces: a conceptual framework.
Personal and Ubiquitous Computing, 11 .
Kinesthetic Interaction - Revealing the Bodily Potential in Interaction Design OZCHI '08: Conference of the computer-human interaction special interest group  of Australia on Computer-Human Interaction, ACM, Cairns, Australia, 2008.
Gaver, W.W. Affordances for Interaction: The Social Is Material for Design.
Comparison of energy expenditure in adolescents when playing new generation and sedentary computer games: cross sectional study.
Hoonhout, J. and Fontijn, W. It's hard, it is fun: Throwing balls inside the home SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems.
Workshop Exertion Interfaces, Florence, Italy, 2008.
Hornecker, E. Getting a grip on tangible interaction: a framework on physical space and social interaction.
Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in computing systems.
Personal and Ubiquitous Computing, 11 .
Psychology of sports: A social psychological approach.
Understanding Movement as Input for Interaction-A Study of Two EyetoyTM Games.
Lin, J., Mamykina, L., Lindtner, S., Delajoux, G. and Strub, H. Fish'n'Steps: Encouraging Physical Activity with an Interactive Computer Game.
Stirring up experience through movement in game play: effects on engagement and social behaviour Proceeding of the twenty-sixth annual SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems, ACM, Florence, Italy, 2008.
Magerkurth, C., Engelke, T. and Memisoglu, M. Augmenting the virtual domain with physical and social elements: towards a paradigm shift in computer entertainment technology.
McCarthy, J. and Wright, P. Technology as Experience.
Merleau, P. Phenomenology of Perception .
Moen, J. KinAesthetic Movement Interaction: Designing for the Pleasure of Motion, Stockholm: KTH, Numerical Analysis and Computer Science, 2006.
Mueller, F., Agamanolis, S. and Picard, R. Exertion Interfaces: Sports over a Distance for Social Bonding and Fun Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems, ACM, Ft. Lauderdale, Florida, USA, 2003.
Mueller, F. and Gibbs, M.R., A physical three-way interactive game based on table tennis.
Evaluating a distributed physical leisure game for three players Proceedings of the 2007 conference of the computer-human interaction special interest group  of Australia on Computer-human interaction: design: activities, artifacts and environments, ACM, Adelaide, Australia, 2007.
Jogging the distance Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in computing systems, ACM, San Jose, California, USA, 2007.
Preece, J. Sociability and usability in online communities: determining and measuring success.
Spark: The Revolutionary New Science of Exercise and the Brain.
Salen, K. and Zimmerman, E. Rules of Play : Game Design Fundamentals.
Sharp, H., Rogers, Y. and Preece, J. Interaction Design: Beyond Human Computer Interaction.
International Journal of Arts and Technology.
Special Issue on Tangible and Embedded Interaction.
Strauss, A. and Corbin, J.
Basics of Qualitative Research : Techniques and Procedures for Developing Grounded Theory.
Stromberg, H., Vaatanen, A. and Raty, V.-P. A group game played in interactive virtual space: design and evaluation Proceedings of the 4th conference on Designing interactive systems: processes, practices, methods, and techniques, ACM, London, England, 2002.
Wakkary, R., Hatala, M., Jiang, Y., Droumeva, M. and Hosseini, M. Making sense of group interaction in an ambient intelligent environment for physical play Proceedings of the 2nd international conference on Tangible and embedded interaction, ACM, Bonn, Germany, 2008.
Webb, A., Kerne, A., Koh, E., Joshi, P., Park, Y. and Graeber, R. Choreographic buttons: promoting social interaction through human movement and clear affordances Proceedings of the 14th annual ACM international conference on Multimedia, ACM, Santa Barbara, CA, USA, 2006.
Winograd, T. Understanding Computers and Cognition: A New Foundation for Design.
