Marianna Obrist1, Rob Comber1, Sriram Subramanian2, Betina Piqueras-Fiszman3, Carlos Velasco3, & Charles Spence3 marianna.obrist@ncl.ac.uk | rob.comber@ncl.ac.uk | sriram@cs.bris.ac.uk | betina.piqueras-fiszman@psy.ox.ac.uk | carlos.velasco@psy.ox.ac.uk | charles.spence@psy.ox.ac.uk 1 2 3 School of Computing Science Dept.
We present rich descriptions of taste experience through an analysis of the diachronic and synchronic experiences of each of the five basic taste qualities: sweet, sour, salt, bitter, and umami.
Our findings from a combination of user experience evaluation techniques highlight three main themes: temporality, affective reactions, and embodiment.
We present the taste characteristics as a framework for design and discuss each taste in order to elucidate the design qualities of individual taste experiences.
These findings add a semantic understanding of taste experiences, their temporality enhanced through descriptions of the affective reactions and embodiment that the five basic tastes provoke.
We discuss our findings on the basis of established psychological and behavioral phenomenon, highlighting the potential for taste-enhanced design.
Drawing on neuroscience and sensory research in combination with user experience evaluation techniques, we investigated how all five basic tastes are experienced at a given time  and how they evolve over time .
We used pure tastants  with an explicitation interview technique  to encourage participants to verbalize their experiences.
In addition, we used physical objects from the Sensual Evaluation Instrument  to elicit affective responses, and create a flexible, non-verbal channel of communication between the user and designers .
The contribution of this paper is threefold: First, we provide a rich description of subjective taste experiences along both the diachronic and synchronic characteristics of the five basic tastes.
Second, these taste characteristics establish a framework for taste experiences and elucidate the potential design qualities of individual tastes.
We demonstrate how each quality can be described along three main themes: temporality, affective reactions, and embodiment.
Third, our findings extend human-computer interaction research on taste through a user experience perspective.
Experts in taste perception agree on at least five basic tastes .
Beyond this, however, we lack insights into the rich experience of these tastes.
This lack of experiential understanding extends beyond HCI as sensory researchers have also acknowledged that: What is not well researched is the link between the food that goes into our mouth and what we think of it .
There is a growing interest in taste within the HCI community , particularly relating to technical challenges in designing for taste stimulation and one-off designs to enhance user experiences through the manipulation of taste.
There is a need for a more systematic study of people's taste experiences and their specific characteristics in order to make a fuller use of this sense in future taste-enhanced technologies.
This paper stands as a first step in addressing this need.
Paste the appropriate copyright/license statement here.
ACM now supports three different publication options: * ACM copyright: ACM holds the copyright on the work.
This is the historical approach.
This text field is large enough to hold the appropriate release statement assuming it is single-spaced in TimesNewRoman 8 point font.
Please do not change or modify the size of this text box.
Sensory researchers and neuroscientists agree on five basic tastes  and a `gustotopic map', linking these classes of receptors with particular regions in the brain, is currently being developed .
Despite breakthroughs in understanding the sense of taste, scientists have still not developed a semantic understanding of how taste is experienced .
Although a wide body of sensory research has studied the temporal evolution of taste perception using labeled intensity scales  and more specific time-intensity sensory evaluation scales , insights are limited to the quantification of temporal responses to perceived taste intensities.
Such scale-based evaluations leave us uninformed concerning the subjective qualities that lie behind the ratings of the perceived taste experience over time.
Recently, neuroscientists have studied taste-specific temporal profiles by comparing sensory evaluation scales with functional MRI  data .
Their results suggested that salty tastes change more rapidly than sweet tastes in the cerebral cortex, and confirm the same patterns that have been observed using time-intensity sensory evaluation .
While such results are intriguing they lack the ability to explain the differences of experienced tastes.
To account for subjective differences, the `taster status' measure has been introduced .
By means of such tests, it is possible to identify participants' subjective sensitivity to bitter tastes and to distinguish between supertasters , medium tasters , and non-tasters  .
Taster status has been considered to partially explain why some consumers like certain foods more than others, and how they describe the way they experience them.
The last few years have seen increasing interest in designing human-food interaction in HCI .
Such research looks to position human-food interaction within the wider spectrum of social, environmental, and physiological influences on our food practices.
In this area, there is a growing realization of the potential for new technologies to support pleasurable experiences around food , and the potential for designers to draw on the extensive research on multisensory experiences .
Despite this increased interest in food experience, we know little about the richness of people's taste experiences.
Most of the studies on food experience combine taste with other modalities, where taste is but one component .
For instance, Schifferstein et al.
Taste experience is interwoven with vision, touch, and olfaction, which, in combination create multisensory food experiences.
Desmet and Schifferstein  also explored the emotions elicited through eating and tasting food.
They describe variables related to food-evoked emotions, such as sensory features, product type, food-related activities, context, and the agent .
Due to the wide range of influencing variables, it is not clear how well these findings translate beyond the specific context of their studies.
Remote triggering of taste while motion sensing with accelerometers allows for using LOLLio as an input modality.
The authors identify various ways in which taste could be used in an interaction, such as reward or punishment or to provide hidden information through taste stimuli.
LOLLio was evaluated in a game context with children .
Sweetness was constantly used in the game session and sour stimuli were used in combination with game mechanics to provide `negative reinforcement'.
Their findings suggest an enhanced playing experience through taste stimulation motivating further explorations of such taste-enhanced interaction experiences.
STUDY METHOD AND PROCEDURE Sensory research provides important information regarding the objective measures of taste perception, temporality, and subjective sensitivity levels.
Yet, an understanding of the subjective understanding of taste experiences is missing.
This study explores the diachronic and synchronic structure and configuration of each of the five basic tastes.
For our study, we combine two verbal and non-verbal user experience and elicitation methods, the explicitation interview technique  and the `Sensual Evaluation Instrument' .
The explicitation interview technique  is used to elicit verbalizations of subjective experiences.
This technique helps to explore the unfolding of an experience over time, the `diachronic' dimension, and examine the specific facets of the experience at a particular moment, the `synchronic' structure .
The value of this interview technique lies in helping participants to express their experiences at a specific moment.
Participants are encouraged to talk about the experiential  aspects of the moment without building on rational comments and explanations .
In comparison to open questioning approaches, this technique is non-inducive but directive  in the sense that it keeps the participant talking about the experience without inducing any content; it focuses on the structure of the experience, and directive, as it keeps the participant focused on the singular experience being explored.
Although it is typically used retrospectively to support the reconstruction of an experience, it has been more recently used in-situ studying people's searching behaviour on websites  or to elicit tactile experiences .
The Sensual Evaluation Instrument  is a non-verbal tool that can be used to elicit users' affective reactions .
Technological advances in creating taste stimulations  and one-off applications exploiting taste in games  and other scenarios  demonstrate a growing interest for the use of taste in interactive applications.
They use electrical pulses applied to the tongue.
Verbal descriptors provided by participants were, for instance, a `refreshing taste' or `minty taste' in relation to the change in temperature.
The authors call for future work to understand the particularities of such taste experiences.
They focused on the introduction of taste in digital communication to enhance long-distance family relations and create remote co-presence and co-living experiences  .
The participants were recruited through the staff list within the lead university.
16 participants were native English speakers, and four were not, but were fluent in English.
All participants gave informed consent prior to the study.
The SEI includes eight objects with different shapes , which represent various levels of arousal and valence .
The SEI objects were also tested as a cross-cultural tool for selfassessment of affect while interacting with computer systems .
The key value of the SEI is to elicit real-time, affective responses, and to create a flexible, non-verbal channel of communication between user and designers.
The latter defines a key advantage compared to other methods that are often limited to verbalizations or visualizations that lack physicality.
The participants were instructed and reminded 2 days prior to the study not to eat spicy food 24 hours before the study and not to drink or eat 1 hour before attending the study.
The study had 2 parts : In the first part, we applied the explicitation interview technique for all five tastes; in the second part we introduced the SEI objects to enhance the verbalizations for each taste.
The stimuli and concentration used for each taste are specified in Table 1.
Each stimulus was prepared as an odorless and colorless water solution using a stock solution as specified in ISO 3972.
We prepared them according to the specifications detailed by Hoehl et al.
These compounds standardised stimulus features and controlled for sensory differences, such as texture, vision, etc.
All of the solutions were prepared the day before each study day.
The participants received 20 ml of each stimulus in a disposable 40 ml cup.
A Latin square design was used to avoid order bias .
In the first part, participants were given 5 minutes per stimulus.
The aim was to receive insights regarding the diachronic and synchronic structure of the taste experience.
We used this technique in-situ in order to account for the rapidly decaying sensory memory trace related to the human sense of taste .
Before continuing with the next stimulus, the participants were asked to have a sip of the deionized water in order to cleanse their mouth.
The same procedure was repeated for all stimuli.
In the second part of the study, the participants were instructed to match each taste experience to one or more of the eight shapes inside the box.
The participants could only feel, and not see, the objects, to exclude visual influences and to focus on the mapping between `taste and shape' via the sense of touch.
The participants were instructed to select one or more or none of the shapes .
Before going through each taste stimulus again, the participants were given the chance to put their hands into the box and familiarize themselves with the 8 shapes.
Next they were asked to take a sip of water and start with the first taste stimulus.
They were asked to express what was going through their mind and to describe their choices or lack thereof .
Finally, participants were asked to rate the pleasantness/unpleasantness of the shapes on a four-point Likert scale from `very pleasant' to `very unpleasant'.
They were also asked about their personal favorites amongst the 5 taste stimuli and their personal food preferences to support the interpretation of the data.
All 20 tasting sessions were transcribed and a qualitative analysis based on the transcripts was conducted.
Two researchers independently performed an open thematic coding based on 5 cases .
The resulting themes were discussed and an initial coding scheme was established.
Two more cases  were coded independently leading to a final coding scheme consisting of three main themes, which were then applied to the remaining 13 cases by both researchers.
We also performed a qualitative analysis of the mapping between the SEI object and the taste experiences, captured through the transcripts and the visual material from the recorded hand movements and selection of the objects in the second part of the study.
Based on participants' ratings of the shapes  we can confirm previous ratings of  - the more spiky shapes were rated as `unpleasant to slightly unpleasant' , the more rounded shapes were rated `very pleasant to pleasant' , and only one shape was perceived as `neutral' .
Finally, the supertaster test provided us with insights on the different taste sensibility of participants and ensures a good distribution of taster statuses in our study.
Overall, we identified 5 non-tasters, 11 normal taster , and 4 supertasters amongst our participants.
These results are consistent with the known distribution amongst the general population .
STUDY FINDINGS The description of taste experiences is based on both parts of the study.
We describe the characteristics of taste experiences across all five tastes along three identified themes:  temporality,  affective reactions, and  embodiment.
We also discuss the particularities of each individual taste to elucidate the potential design qualities of single tastes.
The overall taste characteristics will help to establish a framework for the design of taste experiences.
For instance, all participants agree on the immediacy of the sour taste.
Such immediacy is expounded in similes such as `a firework in the mouth', `a punch', and `a flash that hits you'.
Yet, despite the immediacy of this experience, it is short lasting and rapidly decays.
In contrast, other tastes were described as slowly building up or maintaining consistent intensities .
Such intensities could be seen to be `lingering', rather than `explosive', as one participant described it: "You've got this "Whoa" sensation, feels quite strong to start with.
Then it has gone super quick" .
While the dynamics of intensity imply variation , the vocabulary of movement animates these changes.
Describing the bitter taste, one participant stated: "I guess it's not sticky like the first one .
While certain movements can be attributed to mouthfeel , others were externalized .
These expressions were not confined to the temporal characteristics of taste experiences, but already shed light on the bodily reactions that can be elicited by tastes.
Movement was also invoked to describe stasis  and repetitive movement .
It doesn't have a peak; it doesn't go up and down; it just stays" .
Other tastes fluctuate rapidly: "Yes, ups and downs, but quite quick.
They're quite sudden crests and falls, rather than too drawn out..." .
Participants often appeal to similes of physicality to explain taste experiences .
Such physical experiences are tied to a synchronic perception of taste.
In contrast, the diachronic physicality of taste experiences is given in the implied and experienced characteristics of taste as a residual presence : "It just stays in your mouth, so it kind of keeps developing"  or "it just leaves its mark in your mouth and doesn't go" .
Such experiences are, much like the increasing intensities, those that `build up', or `get a bit stronger".
Such presence is understood to `erode'.
Moreover, the implied residual physicality is associated with experiences of absence.
When tasting sourness, many participants described the immediate, almost physically imposing intensity followed by a marked absence.
This absence is seen to draw the taster back into the taste, leaving them wanting more: "it creates an expectation of sweet flavour, like if you were biting into a slice of orange or something.
It's gone now and actually I'd quite happily have another sip, to be honest" .
This residual physicality can also be seen to afford agency to taste experiences, where tastes `grab you', and `hit you in the face'.
As such, taste experiences can become reified in exerting influence over the taster.
While taste experiences have expected elements of changing intensity , the tastes were also perceived as being mobile , and occasionally exerted a physical presence .
These temporal characteristics are intertwined in the unfolding of the experiences from its initial stimulation  and set the stage for the different taste journeys .
Below we describe the different time-intensity profiles of taste experiences.
Taste intensities are generally experienced as being dynamic and participants' verbalizations offer a lexicon of growth and decline.
It has the feeling of tartness, your mouth moves forwards" .
Sweetness in contrast is associated with the feeling of filling the mouth, and when the taste is gone it leaves one with a kind of stickiness on the teeth.
Figure 3 shows a pictorial representation of the different types of temporality identified based on the above descriptions across all five tastes.
The intensity is represented through the thickness of the lines in the bars, while movement is captured through the frequency of the lines.
Finally, residual physicality as temporal characteristic is shown through the length of the whole bar.
Overall, sour is the taste delivering the highest intensity, followed by umami and bitter.
Umami presents a high intensity, and is also characterized by lingering without losing much of its intensity.
Such an extensive residual presence can also be seen for bitter, however with a lower intensity.
Sweet and salty are also of low intensity and can be characterized by particular movements.
While sweet starts slowly, builds up and then dies out, salty does not peak at all and is constant in its perception and moderate in unfolding over time.
Sour, by contrast, is short-lived with a rapid end.
Specific to sour is the sharp beginning followed by the absence of a taste and the return of it through a forward pulling feeling, which disappears quickly.
Such feelings must presumably be associated with evolutionary causes  or in form of personal memories  and cross-modal experiences .
I have no idea what this is, but there's a bitterness that stays" .
Participants identified as supertasters expressed their affective reaction more clearly: "Definitely bitterness...
There were few predictable or consistent affective reactions among participants, and those experienced as pleasurable by some, were experienced as disgusting or unsettling by others.
The affective response of participants could often be tied to the participant's familiarity with the taste.
This is particularly evident with umami.
Participants who were familiar with this taste indicated familiarity with savory Asian cuisine, and could therefore interpret the perceived taste and experienced it as pleasant.
Those who did not eat Asian cuisine were less familiar with the taste, particularly in this intensity, and described unease and uncertainty when tasting it.
Such responses also evolved over time, notably with sweet and sour tastes.
While, as mentioned, sour produced an immediately unpleasant experience, followed by a refreshingly pleasant experience , the taste of sweet was often initially pleasant, followed by a distinct unpleasantness.
Such experiences were tied to the physicality of the taste residing in the mouth, and were perceived in two extremes for the umami taste, influenced through the participants' familiarity or unfamiliarity with this flavor.
Participants who were familiar with this taste perceived the mouth filling and lingering experiences as something comforting , while other participants who were unfamiliar with it perceived it as disgusting, obtrusive, and annoying referring to the fact that the taste takes over control, without the chance to get rid of it quickly.
As with temporality, we created a representation of the different types affective reactions on the five tastes .
The pleasant-unpleasant characteristics of the taste experience are represented through the `green' and `red' colors and in cases of a neutral experience colored as `orange', and finally `white' in case of absence of the taste.
The familiar-unfamiliar characteristics only find an explicit representation for the umami.
Affective reactions refer to both the sense of pleasure or displeasure gained from the taste experience, but also feelings most often regarding familiarity, such as comfort, or, by contrast, unfamiliarity, such as surprise and suspicion.
These affective characteristics, to be captured as pleasant-unpleasant and familiar-unfamiliar, operate not only as a static attitudinal response to taste experiences , but also as evolving characteristics of the taste experience .
When sampling the taste stimuli many participants related their own uncertainty .
After one sample, this uncertainty is replaced for familiar tastes.
For unfamiliar tastes, particularly bitter and umami, the sense of unease pervades and persists.
Thus familiarity produces responses at singular points , while also producing responses across time .
A recurring phrase throughout the taste study was "I know what it is, but I don't".
While we can at times attribute this to the chemical nature of the stimuli , the sentiment expressed also refers to the lived and felt experiences of the tastes.
Overall, some tastes are characterized by the change from unpleasant to pleasant  or the other way around from pleasant to unpleasant , while the bitter taste was clearly unpleasant and salty was described as neutral.
For the umami taste we identified two separate experiences grounded in the familiarity and unfamiliarity of the taste.
It's like I can see where it's going" .
In this sense, participants described tastes as producing expansive responses, including pleasure, nausea, and, others including reactions associated with allergy such as increased body heat .
Feelings of pleasure were often described as filling, particularly filling the face or the whole body.
A participant describes the experience of umami: "I feel that my whole face feels pleased with it" .
Such feelings were not always positive and for some participants, overwhelming feelings of nausea accompanied tastes of salt, umami, and sweet.
Nausea could also be experienced in undulating taste experiences - those taste which were experienced as prone to fluctuations in intensity, almost mimicking travel or sea sickness.
Participants also described disembodied reactions, which refer to something experienced that lingers between the mouth and the body.
Rather than experiencing direct bodily reactions, participants describe an imagined reaction.
Disembodied reactions could also be seen in expected or caricatured responses, such as the imagined `pucker face' of the sour taste.
Although few participants actually exhibit such a reaction, it is an ingrained image of biting into a lemon.
Although we would expect food experiences to involve embodied responses , here each taste stimuli is experienced in the same form , and yet produce varied embodied responses.
Embodiment in relation to the described diachronic and synchronic taste experiences refers to the mouth-feel of tastes .
Some participants additionally describe whole body reactions  and others refer to imagined and disembodied responses .
Mouth-feel, referring to the experienced chemical and physical sensations in the mouth, is frequently used to describe different characteristics of foods, including coffee, wine and textured foods.
Such descriptions are offered by our participants for qualities of texture and viscosity.
It's just sort of the feeling of viscosity, the sweetness and this cloud is just a bit more mouth feel" .
The mouth-feel also relates to a sense of movement, where tastes evolve in space.
Most often these are lateral movements within the mouth, or commonly tastes are felt to move backwards.
Such experiences can be a feature of the physical movement of the taste stimuli during the swallow reflex and also associated with the location of taste receptors on the tongue.
However, in other cases, taste experiences defied the location of taste receptors and tastes could be experienced on the teeth, gums and lips.
One participant goes as far as to describe the absence of mouthfeel: "I don't know really.
It leaves this numbness in my mouth like the lemon, but without the initial burst" .
In addition to the sensations described in the mouth, some participants described bodily reactions that were opposed to the mouth-feel or isolated taste experiences.
I don't think you're expecting it to be like that" .
The usage of the SEI objects  as a physical engagement with shapes enriched the description of the taste experiences.
The shapes particularly contributed descriptors related to the combined temporal, affective, and embodied experiences of each individual taste.
Below we summarize the key characteristics and the mapping of the eight objects for each taste across all participants.
The sweet taste, generally experienced as `smooth' and `rounded', was most reflected in shapes that also present elements of change such as "phases"  or have protruding elements  or even the half-spiky shape 2.
While typically a pleasant taste, there is a dynamic modulation of intensity and pleasure in the shapes.
The sour taste produces a `sharp' response and for many is best characterized by shapes such as  or .
There are, however, also elements of temporality, a shifting/phasing associated with , starting with the big part as an explosion and then rapidly decaying.
The salty taste has a broad aspect  and a finer granulated and dynamic experience expressed through the shape 1.
Similar to sweetness and sourness there is a repeating wave assigned to this taste experience, verbalized around shapes 4 and 5 though this time associated with an unpleasant feeling/sickliness as aftertaste.
More than other tastes, salty was associated with a subtlety of the temporal characteristics, an experience of something moving, not doing much, but still being there.
This made participants want a shape they can manipulate  or something more neutral, such as a flat shape, or a shape, which can be changed.
Despite the fact that the bitter taste was experienced as unpleasant, the mapping to the shapes created two distinct experiences.
For some participants bitter is a spiky but lingering experience associated with a dull unpleasantness .
For others it is a rounded and smooth taste , associating it with medicine , which dissolves in the mouth, and you cannot get rid of it.
Similarly to bitter, the mapping for umami resulted in two distinct experiences.
If umami was experienced as unpleasant, participants tended to describe the taste as disgusting and chose the shape 8 or 2.
In those cases where umami was perceived as pleasant, participants described it as a more rounded taste with depth and chose combinations of the rounded shapes .
This mapping confirms the descriptions of umami as a full, mouth-filling experience with lots of things to it.
Overall, sweet and sour seem to be the two tastes where participants show high agreement with respect to mapping the shapes to taste experiences.
Bitter and umami seem to share some associations and create two different taste experiences, while salty shows a tendency towards smooth and round shapes, but with the lack of the ability to change and manipulate the shapes.
Figure 5 shows the final pictorial representation of all three characteristics combined for each of the five tastes.
The length of the forms represents the temporal aspects, while the width captures the mouth-feel.
Whole body and imagined embodiment could not be captured as such, but are described in detail above.
The expression `lingering' was used particularly for sweet, bitter, and umami.
When used for sweet and umami `lingering' is experienced in combination with a `mouth filling' element , while for bitter there is no filling experience but it is described as a thin  experience, next to being unpleasant.
In the bitter case `lingering' thus refers to the residual physicality of this taste .
Sour has an initial unpleasant taste, dies down quickly, but comes back after a short absence and leaves one with the feeling of wanting more.
Salty at last is similar to bitter, however with a shorter life and perceived as less unpleasant.
Salty is perceived as a neutral taste with little consequence.
This understanding is useful when designing for taste experiences as it provides designers and developers a vocabulary to talk about taste and the design potentials related to the different characteristics.
First, we discuss the particularities of each taste quality, and then discuss them with respect to established psychological and behavioral phenomenon highlighting their design potential for HCI.
While sensory research and neuroscience study the perception of taste and its temporality, their focus is on quantifying the intensity and perceived changes of the intensity through a wide range of evaluation scales  or, in some recent attempts, by means of time-intensity profiles of fMRI data .
The sweet taste was consistently described as pleasant, which turned into something unpleasant.
Participants struggled between the instinctive taste likeability and the learned taste values and rules , which can be seen in light of learned associations, discussed by Schifferstein and Hekkert  with respect to taste experiences of products.
Of particular interest with respect to our findings on crossmodal interactions for sweet stimulations are the embodied reactions .
Such reactions can be explained through learned associations with sweetened food and beverages.
It is a combination of learned as well as innate, genetic, and cognitive factors .
Sweet sensations can be used to stimulate and enhance positive experiences, however, on a limited timescale, as the sweetness is quickly disappearing leaving one unsatisfied.
It's a pleasant taste but one that is tinged with a bittersweet ending.
This taste overwhelms one with its rapid appearance and quick decay.
It leaves one with the feeling that there is something missing.
Based on childhood memories, such as for instance of sweet-sour drops, participants were expecting sweetness, but were left disappointed, leaving them with the feeling of wanting more.
Moser and Tscheligi , similarly, describe this phenomenon as a side effect observed in their gustatory gaming interface, where sour was used for negative reinforcement linked to the game dynamics.
They report that children intentionally failed in the game in order to get another sour stimulation.
In these cases, the residual physicality can be seen to afford agency.
The taste experience becomes reified in the influence it exerts over the taster.
Depending on personal familiarity/unfamiliarity  and preferences, this taste experience is quite interesting for design.
Umami grabs one's attention and initiates a conscious process of reflection.
While judgment on the taste is defined quickly, the reflective thinking brings to the fore the richness and variety of the taste.
Even when perceived as unpleasant, the richness is recognized, and linked to the motivation to remove the taste from the mouth.
The salty taste experience was not linked to an extreme reaction unlike sour, bitter and umami.
This taste is often described as `bland', `discrete' and `just being there and not doing much'.
It is minutely moving around, giving the feeling of cleansing the mouth, but not being mouth filling as sweet or umami, and certainty not as unpleasant as bitter, however lingering almost as long as the bitter taste.
The modesty of saltiness in contrast to all of the other tastes opens up some interesting questions when looking at the neuroscience findings.
Nakamura's  findings based on time-intensity profiles of functional MRI  data suggest that salty tastes change more rapidly than do sweet tastes.
This is not quite consistent with how participants described their experiences.
Taste experiences can be discussed with respect to their relevance for design, building on existing psychological and behavioral phenomenon: rational and intuitive thinking, anchoring effects, and behavior change.
Dual process theory, for instance, accounts for two styles of processing: the intuition based System 1 with associative reasoning that is fast and automatic with strong emotional bonds, and reasoning based on System 2 which is slower and more volatile, being influenced by conscious judgments and attitudes .
Based on our findings, we can see that sweet is intuitively perceived as pleasant, and bitter intuitively as unpleasant, while sour, salty, and umami cause a reflective process, confused for instance by the surprise appearance and rapid disappearance of the sour taste.
Our findings also give insights into how to time the presentation of the taste qualities so that the user can transition from System 1 thinking to System 2 thinking.
Figures 3, 4, and 5 can be used to create the appropriate transitions and time them.
For example, the rapidity of the sour taste experience does not leave enough time for System 1 to engage with it and triggers System 2 to reflect on what just happens.
Such reactions when carefully timed can prime users to be more reason based in their thinking during a productivity task .
Moreover, an appropriately presented taste can create a synchronic experience that can lead to stronger cognitive ease  or reduce the cognitive ease to encourage rational thinking.
For example, a pleasant taste can be used to provide achievements across the workflow, however with the slight hint that there is still more tasks to do before you are finished .
Below we outline two potential design directions for using taste experiences in work-related activities and for personal behavior management.
Doing so we draw on the potentials of different taste qualities and their power to stimulate intuitive and rational thinking described above.
The perceived intensity of the bitter taste was not the same for everyone, as confirmed by the supertaster test.
While supertasters felt the experience with more immediacy, others had to allow the taste to travel to the back of their mouth to recognize it.
After this initial difference, the bitter experience becomes consistent with respect to its `lingering' features, of `staying' either on the tongue or at the back of the mouth.
Bitter was also described as `thin'.
The character of bitter was further revealed through learned associations referring to `biting into a flower', or `medicine', things you had to take as a child, but after which you would rather avoid this experience of bitterness.
Bitterness can indicate the presence of toxins  and is found in evolutionary development of humans  .
Thus, it may be useful for design to make people avoid certain behavior.
The familiar-unfamiliar characteristics of umami cause lots of confusion in our study and participants could not rely on their intuition.
While the `like' or `dislike' of the taste was decided instantly, the unpicking of the still `confusing' elements of the umami taste was more challenging.
Different word pairs depending on the like/dislike of the taste were expressed: `pleasant-unpleasant', `comforting- uncomforting' and `liking-disgusting'.
We could also see participants using additional bodily descriptors in particular when describing umami as a pleasing experience .
These interruptions can either be short  or slightly longer requiring us to change our activity .
All these activities have anchoring effects.
In other words, the initial activity affects our judgments and decision making in the latter activities.
It has also been shown that users often find it hard to avoid these biases in their judgments .
Our study of taste experiences suggests that taste interfaces can be carefully designed to manage interruptions in such a way that anchoring effects can be either minimized or maintained.
For example, we know that the salty taste has a long temporal component with a feeling of "not doing much but being there".
This taste could be very useful in those situations where the interruption is small and the user is expected to return to the initial activity soon.
As an example, when the user notices a pop-up in the bottom left corner of their desktop  a small salty taste in their mouth which starts just before the user switches their activity can be useful.
This will prolong their initial experience and remind them of the initial activity when still checking the social media page.
This could enable smoother transitions back to the initial activity.
Alternatively if the interruption is a longer activity then it is useful for the user to drop any priming effect that might transfer to the new activity.
In this case, a sour taste in the mouth would leave the user a quick sharp taste engaging their rational System 2 but rapidly decaying helping the user return to a more neutral state by the time they switch to the new activity.
Such management of anchoring effects is not only useful for productivity activities but also in gaming and other household activities.
For example, in a gaming scenario when a person moves between related levels of a game a continuing taste like bitter or salty is useful.
Whereas when a user is moving to distinct levels or is performing a side challenge an explosive taste like sour, sweet or umami might be useful.
The choice of specific tastes in each category can be tuned by the designer to create different affective reactions and a sense of agency.
The findings from our study can provide guidelines for such taste designs.
Taste stimulation might also facilitate sustainable food practices, for instance linking food waste to taste experiences.
When disposing overripe bananas, a user might get a sour stimulation for the waste of food but the immediate reward for waste separation.
Taste stimulation might also reflect various characteristics of food waste, such as its lengthy impact on environmental sustainability through the bitter taste.
In this way, the framework for design points to the potential for taste experiences to be incorporated into timely and rewarding persuasive messages for positive food behaviour.
CONCLUSIONS In this paper we presented the results of a user study exploring the diachronic and synchronic experiences for each of the five basic taste qualities.
Our analysis of participants' verbalizations, collected by means of verbal and non-verbal methods, resulted in three key themes.
We provide rich descriptions on the temporality, affective reactions, and embodiment of taste experiences.
We discuss these themes for each individual taste elucidating the design potentials with respect to the specific structure and qualities of sweet, sour, salty, bitter, and umami tastes.
Our findings help to establish a framework for the design of taste experiences in HCI, enhancing existing technology driven research around taste, and food interaction design research.
Taste and taste preferences play an important role in our food choices and food plays a significant role in our and our environments health and well-being.
The stimulation and manipulation of taste experiences therefore offers potential to improve a variety of food behaviors.
Using taste stimulation technology to alter the taste of unpleasant but healthy food is one obvious route.
Expanding the design space for healthy taste technology, our framework for design of taste experiences suggests alternative routes.
Taste experiences might, for instance, be heightened through appeal to related experiences and sensations.
