We present Cued Gaze-Points  as a shoulder-surfing resistant cued-recall graphical password scheme where users gaze instead of mouse-click.
This approach has several advantages over similar eye-gaze systems, including a larger password space and its cued-recall nature that can help users remember multiple distinct passwords.
Our 45-participant lab study is the first evaluation of gaze-based password entry via user-selected points on images.
CGP's usability is potentially acceptable, warranting further refinement and study.
We present Cued Gaze-Points : a cued-recall graphical password scheme using eye-gaze as an input mechanism.
Cued-recall  password systems show a graphical cue that triggers the user's memory of their password, and therefore facilitates memory of multiple distinct passwords.
Unlike similar click-based schemes, CGP is shouldersurfing resistant since there is no on-screen indicator revealing users' gaze-point locations.
Our 45-participant user study is the first evaluation of gaze-based password entry with userselected points on images, rather than pre-defined regions.
Cued-recall click-based graphical passwords consist of clicks on specific points of one or more images.
Such systems offer fast login times and larger theoretical password spaces than other graphical password systems .
PassPoints , where passwords consist of 5 clicks on one image, has been extensively evaluated.
Although usable, PassPoints users often select predictable passwords , raising significant security concerns.
In response, Cued Click-Points   users sequentially choose one click-point on each of 5 distinct images.
Each subsequent image is determined by the user's previous click-point location.
Attacking CCP requires more effort since it uses a large number of images, rather than only one.
Graphical passwords are proposed as more memorable and secure authentication methods that leverage the human ability to more easily recognise and recall images over text .
One disadvantage to most graphical password schemes is their susceptibility to shoulder-surfing: attackers may observe or record users as they enter passwords and subsequently log in with the observed credentials.
Text passwords and PINs may also be vulnerable to shoulder-surfing .
Some shoulder-surfing resistant graphical password schemes rely on obfuscation or challenge-response .
Recent proposals use eye-gaze input, which should become affordable in the near future.
Their EyePassword scheme displays an on-screen keyboard whereupon users gaze at the letters of their password.
However, EyePassword remains vulnerable to guessing attacks due to the predictability of text passwords.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Cued Gaze-Points is an eye-gaze version of Cued ClickPoints, where users select points on a sequence of images with their eye-gaze instead of mouse-clicks.
For each of a password's 5 gaze-points, users look at their desired point and hold the space bar for a few seconds to record their gaze.
The system determines the user's intended gaze-point as the centre of the tolerance-sized area of highest gaze density.
This emphasises points where the user has primarily gazed and eliminates outliers.
We chose the space bar to trigger gaze input because users have difficulty performing eye-gestures to indicate exact input .
However, they respectively use on-screen character selection and eyegestures as passwords, while we use gaze-points.
Eye-trackers typically require a multi-step calibration process for each new session or user.
We use an alternative process that is quicker and tailored for the short duration of authentication.
Before creating or entering a CGP password,
When the space bar is released, CGP uses the gaze density method to calculate the user's gaze-point .
The distance between the gaze-point and the on-screen point is used as an offset for the subsequent password entry.
What is the usability and security cost of preventing shouldersurfing attacks with CGP?
To answer this, we conducted a 2-condition between-subjects lab study following the published study methodology for CCP , including the same image set.
Our goal was to evaluate eye-gaze as a cued-recall authentication method; more ecologically valid field studies may only be possible when eye tracking becomes ubiquitous.
Eye-gaze accuracy is limited by human eye physiology, so we adjusted CGP's configuration as follows.
This made the physical size of the images in our study 1024 800 = 1.28 times larger linearly than in the CCP study.
People have full vision acuity within  1 of their gaze's centre .
Thus, a 1 radial target on a 17" monitor with a 800 x 600 resolution that is 25 inches away from the user forms a circular target with a diameter of 51 pixels.
Although the area of full vision acuity forms a circular target on the screen, we used square tolerance regions because a grid system is necessary to store passwords securely with Centered Discretization .
Our first condition, T-51, denotes a 51 x 51-pixel tolerance square.
Since smaller tolerance squares equate to more total squares , we tested a second condition, T-31, to see how shrinking the tolerance square to 31 x 31 pixels affected usability.
Forty-five  participants were randomly assigned to a condition and completed individual 1-hour sessions.
We told participants to choose points that were easy to remember and repeat, but difficult for others to guess.
We then instructed them on proper eye tracker use.
Perception and demographics questionnaires were given at the beginning, middle, and end of the session.
Participants familiarised themselves with the system during two practice trials, followed by 6 to 10 regular trials, as time permitted.
Each individual trial corresponded to one password.
Participants first created and confirmed a 5-gaze-point password.
If they made errors, they could re-try until successful or skip the trial at any point.
Next, participants answered two 10point Likert-scale questions about the usability of their current password, and completed a 30-second distraction task intended to clear visual working memory and simulate a longer passage of time.
Finally, users logged in with their password, re-trying until successful or skipping if they could not remember it.
This entire process was repeated every trial.
Table 1 compares the number of participants, trials, and general results from our CGP study conditions, T-51 and T-31.
In the right-hand column, we show the published results from the CCP study for comparison.
The success percentages and chi-square significance tests in Table 1 show that larger tolerance squares  made the system significantly easier for participants to confirm and log in than with smaller tolerance squares .
In comparison with CCP, T-51 participants logged in 73% without error, while CCP users did so 96% of all logins.
Thus, CGP users can successfully re-enter passwords, but may require more than one attempt.
CGP participants using larger tolerance squares  were significantly less prone to login errors.
Despite larger tolerance squares leading to higher confirm success rates, no difference in confirm errors was observed.
CGP users generally committed more errors per trial than CCP users.
This is not surprising, since users are probably more practiced at pointing with a mouse than with their gaze.
CGP passwords were created more quickly with larger tolerance squares .
However, for confirm and login, there was high variability  in the time taken, resulting in non-significant differences between conditions.
Participants were slower on average to create, confirm, and log in with T-51 than with CCP.
This is not surprising because CGP times include typing their username, calibrating, and recording a few seconds of gaze for each point, while mouse-clicking is rapid and CCP times begin at the first click-point .
CGP users also committed far more errors than CCP users, and time elapsed during errors and re-tries is included.
Figure 1 plots the frequencies of the Euclidian distances between the creation and login points for passwords created with T-51 and T-31 respectively, scaled by natural logarithm for greater detail.
We use a line graph instead of overlaid histograms to make comparisons between the conditions easier.
We suspect this occurred because T-31 users required greater precision to re-enter their passwords.
Although eye-tracking is limited by eye physiology, somewhat better precision may be achieved with additional care.
We also examined the x- and y-coordinates of incorrect gaze-points to see if CGP participants committed more errors at the edges of the image, due to our 1-point calibration.
We found no such evidence, since the errors were evenly distributed across the image.
Figures 2 and 2 show notched box plots of post-test responses to two 10-point Likert scale questions.
Figure 2 shows that T-51 users felt they could easily create CGP passwords, while T-31 users were neutral.
Figure 2 demonstrates that most CGP users felt they could quickly enter passwords with practice.
This suggests that participants felt that any difficulties were because they lacked familiarity with eye-tracking.
Results of this initial study show a clear trade-off between usability and security.
We found the smaller tolerance size too difficult to use with eye-tracking technology.
The larger tolerance size proved considerably more usable.
However, this configuration's smaller theoretical password space  makes it more vulnerable to password guessing attacks.
This would be an acceptable trade-off in certain environments.
For example, CGP T-51 is much more secure than ATM PINs, because of a larger password space.
CGP can also offer an even larger TPS by using larger images and/or adding gaze-points.
TPS is only an estimate of security against guessing attacks, since not all points on an image or text character combinations are equally likely to be chosen by users.
We address this issue in other work .
We next compare our CGP T-51 results  to other gaze-based authentication systems.
Precise comparisons are not possible due to differences between study methodologies, tasks, and assessment.
For example, CGP success rates and times include username entry, calibration time, failed login attempts, and password recall time, in order to present more ecologically valid results.
We also count a login failure when users either enter an incorrect password or choose to re-enter their password if they see an unfamiliar image .
This latter re-entry is analogous to erasing and re-typing a text password, which Kumar and De Luca do not count as failed logins.
CGP users chose their own passwords, while Kumar and De Luca assigned passwords to users and showed them their passwords before entry, thus not testing password memorability in these conditions.
CGPs success rates are lower as a result of using a stricter definition of "success", which is more representative of real-world usage.
CGP offers a distinct advantage over conventional graphical password systems: shoulder-surfing is very difficult without visible indicators of user selection.
Even with a recording of users' eyes during login, it would be very difficult to align and synchronise this data with the screen with sufficient accuracy.
This lab study was our users' first interaction with an eye tracker.
It is encouraging to see that 93% of login attempts in the T-51 condition were eventually successful, indicating that users are capable of using the system with additional practice.
Participants also indicated confidence in their ability to improve with practice.
EyePassword participants took 10.7 and 9.2 mean seconds to enter Trigger and Dwell passwords respectively.
The 1-try success rates for Trigger and Dwell were 85% and 97% respectively.
EyePassword performance appears better than CGP T-51, but EyePassword users saw their password immediately before entering it, while CGP users relied solely on memory.
Each EyePassword on-screen keyboard key had a focus point in the centre to help users focus their gaze.
Obviously, CGP cannot show users their gaze-point, as this would reveal the password to an attacker.
EyePassword and text passwords also share the same password space weaknesses: weak user-chosen passwords.
This suggests that EyePassShapes is quicker and easier to use than CGP T-51.
However, we believe EyePassShapes may be more vulnerable to shouldersurfing, since attackers could simply watch users' eye movements to capture passwords.
Furthermore, EyePassShapes passwords included only 7 gestures of 8 possible directions each, giving a password space of log2  = 21, which is smaller than CGP T-51 .
Login times were not reported in Dunphy et al.
Their 1-try and 3-tries login success rates were 40% and 65% respectively, which are lower than either CGP condition.
CGP is the first implementation of a shoulder-surfing resistant cued-recall graphical password system using eye-gaze.
This approach has a number of advantages over similar gazebased schemes and with sufficiently large tolerance squares, the system's usability is potentially acceptable.
CGP's password space is larger than similar gaze schemes, and hence more secure against password guessing attacks.
Moreover, CGP's cued-recall nature can help users remember multiple distinct passwords, as distinct images on different systems will help users remember their different gaze-points.
While CGP's usability should be improved before real-world deployment, we believe CGP is a valuable contribution to eye tracking and graphical password research.
User interface design affects security: Patterns in click-based graphical passwords.
Graphical password authentication using Cued Click Points.
S. Chiasson, J. Srinivasan, R. Biddle, and P.C.
Centered discretization with application to graphical passwords.
De Luca, M. Denzel, and H. Hussmann.
Can you guess my password?
Modeling user choice in the PassPoints graphical password scheme.
Eye Tracking Methodology: Theory and Practice.
P. Dunphy, A. Fitch, and P. Olivier.
Gaze-contingent passwords at the ATM.
Improving text passwords through persuasion.
R. Jacob and K. Karn.
Eye tracking in human-computer interaction and usability research: Ready to deliver the promises.
In J. Hyona, R. Radach, and H. Deubel, eds., The Mind's Eye: Cognitive and Applied Aspects of Eye Movement Research, chapter 4 commentary.
S. Komanduri and D. Hutchings.
Order and entropy in picture passwords.
M. Kumar, T. Garfinkel, D. Boneh, and T. Winograd.
Reducing shoulder-surfing by using gaze-based password entry.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Learning and Memory, 2, 1976.
On predicting and exploiting hot-spots in click-based graphical passwords.
Technical Report TR-08-21, School of Computer Science, Carleton University, 2008.
V. Roth, K. Richter, and R. Freidinger.
A PIN-entry method resiliant against shoulder surfing.
A comparison of perceived and real shoulder-surfing risks between alphanumeric and graphical passwords.
Waters, J. Birget, A. Brodskiy, and N. Memon.
PassPoints: Design and longitudinal evaluation of a graphical password system.
