We designed and ran an experiment to measure social influence in online recommender systems, specifically how often people's choices are changed by others' recommendations when facing different levels of confirmation and conformity pressures.
In our experiment participants were first asked to provide their preferences between pairs of items.
They were then asked to make second choices about the same pairs with knowledge of others' preferences.
Our results show that others people's opinions significantly sway people's own choices.
The influence is stronger when people are required to make their second decision sometime later  than immediately .
Moreover, people seem to be most likely to reverse their choices when facing a moderate, as opposed to large, number of opposing opinions.
Finally, the time people spend making the first decision significantly predicts whether they will reverse their decisions later on, while demographics such as age and gender do not.
These results have implications for consumer behavior research as well as online marketing strategies.
You already have an idea about what product you are looking for.
After navigating through the website you find that particular item, as well as several similar items, and other people's opinions and preferences about them provided by the recommendation system.
Will other people' preferences reverse your own?
Notice that in this scenario there are two contradictory psychological processes at play.
On one hand, when learning of other's opinions people tend to select those aspects that confirm their own existing ones.
A large literature suggests that once one has taken a position on an issue, one's primary purpose becomes defending or justifying that position .
From this point of view, if others' recommendations contradict their own opinion, people will not take this information into account and stick to their own choices.
On the other hand, social influence and conformity theory  suggest that even when not directly, personally, or publicly chosen as the target of others' disapproval, individuals may choose to conform to others and reverse their own opinion in order to restore their sense of belonging and self-esteem.
To investigate whether online recommendations can sway peoples' own opinions, we designed an online experiment to test how often people's choices are reversed by others' preferences when facing different levels of confirmation and conformity pressures.
We used Rankr  as the study platform, which provides a lightweight and efficient way to crowdsource the relative ranking of ideas, photos, or priorities through a series of pairwise comparisons.
In our experiment participants were first asked to provide their preferences between pairs of items.
Then they were asked to make second choices about the same pairs with the knowledge of others' preferences.
To measure the pressure to confirm people's own opinions, we manipulated the time before the participants were asked to make their second decisions.
And in order to determine the effects of social pressure, we manipulated the number of opposing opinions that the participants saw when making the second decision.
Our results show that other people's opinions significantly sway people's own choices.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Furthermore, people are most likely to reverse their choices when facing a moderate number of opposing opinions.
Last but not least, the time people spend making the first decision significantly predicts whether they will reverse their decisions later on, while demographics such as age and gender do not.
The main contribution of the paper is that we designed and ran an experiment to understand the mechanisms of social influence in online recommender systems.
Specifically, we measured the impact of others' preferences on people's own choices under different conditions.
The results have implications for consumer behavior research and online marketing strategies.
In the series of studies, participants were asked to choose which of a set of three disparate lines matched a standard, either alone or after 1 to 16 confederates had first given a unanimous incorrect answer.
Meta-analysis showed that on average 25% of the participants conformed to the incorrect consensus .
Moreover, the conformity rate increases with the number of unanimous majority.
More recently, Cosley and his colleagues  conducted a field experiment on a movie rating site.
They found that by showing manipulated predictions, users tended to rate movies toward the shown prediction.
Researchers have also found that social conformity leads to multiple macro-level phenomenons, such as group consensus , inequality and unpredictability in markets , unpredicted diffusion of soft technologies  and undermined group wisdom .
Lataneproposed a theory  to quantitatively predict how the impact of the social influence will increase as a function of the size of the influencing social source.
The theory states that the relationship between the impact of the social influence  and the size of the influencing social source  follows a negative accelerating power function .
The theory has been empirically supported by a meta-analysis of conformity experiments using Asch's line-judgment task .
There are informational and normative motivations underlying social conformity, the former based on the desire to form an accurate interpretation of reality and behave correctly, and the latter based on the goal of obtaining social approval from others .
However, the two are interrelated and often difficult to disentangle theoretically as well as empirically.
Additionally, both goals act in service of a third underlying motive to maintain one's positive self-concept .
Both self-confirmation and social conformity are extensive and strong and they appear in many guises.
In what follows we consider both processes in order to understand users' reaction to online recommender systems.
Confirmation of existing opinions is a long-recognized phenomenon .
As Francis Bacon stated several centuries ago : "The human understanding when it has once adopted an opinion  draws all things else to support and agree with it.
Although there be a greater number and weight of instances to be found on the other side, yet these it either neglects and despises, or else by some distinction sets aside and rejects" This phenomenon can be explained by Festinger's dissonance theory: as soon as individuals adopt a position, they favor consistent over inconsistent information in order to avoid dissonance .
A great deal of empirical studies supports this idea .
Many of these studies use a task invented by Wason , in which people are asked to find the rule that was used to generate specified triplets of numbers.
The experimenter presents a triplet, and the participant hypothesizes the rule that produced it.
The participants then test the hypothesis by suggesting additional triplets and being told whether it is consistent with the rule to be discovered.
Results show that people typically test hypothesized rules by producing only triplets that are consistent with them, indicating hypothesis-determined information seeking and interpretation.
Confirmation of existing opinions also contributes to the phenomenon of belief persistence.
Ross and his colleagues showed that once a belief or opinion has been formed, it can be very resistant to change, even after learning that the data on which the beliefs were originally based were fictitious .
Compared to traditional sources of recommendations peers such as friends and coworkers, experts such as movie critics, and industrial media such as Consumer Reports, online recommender systems combined personalized recommendations sensitive to people's interests and independently reporting other peoples' opinions and reviews.
One popular example of a successful online recommender system is the Amazon product recommender system .
Still, there are few empirical studies investigating the basic psychological processes underlying the interaction of users with recommendations; and none of them addresses both self-confirmation and social conformity.
As mentioned above, Cosley and his colleagues  studied conformity in movie rating sites and showed that people's rating are significantly influenced by other users' ratings.
But they did not consider the effects of self-confirmation or the effects of different levels of social conformity pressures.
Schwind et al studied how to overcome users' confirmation bias by providing preference-inconsistent recommendations .
However, they represented recommendations as search results rather than recommendations from humans, and thus did not investigate the effects of social conformity.
Furthermore, their task was more related to logical inference rather than purchase decision making.
In the area of marketing and customer research, studies about the influence of recommendations are typically subsumed under personal influence and word-of-mouth research .
Past research has shown that word-of-mouth plays an important role in consumer buying decisions, and the use of internet brought new threats and opportunities for marketing .
There were several studies specifically investigating social conformity in product evaluations .
Although they found substantial effects of others' evaluations on people's own judgments, the effects were not always significantly stronger when the social conformity pressures are stronger1.
In Burnkrant and Cousineau's  and Cohen and Golden's  experiments, subjects were exposed to evaluations of coffee with high uniformity or low uniformity.
Both results showed that participants did not exhibit significantly increased adherence to others' evaluation in the high uniformity condition .
In summary, while previous research showed that others' opinions can influence people's own decisions, none of that research addresses both the self-confirmation and social conformity mechanism that underlie choice among several recommendations.
Additionally, regarding to the effects of increasing social conformity pressures, experiments using Asch's line-judgment tasks supported that people are more likely to be influenced when facing stronger social pressures, while the findings of studies using product evaluation tasks were mixed.
Our experiments address how often people reverse their own opinions when confronted with others people preferences, especially when facing different levels of confirmation and conformity pressures.
The hypothesis is that people are more likely to reverse their minds when the reversion causes less self-inconsistency  or the opposing social opinions are stronger .
Unlike other conformity experiments such as linejudgment where the pressure of social conformity is manipulated by increasing the number of "unanimous" majority, experiments about social influence in product evaluation  usually manipulate the pressure of social influence by changing the degree of uniformity of opinions.
As discussed in , since it is seldom that no variation exists in the advice or opinions in reality, the latter method is more likely to stimulate participants' real reactions.
We also use the latter method in our experiment by manipulating the ratio of opposing opinions versus supporting opinions.
We conducted a series of online experiments.
All participants were asked to go to the website of Rankr  to make a series of pairwise comparisons with or without knowing others people's preferences .
The pictures were collected from Google Images.
We wanted to determine whether people reverse their choices by seeing others' preferences.
Note that the Caucasian baby pictures in Figure 1 are examples.
We displayed baby pictures from different races in the experiment.
In the loveseat condition, the question was "your close friend wants your opinion on a loveseat for their living room, which one do you suggest"; and people also needed to make twenty-three or twenty-four choices.
In the short interval condition, people first compared two pictures on their own and they were then immediately asked to make another choice with available information about others' preferences.
Furthermore, we tested whether people would reverse their first choice under four levels of social pressure: when the number of opposing opinions was twice, five times, ten times, and twenty times as many as the number of people who supported their opinions.
The numbers were randomly generated2.
Except for theses eight experimental pairs, we also added fourteen noise pairs and an honesty test composed of two pairs .
In this condition, noise pairs also consisted of consecutive pairs .
However, others' opinions were either indifferent or in favor of the participants' choices.
We created an honesty test to identify participants who cheated the system and quickly clicked on the same answers.
The test consisted of two consecutive pairs with the same items but with the positions of the items exchanged.
Participants needed to make the same choices among these consecutive two pairs in order to pass the honesty test.
The relative orders of experimental pairs, noise pairs, and honesty test in the sequence and the items in each pair were randomly assigned to each participant.
In contrast with the short interval condition where people were aware that they reversed their choices, in the long interval condition we manipulated the order of display and the item positions so that the reversion was less explicit.
People first compared pairs of the items without knowing others' preferences, and then on average after 11.5 pairs later we showed the participants the same pair  and others' opinions.
Similarly, with the short interval condition we showed eight experimental pairs to determine whether people reversed their previous choices with increasing pressures of social influence.
Additionally, we showed thirteen noise pairs  and performed an honesty test .
Participants were asked to provide their preferences between the same pair of items twice.
The first time the participant encountered the pair, they made a choice without the knowledge of others' preferences.
The second time the participant encountered the same pair, they made a choice with the knowledge of others' preferences.
Social influence is measured as whether people switched their choices between the first time and second time they encountered the same pair.
To manipulate the pressure to confirm people's own opinions, we changed the time between the two decisions.
In the short interval condition, people first compared two pictures on their own and they were then immediately asked to make another choice with available information about others' preferences.
When the memories were fresh, reversion leads to strong inconsistency and dissonance of other people's choices with their own previous ones .
However, in the long interval condition, participants compared pairs of items in the beginning of the test followed by several distractor pairs and then followed again by the same pairs the participant had previously compared but with augmented information of others' preferences.
In this case, participants' memories of their previous choices decay, so the pressure to confirm their own opinions is less explicit.
To manipulate the social pressure, we changed the number of opposing opinions that the participants saw when making the second decision.
We selected four levels: the opposing opinions were twice, five times, ten times, or twenty times as many as the number of people who supported their opinions.
In the following section, the details of experimental conditions are discussed.
The experimental design was 2  X 3  X 4 .
Participants were recruited from Amazon's Mechanical Turk and were randomly assigned into one of six conditions  and made four choices with different levels of conformity pressure.
By increasing the time between two choices, we blurred people's memories of their choices in order to exert a subtle confirmation pressure.
However, as people proceeded with the experiment they were presented with new information to process.
This new information may lead them to think in a different direction and change their own opinions regardless of social influence.
In order to control for this confounding factor, we added a long interval control condition, where the order of the pairs were the same as with the long interval condition but without showing the influence of others.
We conducted our experiment on Amazon Mechanical Turk  .
The recruiting messages stated that the objective of the survey was to do a survey to collect people's opinions.
Once mTurk users accepted the task they were asked to click the link to Rankr, which randomly directed them to one of the six conditions.
This process was invisible to them.
First, the participants were asked to provide their preferences about twenty-three or twenty-four pairs of babies or loveseats.
They were then directed to a simple survey.
They were asked to report their age, gender and answer two 5-Likert scale questions.
The questions were as follows.
After filling out the survey, a unique confirmation code was generated and displayed on the webpage.
Participants needed to paste the code back to the mTurk task.
With the confirmation code in hand we matched mTurk users with the participants of our experiments, allowing us to pay mTurk users according to their behaviors.
We paid $0.35 for each valid response.
These procedures left 433 valid participants in the sample, about 72% of the original number.
According to participant self-reporting, 40% were females; age ranged between18 to 82 with a median age of 27 years.
Geocoding 3 the ip addresses of the participants revealed 57% were from India, 25% from USA, with the remaining 18% of participants coming from over 34 different countries.
The numbers of participants in each condition were as follows.
4 People spent a reasonable amount of time on each decision .
The valid responses in short interval conditions were fewer than the ones in long interval conditions because the short interval condition had a higher failure rate in the honesty test.
The reason might be that short interval condition had more repetitive pairs, fewer new items and more straightforward patterns, leading to boredom and casual decisions, which in turn caused failure in the honesty tests.
To summarize the results, in both the long and the short interval conditions, others' opinions significantly swayed people's own choices .
The effect size of social influence was larger when the self-confirmation pressure was weaker .
Social conformity pressures: the ratio of opposing opinions to supporting opinions.
Decision time: the time  people spent in making each decision.
Demographic information: age and gender.
Self-reported level of being influenced.
Figure 3 shows the reversion rate as a function of the conditions we manipulated in our experiment.
First, we found out that content does not matter, i.e., although baby pictures are more emotionally engaging than loveseat pictures, the patterns are the same.
The statistics test also shows that there is no significant difference between the baby and the loveseat results =1.35, p=0.18.
Third, the percentage of people that reversed their opinion was as high as 32.5% in the long interval condition, significantly higher than the long interval control condition  which measures the effects of other factors leading to reversion regardless of the social influence during the long interval.
Interestingly, we saw an increasing and then decreasing trend when the opposing opinions became exponentially stronger .
The condition with the most uniform opposing opinions  was not more effective in reversing people's own opinions than the moderate opposing opinions .
In order to calibrate the magnitude of our results, we point out that our results are of the same magnitude as the classic line-judgment experiments.
According to a 1996 metaanalysis of line-judgment experiment consisting of 133 separate experiments and 4,627 participants, the average conformity rate is 25% .
These results might be explained by Brehn's finding of psychological reactance .
According to Brehn, if an individual's freedom is perceived as being reduced or threatened with reduction, he will become aroused to maintain or enhance his freedom.
The motivational state of arousal to reestablish or enhance his freedom is termed psychological reactance.
Therefore if the participants perceived the uniform opposing opinions as a threat to their freedom to express their own opinions, their psychological reactance might be aroused to defend and confirm their own opinions.
These results can also be explained in terms of Wu and Huberman's findings about online opinion formation .
In their work they used the idea of maximizing the impact that individuals have on the average rating of items to explain the phenomenon that later reviews tend to show a big difference with earlier reviews in Amazon.com and IMDB.
We can use the same idea to explain our results.
Social influence in product recommendations is not just a one-way process.
People are not just passively influenced by others' opinions but also want to maximize their impact on other people's future decision making .
We assume that the influence of an individual on others can be measured by how much his or her expression will change the average opinion.
A simple derivation shows that to maximize the influence on average opinion, people need to stick to their own choices and vote for the minority.
Then their influence gain will be stronger when the difference between existing majority opinions and minority ones is larger.
Therefore, the motivation to exert influence on other people can play a role in resisting the social conformity pressure and lead people to confirm their own decisions especially when facing uniform opposing opinions.
Note that standardized first decision time =  / this person's standard deviation.
So "first decision time" is an intrapersonal variable.
The results showed that age and gender do not significantly predict reversion .
The longer people spent on the decisions, the more equivalent the two choices are for them.
According to Festinger's theory : the more equivocal the evidence, the more people rely on social cues.
Therefore, the more time people spend on a choice, the more likely they are to reverse this choice and conform to others later on.
On one hand, the phenomena we found  are quite different from the classic line-judgment conformity studies .
Notice that these experiments used questions with only one single correct answer .
In contrast, in our experiment we examined the social influence on people's subjective preferences among similar items, which might result in such different phenomena.
On the other hand, our findings reconcile the mixed results of studies investigating social conformity in product evaluation tasks  .
Due to the returning effects, strong conformity pressure is not always more effective in influencing people's evaluations compared to weak conformity pressure.
Additionally, in our experiment we did not look at social influence in scenarios where the uncertainty level is quite high.
For example, in settings such as searching recommendations for restaurants or hotels where people have never been to, the level of uncertainty is high and people need to rely on other cues.
Therefore, some caution is needed when trying to generalize our results to other settings with high uncertainty.
Regarding the tasks used in the experiment, the choice of "which baby looks cuter on a product label" involves emotions and subjective feelings.
Alternatively similar choices include the preferences of iTune music or YouTube's commercial videos.
In contrast, the other type of question, "which loveseat is better", is less emotionally engaging.
In this case people are more likely to consider the usability factors such as color and perceived comfortableness when making these types of choices.
Results showed that the impact of social influence on these two different types of choices are similar and consistent, which suggests the general applicability of the results.
There might be concern about cultural differences between the global nature of the respondents and the Western-style nature of the tasks.
We point out that this intercultural preference difference inherent in the participant is assumed consistent throughout the test and therefore should not affect a particular person's preference changes and will not confound the results.
During our research, we invented an experimental paradigm to easily measure the effects of social influence on people's decision making  and manipulate conditions under which people make choices.
This paradigm can be extended to scenarios beyond those of binary choices, to the effect of recommendations from friends as opposed to strangers and whether social influence varies with different visualizations for the recommendations.
Particularly, compared to recruiting people from a college campus, we believe the use of Mechanical Turk has a lower risk of introducing the Hawthorne Effect , which is itself a form of social influence and might contaminate our results.
In our experiment, we used several methods such as an honest test and IP address checking to further ensure that we collected earnest responses from Mechanical Turk workers.
The average time they spent on the task, the statistically significant results of the experiment and the comments participants left all indicate that our results are believable.
However, there is still a limitation of our honesty test.
On one hand, the honesty test  was unable to identify all the users who tried to cheat the system by randomly clicking on the results, which added noise in our data.
On the other hand, the honesty test might also exclude some earnest responses.
It is possible that, immediately after people made a choice, they regret it.
In this paper, we present results of a series of online experiments designed to investigate whether online recommendations can sway peoples' own opinions.
These experiments exposed participants making choices to different levels of confirmation and conformity pressures.
Our results show that people's own choices are significantly swayed by the perceived opinions of others.
The influence is weaker when people have just made their own choices.
Additionally, we showed that people are most likely to reverse their choices when facing a moderate, as opposed to large, number of opposing opinions.
And last but not least, the time people spend making the first decision significantly predicts whether they will reverse their own later on.
Our results have three implications for consumer behavior research as well as online marketing strategies.
There is enough information in most websites to capture these decision times and act accordingly.
In our experiments, we examined whether people reverse their choices when facing different ratios of opposing opinions versus supporting opinions .
In order to further investigate the relationship between the ratio of the opposing opinions and the tendency to revert, it would be better to include more fine-grained conditions in the ratio of opposing opinions.
The ideal situation would be a graph with the continuous opposing versus supporting ratio as the x-axis and the reversion rate as the y-axis.
Also, additional manipulation checks or modification of the design of the experiment would be needed to establish whether processes such as psychological reactance or the intent to influence others have been operating.
For example, the degree of perceived freedom in the task could be measured.
And it would be revealing to manipulate whether or not people's choices would be visible to other participants to see whether the intention of influencing others takes effect.
Senecal, S., Nantel, J., The influence of online product recommendations on consumers' online choices, Journal of Retailing, Volume 80, Issue 2, 2004, Pages 159-169.
I will do it, but i don't like it: user reactions to preferenceinconsistent recommendations.
In Proceedings of the 2011 annual conference on Human factors in computing systems .
Service Bashing on the Internet is a Thorny Issue.
