Jayne Elizabeth Zanglein and Katherine Austin Stalcup Law professors increasingly are using the Internet to supplement their course materials and enhance their teaching skills.!
They are using it to create interactive, educational computer software,2 to provide a forum for peer review of student work products/' to encourage collaborative learning,4 to provide a structured out-of-classroom learningenvironment,s to foster a tighter community of educators,6 to extend office hours,' to supplement and update class materials,S and to promote faculty collegiality.9 But does Web-based instruction work in the classroom?
This is the question we set out to answer.
See also Michael A. Geist, Where Can You Go Today?
The Computerization ofLegal Education from Workbooks to the Web, 11 Harv.J.L.
The CALI "Library of Lessons is a collection of over one hundred interactive computer-based lessons covering twenty seven legal education subject areas."
When we started on that path, we did not know much about learning theories and pedagogy.
Zanglein, a professor oflaw at Texas Tech, was at that time a relative newcomer to the use of multimedia in education.
Her 1975 bachelor's degree in music education qualified her to use mimeograph machines and film strips, and to teach students ages five to eighteen-skills not very transferable to teaching law students in the 1990s.
Theorizing that there might be a vast literature on adult learning theory that she was unaware of, Zanglein decided to experiment: she would use various multimedia in her classes, evaluate their effectiveness, and then find outwhether the educational literature explained why certain approaches were more effective than others.
Since Zanglein was not experienced in technology, she sought the assistance ofStalcup, the technology program manager at Texas Tech's Teaching, Learning, and Technology Center.
Together we developed a thesis: that Webbased technology can improve student learning and satisfaction in skills-based courses because it allows students to choose among various sensory stimuli according to their own learning styles.
Our goal was to explore a variety of technologies and attempt to accommodate a variety oflearning styles instead of teaching to the prototypical law student.10 Tailored instruction often occurs in" primary and secondary education.
In contrast, law students are subjected to a one-size-fits-all teaching approach.
The law school admissions committee assumes that an applicantwith a high LSAT score and a high grade point average has succeeded in college and will therefore succeed in law school.
But such an applicant may have excelled in college by taking courses from teachers whose methods suited his particular learning style, and by choosing courses that interested him.12 As a first-year law student he must take required courses that he mayor may not find interesting.
He must also workwith course materials whose style varies little from course to course.
Most textbooks are compilations ofappellate cases, followed by notes and problems.
Unlike undergraduate textbooks, law books do not typically include photographs, charts, or color-coded graphs.
They appeal primarily to a student who learns by reading and writing; they are not geared toward the visual learner.
Our premise was that by using Web-based instruction we could teach more effectively to all types oflearners.
In this article, we focus on several skills-based law courses and examine the effectiveness of a few technologies in our traditional classroom.
At that time we knew only of auditory, tactile, kinesthetic, and visualleaming orientations.
Student participation in legal clinics is a general exception.
See generally Brook K. Baker, Learning to Fish, Fishing to Learn: Guided Participation in the Interpersonal Ecology of Practice, 6 Clinical L. Rev.
Throughout, we use masculine pronouns for the student and feminine pronouns for the teacher.
I5 Part II discusses the pedagogical attributes of Web-based instruction.
Part III reports on our use of learning theory and technology in skiJ1s..based courses.
In part IV we assess our exploratory efforts, and in part V we suggest future directions.
There are many learning styles that we do not address, such as mastery learning.
Bloom's taxonomy of educational o~ectives, Kolb's theory of learning styles, cognitive learning theory, and developmental learning theory.
We have focused on perceptual learning theories because we hypothesized that computer technology was a good vehicle through which we could tailor instruction to individual learning styles.
See generally, e.g.,James A. Wakefield, Jr., Using Personality to Individualize Instruction .
The global learner is likely to be the applicant with the high LSAT score who performs poorly in law school.
Most students with an IQ higher than 145 are globallearners.
17 Most underachieving students are also globallearners.18 Analytic learners are the sort that every law school is trying to attract.
This is the student who performs well on the LSAT and then does well in law school.
It is as if the law school learning environment were developed by an analytic for other analytic learners:
Analytics *** tend to prefer learning in silence, with bright lighting, and a formal design-a conventional classroom.
They rarely eat, chew, drink, or smoke while learning; instead, theyeatafterward.
The ideal teacher adapts her lessons to reach both analytic and global learners.20 Analytic learners prefer "details, rules, procedures, and directions; they like specific, step-by-step instructions.
Global learners ... are concerned with end results; they need *** the big picture; they like general guidelines, variety, alternatives, and different approaches.
22 An analytic teacher who wants to reach global learners should introduce class material with an anecdote that relates to the subject of the lesson.
She should allow collaborative learning during the class, perhaps forming small groups to discuss problems or policy issues.
She should use flowcharts, graphs, and illustrations; global learners tend to be visual learners.
They also tend to be kinesthetic learners and respond well to role-playing and simulations.
Global teachers who want to meet the needs ofanalytic learners should also use visual aids that reinforce verbal communication.
They should write key words on the chalk board.
Analytic learners benefit from the written material in slide presentations and class handouts.
Corinne O'Connor Cody, Learning Styles, Including Hemispheric Dominance: A Comparative Study of Average, Gifted, and Highly Gifted Students in Grades Five Through Twelve.
Doctoral dissertation, Temple University, 1983, abstracted in Dissertation Abstracts International,44,1631A.
Analytic students need to have written directions and written notification ofassignments, test dates, and due dates for assignments.
Analytic learners also benefit from frequent testing and prompt feedback.
23 B. IUght Brain/Left Brain Thernies The Dunns' Learning Style Inventory implicitly relies on differences between the right and left hemispheres of the brain.
Analytic learners are predominantly left-brained learners.
Global learners rely on the right side of the brain.
In Teachingfor the Two-Sided Mind Linda Verlee Williams describes the functions of each hemisphere:
The left hemisphere processes sequentially, in a step-by step manner.
This linear processing is temporal or timMelated in that it recognizes that one stimulus comes before another.
Verbal perception and generation depend on the awareness of the order or sequence in which sounds occur.
Sequence is important notonlyin decoding acoustic cues into words but in understanding syntax as well, since the meaning of a series ofwords depends largely on the order in which they occur.
This type of processing relies on the ability to discriminate the relevant features, to redtlCt a whole to meaningful parts-in short, to ana9ze.
The right hemisphere appears to specialize in simultaneous processing or processingin paralleL It does not move from one feature to another but instead seeks patterns and gestalts.
The teacher should teach to both sides of the brain-that is, teach in a linear, sequential manner, while providing opportunities for learners to detect patterns, use visual and spatial intelligences, and see the whole picture.
Williams suggests the following techniques for teaching to the right side of the brain:
Many ideas are better expressed and more easily understood through pictures, maps, diagrams, charts, and mind maps..** Fantasy.
Another form.ofvisual thinking ... is fantasy, the ability to generate and manipulate mental imagery.
As a teaching technique, it can be used to translate verbally presented material into images, making that information more accessible and comprehensible to students.*..
In each discipline there are basic concepts which students mustleam and terms whose precise meaning it is important to understand, but evocative language also has its place in school.
Think, for a moment, oflecturesyou've attended.You will probably find that the lecturers who made the deepest impression were those who made effective use of evocative language**** Metaphor.
Fuld trips are another**** Experience can be created in a classroom through simulation and role playing.
While both hemispheres process sensory stimuli, it seems that stimuli that are nonverbal are processed primarily in the right hemisphere.
The role of the senses is another area that has been slighted because of our tendency to equate thinking with verbal processes.
Yet both the sensory and motor systems playa role in learning **** Mwic.
While music can be processed in either hemisphere, most listeners seem to use their right hemispheres .*.
In 1942 Katherine Briggs and her daughter, Isabel Briggs Myers, developed the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator, an inventory that categorizes personalities according tojung's theory ofpersonality preferences.26 The MBTI asks a series of questions, forcing choices between preferences, and scores the individual on four poles: Extroversion / Introversion Sensing / Intuition Thinking / Feeling judging / Perceiving2" Introversion and extroversion are different ends of the polar question: "Where is your primary source of energy?"
An extrovert primarily derives energy from the outer world of activity and spoken words.
An introvert's primary source is the inner world of thoughts and emotions.
Sensing and intuition are at opposite ends of the question: "How do you prefer to take in information?"
Sensing people take in facts or details, while intuitive people take in patterns and overviews.
The thinking/feeling pole answers the question: "How do you prefer to make decisions?"
Thinking people base decisions on logical and objective considerations; feeling people's decisions are based on personal values.
Perceiving people are flexible; they prefer to discover life as they go along.
Vemellia R. Randall has done considerable research on the use of the MBTI in teaching law students.
What follows is largely based on her article, "The Mye~BriggsType Indicator, FirstYear Law Students and Performance.
While extrovertS generally do better at Socratic dialog, it is the introverts who perform well on the written exams that usually determine course grades.
As Randall says, "much of law study involves thinking alone, something introverts do well.
They should encourage extroverts to "fill their learning situation with talking and discussion, activity and group work," and to "connect the theories or facts with their own experience."
Because extroverts tend to perform better orally than in writing, they "should be encouraged to practice writing exams and hypotheticals.
Sensing students are better adapted to the study of law than intuitive students.
Sensing students focus on facts and details and strive for practical and realistic solutions.
Intuitives look at the big picture.
They tend to be idealists who want to change the world.
Randall notes that "sensing law students learn best when they are given concrete examples that allow them to move abstract theory in a step-by-step progression."
They should be encouraged to use programmed interactive computer-assisted legal instruction.
They need clear, detailed, concise directions.
They "learn best when given a principle, or rule, followed by many examples of variations in applying it.
They tend to enjoy practice and drill."
Because sensing students are good at time management, "they are more likely to work steadily at preparing for exams.
A downside to their quick insight is that they are often careless about facts and details, preferring theoretical and abstract concepts.
Once an intuitive student grasps the main point, he is likely to become bored and inattentive.
Intuitives tend to "underestimate how long things will take and may finish tasks in a lastminute rush.
Thinking law students have a marked advantage over feeling law students.M Thinking students are analytical, objective, logical, critical onlookers who make decisions based on principle.
Feeling students are sympathetic, subjective, personal participants who make value judgments.
Randall suggests that law teachers should encourage feeling students to discuss the underlying values that motivate the parties.
Feeling students tend to have difficulty departing from their own firmly held values to understand others' different values.
They need to learn how to balance needs against competing liabilities.
Judging students are structured, organized, and firmly in control.
Perceiving students are flexible, spontaneous explorers who are open to change.
In law school they "may feel imprisoned.
They need to be taught how to recognize "when it is time to be open, curious and perceptive; and when it is time to stop looking and decide to act."
Teachers can helpjudgingstudents by giving them structure and organization.
They should encourage judging students to be more careful in their legal analysis because "'they have probably decided prematurely, on the basis ofinsufficient information, either that they are right or there is nothing more to be done.
Students learn through all of their senses: visual , aural , interactive , print , kinesthetic , haptic , and olfactory  .38 Most law school teaching is directed at students who are interactive , aural, or print learners.
Lynne Celli Sarasin categorizes students into three learning style preferences: auditory, visual, and tactile/kinesthetic.
Waynne B. James &: Michael W. Galbraith, Perceptual Learning Styles: Implications and Techniques for the Practitioner, lifelong Learning, Jan. 1985, at 20, 20-21.
Students between the ages of 20 and 49 ranked learning styles in the following order: visual, haptic, interactive, aural, print, kinesthetic, and olfactory.
Older students ranked the order somewhat differently: visual, interactive, aural, haptic, print, kinesthetic, and olfactory.
Auditory learners learn by listening.
They are skill oriented and are good memorizers.
An auditory learner is an "independent learner, the learner who is competitive and achievement-oriented, the learner who has the ability to analyze pieces of information, and the perceptual student, who needs to understand relationships and connections between concepts and pieces of information.
They have characteristics that are random, holistic, global, perceptual, concrete, and imaginative.
They are similar to global learners: they want to know the whole before understanding the parts.
They are active learners who learn by doing.45 They like role-playing and skills-based courses.
They learn best through internships, field trips, direct contact, experiential learning, simulation, and demonstration.
They respond well to technology, including audio, video, and computer-assisted instruction, which allows them to "learn at their own speed, in their own way, and with emphasis on whatever components they wish.""
The theory ofmultiple intelligences was developed in the 1980s by Howard Gardner, who recognized that learners have different cognitive strengths and styles.45 He identified seven intelligences, possessed by learners in varying degrees, which determine each person's most appropriate learning style.
The seven intelligences are linguistic, logical-mathematical, spatial, musical, bodilykinesthetic, interpersonal , and intrapersonal .
Gardner describes each ofthe intelligences through a thumbnail biogra-
To teach to all seven types ofintelligence, teachers should vary their format to include graphs and charts and other visual aids ; discussion groups ; problem-solving, classifying, and categorizing information ; hands-on projects ; tonal or rhythmic patterns ; role reversal, listening, and counseling ; and journal writing .
While it is difficult to teach to every intelligence in one lesson, one can teach to all the intelligences over the course of a learning module.
For example, in teaching a client-centered counseling approach, we can address the seven intelligences as follows.
Pro and con chart of client alternatives; charts and Spatial graphs Discussion groups; client interview; listening exerLinguistic.
Role-plays and simulations; client interviews Bodily-kinesthetic Play Gil &ott Heron's "Peace Go withYou, Brother" Musical Role reversal; listening exercises; counseling exerInterpersonal cises Intrapersonal Journal entry discussing student's strengths and weaknesses in conducting an interview.
Malcolm S. Knowles is the chief proponent of adult learning theory.
He focused not on pedagogy, which he considered to be the art of educating children, but on andragogy, "the art and science of helping adults learn.
Finally, adult learning is commonly anxiety-provoking."
Legal educators have attempted to apply adult learning theory to legal education, especially in the clinical context.58 Linda Morton,Janet Weinstein, and Mark Weinstein describe such an attempt in a recent article, "Not Quite Grown Up: The Difficulty of Applying an Adult Education Model to Legal Externs."
They found that they used andragogicalleaming theories less than they had expected.
Apparently the "voluntary" act ofenrolling in elective law courses is not the type of external motivation which Knowles believed would encourage selfdirection.
The three authors note that "hile most of our students come to us eager to begin their transition to law practice, some have little or no sense ofgoals and  the process ofintrospection."
But see Stephen D. Brookfield, Understanding and Facilitating Adult Learning 40-59 .
John Dewey, Democracy and Education: An Introduction to the Philosophy of Education 322-23 .
A role-playing methodology is attributed to Carl Rogers by Chet Meyers &: Thomas B.Jones, PromotingActive Learning: Strategies for the College Classroom 93 .
Robert M. Smith, Learning How to Learn: Applied Theory for Adults 44-48, 50' ; Jack Mezirow, Transformative Dimensions of Adult Learning 189 ; Stephen Brookfield, The Skillful Teacher: On Technique, Trust, and Responsiveness in the Classroom 58-60 .
See Frank Bloch, The Andragogical Basis of Clinical Legal Education, 35 Vand.
321 ; Linda Morton, Creating a Classroom Component for Field Placement Programs: Enhancing Clinical Goals with Feminist Pedagogy, 45 Me.
211  j Fran Quigley, Seizing the Disorienting Moment Adult Learning Theory and the Teaching of SocialJustice in LawSchool Clinics, 2 Clinical L. Rev.
37 ; Abbe Smith, Carrying On in Criminal Court: When Criminal Defense Is Not So Sexy and Other Grievances, 1 Clinical L. Rev.
Instead of focusing on Knowles's learning theory, the three authors have modified their teaching method to be more directive; they "impose content regarding professional responsibilities, ethics, and some personal awareness,  impose a process that is intended to be selfreflective and to some extent self-disclosing."
They conclude that this combination ~helps push students in the direction ofa more thoughtful and conscious response to the ambiguities and dilemmas of practice, as well as to~d a better understanding of their own personal values and how they may be incorporated into their lives as lawyers.
He draws uponJack Mezirow's transformational learning pattern, which has three stages: a disorienting experience, exploration and reflection, and reorientation.
Quigley notes that "pon re-orientation, the learner's perspective is transformed in such,a way that the previously disorienting experience is explained.
One student, asking to be relieved ofa client who had been raped, described his disorienting experience: "Her life is so messed up, I don't know how to respond.
She has so many problems I don't see a way out of her situation."
Quigley uses this type ofdisorienting moment to initiate a conversation about the roles of lawyers.
Mter this type of experience, the student is ready to reorient his perspective onjustice.61 ' Techniques that Quigley uses to promote transformative learning include sharing of student experiences, journal writing, and teacher-:student discussions in which he facilitates the learning process.
We can summarize this section with a chart that shows how much the various learning theories have in common.
The Dunns categorize learners as "global" or "analytic."
Each of the other learning theories adopts a similar approach.
We began our collaboration by identifying aspects of a Web-based instruction environment that we hypothesized would enhance learning in skillsbased courses.
While traditional classrooms are based on precepts of passive learning and highly structured course delivery, typically centered around lectures and reading assignments, the hallmarks ofa Web-based environment are flexibility, interactivity, visual appeal, kinesthetic movement, and sequential segments.62 Active learning.
Web-based instruction allows students to take an active role in learning and control their own learning environment.
They can control the pace, timing, sequence, and depth of their learning experience.
Students who learn best by reading can read the material sequentially as chapters in a book; they can print out the chapter and read it in their favorite study place.
Students who learn best by thinking aloud can discuss the materials in class or online, perhaps in a chat room.
VISual learners can look at videos, charts, graphs, and slides.
Kinesthetic learners can learn through computer simulations and tutorials that guide them through the materials.
Students who learn best by writing can create outlines online and participate in online discussions.
In traditional legal education, materials are presented linearly; that is, there is a single path through the material, and the order of the material is entirely controlled by the instructor.
A good example of the linear approach is the traditional lecture or a slide presentation during class.
The teacher decides what material she will present and in what order, and the student has no choice but to receive the information as the teacher organizes and delivers it.
Many would argue that linear presentations limit student activity' and participation.
In contrast, Web-based instruction allows each student to choose the route he wishes to take through the materials.
Concepts and course materials are organized logically, but the student is not restricted to a linear order.
Most law school instruction is synchronous; that is, it involves a two-way interaction in real time.
Typically, synchronous communication implies that the instructor is present during the instruction.
The Internet offers several interactive synchronous utilities.
Mailing list managers were the first type ofasynchronous communication utility beyond electronic mail.
The most common mailing list manager is the ListProcessor software.
This requires participants to subscribe to the server.
Once subscribed, the participant automatically receives any mail sent to the server.
Listserves generate a large amount of mail and can be quite confusing if multiple topics are being discussed.
A second type of communication utility is threaded message technology.
Threaded technologyservers allow participants to check a common Web site and post messages.
Typically, a teacher will organize the site into different classes, rooms, or topics.
Each participating student can read the postings of the other participants.
The teacher has a record of all interactions and can also review the quality and quantity of postings.
A third type of communication utility is chat software.
We wanted to involve students in both synchronous and asynchronous communication.
Synchronous communication with the instructor occurred during class and office hours.
Chat rooms allowed students to communicate with each other synchronously.
We anticipated that asynchronous communication would primarily occur via the Internet Case method vs. prohlem-soT:uing.
The courses we focused on-Negotiation, Transactional Practice , and Legal Writing-are not well suited for use of the traditional Langdellian case method.
Instead, we chose to use a problem-solving approach.
We gave students assignments and provided guidance along the way with computer-assisted programs.
Information is available on the Web long before it becomes available in printed form.
We took advantage of this by providing links to sites with substantial content Another strength of the Web is the vast amount of resources available.
The Web is larger than any traditionallibrary and offers students a wealth oftimely and practical information.
We created a large electronic collection of relevant resources for students to review.
An electronic library provided basic information such as standard dictionaries, legal dictionaries, and legal forms.
These links targeted useful resources for the course.
A second collection of links provided specific class materials.
We also used a dynamic Web-based syllabus to provide students with up-to-date course information and assignments.
We could provide updates on the same day as the class was held.
We arranged the Web pages in a logical formation by including an organized home page table ofcontents and links.
Students could click on hypertext links or map images that graphically depicted an image.
The hypertext learning environment has the following characteristics.
The student determines the learning path and assimilates the information in an order that is intuitive and interesting to him.
This is an environment that promotes individuality.
It also promotes higher-order thinking skills.
Because the student controls the order in which concepts are presented, he must then organize and relate the information and assimilate the main concepts.
The hypertext environment allows information to be presented in a spatially aesthetic and effective manner.
While chat rooms have been very successful in the entertainment industry, academics are hesitant because the communications usually cannot be recorded and so the teacher cannot observe, guide, or measure communications.
Since the inception of the World Wide Web, several hypertext styles have emerged A firstgeneration style involved long pages oflists, which usually included links to otherWeb pages.
A second generation emerged to include more graphics and technology in the Web pages.
The Teaching, Learning, and Technology Center introduces and promotes the thirdgeneration style, which includes splash pages to organize and present information.
A splash page is a short  introductory page that organizes the main categories ofinformation and provides a link to those categories.
The pages also have common background, picture, and font schemes, called themes.
The themes help orient the students.
Zanglein created a distinct theme for each course offered on the Web.
Because Zanglein also supervised Legal Practice, the first-year writing course, she was able to incorporate some computer technology into that course.
We used several new techniques, along with the traditional skills-based repertoire ofsimulations,joumals, annotations, small-group discussions, and collaborative and individual drafting.
For the first time, we also used WebBoard , a Web-based textbook, class Web pages, WWWedit!65 , and e-mail.
A. WebBoard WebBoard is an onlineWeb-based discussion board.66 We created WebBoard conferences for Transactional Practice, Negotiation Workshop, and each of the Legal Practice classes.
Each course used the WebBoard in different ways.
Transactional Practice students were required to post all of their ungraded daily assignments on the WebBoard.
Once they posted their answers, Zanglein encouraged them to read their classmates' answers.
On some drafting assignments, she also required them to post a comment to three oftheir classmates, offering editorial comments.
At first, the comments tended to be too kind"Nicejob on the contract!
I like the termination clause"-but as the semester progressed, the comments became much more insightful.
Zanglein also provided feedback to the students either by a reply posted on the WebBoard or by e-mail.
A major advantage ofWebBoard was that it allowed Zanglein to easily transport the students' drafts to class for viewing by the entire class.57 She always gave the students hard copies of all materials shown in class via the traditional overhead projector or the computer projector.
This sexved two purposes: the students had the paper to write notes on, and the class had a backup in case ofa problem with the projection.
WebBoard automatically converts links to Web pages into active links.
That is, if you type "Click here to see the contract: http://www2.tItc.ttu.edu/ Zanglem/Trans/k3.htmI," then when the message is posted, the link will automatically tum into a hypertext link that the student can click on to visit a new Web page.
This allowed the class to view longer contracts in a Web-based format that looked more like the hard-copy version.
Readers may log onto the WebBoard as a guest to see how It works.
To edit the documents during class, Zangleln would copythe students' work Into WordPerfect and project it on the screen using a 20- or 24-polnt font.
A disadvantage ofWebBoard is that although.it is compatible with Netscape, students could not attach files through Internet Explorer or America On Line.
Those students would send e-mail to Zanglein with the document attached, and she would post it for them using Netseape.
Also, we had difficulty using Internet Explorer to post to large conferences that extended for more than one Web page.
Because, initially, the first-year students were not motivated to log onto WebBoard daily, the Legal Practice teachers offered them an incentive to use the WebBoard.
Each of the teachers posted a notice that essentially said, "If you see this message and reply to it, you do not have to tum in the nextwritten assignment."
Hundreds of students overcame their reluctance and logged onto the WebBoard.
Many posted messages thanking the teacher for forcing them to learn WebBoard.
Through WebBoard, we created a chat room for each class.
One of the Legal Practice instructors held weekly chats with her students, which allowed students to ask questions about their writing projects.
The students who did not want to participate in the discussion could just look and listen to the conversation.
The chat room also allowed participants to whisper to each other without being overhead by others.
This is a nice feature that might be useful when students are working on group projects or negotiating a contract.
In Negotiations Workshop we used WebBoard to continue discussions started in class.
The class met for two hours only once a week, and it was useful to have that means of continuing class discussions.
WebBoard gave Zanglein the opportunity for instant and candid feedback from students on how the course was going.
About halfway through the semester, she noticed that several students were getting tired of the editing assignments they were working on.
She canceled the scheduled writing assignmentand instead asked the students to respond to a WebBoard posting, "How can we improve this course?"
Zanglein was delighted with the results.
Sometimes comments were diametrically opposed: I think that the class should have more weight put on substance.
For example, ifwe decide to put in a noncompete covenant, we need to know if it will stick.
This could depend on the profession orjurisdiction in which the contract was executed.
Personally, I'm not interested in substance.
I really like learning about how to use clear language and better structure to forms or drafts I already have.
I think sometimes we should limit the amount of conversation in the class-
The students' criticism was constructive and was offered in a spirit of cooperation and trusL69 Unlike end-of.term course evaluation, these student comments came at a time in the semester when Zanglein could actually make changes in response.
As a result of the comments, Zanglein completely revised the upcoming assignments to take into account some of the student suggestions.
I  am always surprised, although I should not be, that 'typically ,students want more difficult work and more practical experience than I am giving to them.
Students wanted to do more whole contract drafting rather than isolated provisions.
Students also wanted to draft more contracts that required knowledge of a substantive area of the law.
I had steered away from both of these, for the most part, believing that I was already working them hard enough with the daily assignments and three graded assignments.
Class Web Pages We chose the Web environment to house the class materials for several reasons.
First, the multimedia nature of the World Wide Web, with its graphics, audio, video, and interactivity, stimulates many different types of learners.70 Another advantage of the Web is that it allows hypertext links.
We created Web pages for Transactional Practice, Negotiations Workshop, and Legal Practice.
The Transactional Practice Web page was the most extensive and included an electronic textbook, in which Zanglein tried to incorporate as many interactive features and visual images as possible so that she could appeal to visual, kinesthetic, and verbal learners.
Some pages were designed to be interactive.
1 really like the wayyou promote and facilitate class discussions.
For example, one student said: "I really do appreciate your'openness and flexibility.
That Is one of the reasons 1 enjoy taking your classes.
1 know that there may be quite a bit of work involved, but it is fora purpose.
You are veryfair, and open to anysuggestion to how we could get more out of the class.
That said, another reason 1 took the class was for the practical usefulness ofthe material and the subjects studied in class.
1would be a lot clearer about what was going on ifwe could take a little time on each project and talk about how it applies to the big picture; how we can use this skill in practice."
See generally Sarasin, supm note 39.
Later, when we researched learning theories, we discovered that these pictures also help students to learn metaphorically.
As the semester progressed, we stumbled onto techniques that made life a little easier for the students.
One such success was the creation ofa page called Current Assignments.
Students would log onto the Transactional Practice Web page and go straight to Current Assignments, which would have links to the daily reading assignments, the daily writing assignments, and any outside resources.
The page could be updated daily with a new bookmark so that the students could easily find the current assignment.
We also made great use of the Negotiation Workshop Web page.
For example, to prepare for a class, the student was expected to visit a page with the handouts for the class.
The handouts page contained links to other materials and assignments.
The Web page was useful for providing students with organized material in a paperless format.
Students could log onto the Negotiations Workshop home page and have access to all the materials they needed to prepare a written paper.
For example, Zanglein asked students to write a paper proving or disproving the hypothesis that personality has a predictable effect on negotia71.
This is a good example of the way the Internet allows teachers to bring timely and relevant material that previously was inaccessible into the classroom.
For example, for students in Corporate Aspects of Environmental UlW, we were able to obtain the securities class action lawsuit against Valuejet, analyze it to determine if it met the enhanced pleadings requirements of the Securities Litigation Reform Act, and prepare arguments for a motion to dismiss.
After the students argued the motion to dismiss, we gave them a copy of the actual pleading.
Much useful information on corporate environmental mission statements, liability under GERCLA, and environmental audit procedures was available on the Internet, material that was very difficult to come by through traditional research.
In Securities Regulation we also used the Web to enhance learning.
We found and analyzed cyber-tombstone ads, and analyzed cyber-investment scams to determine if they could be violations of the Securities Act.
The Securities Exchange Commission site provided a wealth ofinformation.
Likewise, for Pension and Medical Benefits, we were able to find copies of pension summary plan descriptions that allowed the students to calculate pension benefits.
The students could easilysee the difference in pension benefits provided to single participants as opposed to married participants who received joint and survivor annuities.
We located a pension calculator that allowed students to calculate the amount of money that they would need at retirement to maintain a comfortable lifestyle.
We also found sample qualified domestic relations orders that allowed us to analyze the QDRO to determine if it met the statutory requirements.
The Web page had links to various personality tests, personality assessments, slides about personality styles, and the results of each of the problems that the class had negotiated so far.
Zanglein was even able to provide fullcolor pictures of the items that the students were negotiating, which we think made the negotiations more realistic.
Another useful feature was the creation ofa wall where students could post negotiation graffiti.
The graffiti wall features quotations ranging from SunTzu  to the Rolling Stones .
Students could mull over these sayings that relate, in some manner, to the art of negotiating, and they used these sayings as topic headings or discussion areas of their negotiation analysis papers.
It was not until later, when we researched learning theories, that we discovered that this technique helps students learn metaphorically.
The Web page also allowed Zanglein to archive slide presentations given in class so that students could view the presentation on the Web?!
E-mail promoted three forms of interaction in the classroom.
First, it allowed Zanglein to be accessible outside of office hours and contributed to her open-door policy.
Second, students were able to communicate with one another about course topics and assignments; e-mail fosters collaboration and active learning.
Finally, students could send assignments and exercises to Zanglein in digital format, and she could receive, read, and comment on their work electronically.
In addition, all communications could be easily documented and tracked.
WebBoard integrates e-mail into WebBoard and makes e-mail easier to use.
To send a message, all we had to do was click on the recipient's name in WebBoard and the mail program would start an e-mail to that person.
Students used it to converse with each other outside class.
Zanglein used it to inform students of the number of their absences, and to discuss issues more personally than she could on a public forum like WebBoard.
Since it was much more convenient than running downstairs to a student's mailbox, she also was more inclined to send congratulatory messages like "Goodjob in class today!"
The use of technology-based instruction requires adequate university resources and facilities.
Oudaw school is connected to the Texas Tech Univer73.
In a similar environment, "Sammons surveyed over 500 students to evaluate the effectiveness of computer multimedia presentations.
The students reported that multimedia slides were dearer and more legible than overhead transparencies and chalkboard materials.
They also indicated that lectures were easier to understand and more interesting when delivered in a multimedia format."
In addition, many of the presentations were transferred to the World Wide Web for students to study electronically or print for reference.
The school has a local area network.
Students are provided a study carrel complete with computer, and each computer has a full suite of Internet utility software.
In addition, students can use the law library computer lab or the main campus academic computing facility.
Students may also purchase a PPP  account from the university and access the Internet and university resources from a home computer.
Zanglein's course materials are hous~d on a Web server hosted by the Teaching, Learning, and Technology Center.
A dual-Pentium server runs the Wmdows NT operating system with Microsoft Internet Information Server 3.0.
In selecting these platforms, we focused on security, compatibility with existing campus technologies, and ease of use for us and for the students.
Before creating our Web pages, we conducted an extensive review of all the available tools for creating Web-based course materWs.
We categorized the software that we evaluated into three types.
These packages allow users to manipulate text and images through a graphical user intt;rface.
They still require that the author use FfP  to transfer the files from a local host to the server.
Unlike simple Web editors, FfP software can be quite cumbersome for even an intermediate user.
At the time ofour evaluation, Microsoft FrontPage was the only interactive authoring package.
Many packages have been created in the past two years.
Mter evaluating the various packages, we chose Microsoft FrontPage for the following reasons.
One can easily manage and edit pages from home or office.
Students would need to create documents and critique one another's work, and Zanglein would need a record of all online activity.
Again, zanglein would need a record of individual and group communications.
Stalcup investigated the technology communication options and found that chat is an interactive communication tool usually accessible through a Web browser interface.
Threaded discussion is an asynchronous communication mechanism that allows messages to be posted into groups .
MOO  is a text-based synchronous tool similar to chat.
As one of the older forms of interactive communication, the MOO is limited by text-based environment.
Users typically have to log onto a server using a telnet session and get into a MOO running on a large system.
Our need for a record of interactions and a quest for a user-friendly interface led us to O'Reilly and Associates' WebBoard software.
The Texas Tech Department ofEnglish was already running a WebBoard server, and the department agreed to allow us to use its resources.
WebBoard kept detailed records of posts and activities in each conference.
To evaluate the effectiveness of our use ofWeb-based instruction in skillsbased courses, we prepared a survey, which Stalcup administered during a class period while Zanglein was not present.
The survey asked the students to rate the effectiveness of electronic mail, the World Wide Web, WebBoard, the electronic textbook, and multimedia as instructional tools.
For each technology, we asked six basic questions in an effort to measure efficiency, educational value, ease of use, impact on instruction, general impression, and overall value.
We also asked at least six questions measuring the effect of the technology on the learning process, and we asked students to rate their satisfaction on a scale from 1  to 5 .
We looked at the average ofall the questions in each category to get an overall view of the data.
Figure 1 depicts the general levels of satisfaction with each technology implemented in the classroom.
Because almost all of the students had used electronic mail previously, prior experience with e-mail had very little to do with how effective e-mail communications were in the classroom.
In general, students found e-mail to be a positive contribution to the learning process.
The survey showed that Zanglein responded to students' e-mail in a timely manner, and the students rated that aspect of the technology the highest .
Clearly the instructor response was the most critical success factor in using e-mail.
Most students had been exposed to the' World Wide Web and had already used the Web for materials, but many had very basic skills.
In general they had had slightly less experience with the Web than with e-mail.
With an average rating of3.82, the Web wasjudged a very beneficial technology in the classroom.
Furthermore, students rated World Wide Web course materials as very easy to use .
Students also regarded the Web as an effective means of disseminating information .
Very few students had ever used a threaded discussion tool, and none had used the WebBoard software.
While their general impression of the technology was positive, with an average rating of 3.42, students questioned the effectiveness and efficiency of the software.
As we discuss below, we attribute much of this response to the stability and functionality of the server.
The students favored the immediate feedback that WebBoard provided.
We concluded that this technology tool was beneficial, but perhaps we needed another specific product.
Only three students had ever used an electronic textbook before.
But they gave the electronic textbook the least favorable rating of any technology used in the course: 3.3.
The students thought the content of the book was valuable but the medium was not effective.
Because ofprinting problems in the computer laboratories, students resented having to try to print materials that they wished to study from hard copy.
Some of the negativity we measured can be correlated to lack of previous experience; the students were accustomed to a traditional class.
Zanglein regularly used multimedia equipment in the classroom, which included a computer and a projection unit.
She used those to display Web pages as well as PowerPoint presentations.
The computer and multimediawere a routine part ofthe lecture and instruction.
Students clearly favored the use ofsuch equipment.
With a group average of3.91, the students found the multimedia materials to be an enhancement to the learning process.
They gave multimedia a rating of3.
One of the more challenging aspects of incorporating technology into a classroom is to do so without destroying traditional course structure and protocol.
We found that computers lessened students' sense ofaccountability: they obviously perceived some level ofanonymity and privacy as they communicated electronically.
While Zanglein worked to maintain a certain level of mutual respect and professional distance, students were far more likely to push the boundaries electronically than in a traditional classroom.
To combat this problem, we defined a set of guidelines for electronic communications.
Zanglein would maintain a professional tone in any communication, avoiding familiar language and first names.
And she would not tolerate personal or inappropriate topics through electronic mail or the interactive WebBoard.
As a result, we were able to avoid any real problems.
A second challenge was the somewhat unstable nature of the WebBoard software.
While the server itself was stable, many features of the software did not function reliably.
Attachments were sometimes scrambled when students tried to send papers and assignments, and students experienced a high level of frustration trying to use some of the more advanced features.
As a partial resoiution, two university technology consultants visited the class, answered questions, and offered helpful suggestions.
But we need to address inadequacies ofWebBoard before deciding whether to continue its use or try another threaded discussion software.
A third problem concerned training and support available to the students.
Our survey indicated clearly that students felt they had not received enough help with the new technologies.
When WebBoard became unstable and students received error messages, they had no tools for interpreting or troubleshooting the problems.
In the next semester, we will repeat this study and attempt to correct these problems.
In particular, we will offer training for navigating the WWW.using electronic mail, and using an electronic messaging system, and we will provide an overall introduction to campus technology resources.
Now that we have explored the technologies, we hope to continue our experiments, applying a scientific approach.
Our first task will be to formulate a few hypotheses based on our survey results and our own impressions.
We will need to identify outcome measures, such as student performance  and student satisfaction.
We will need a control group and a test group.
Ideally the same instructor will teach both groups during the same semester, using traditional teaching methods for the control group and new technologies for the test group.
Students will be randomly assigned to the two sections and will not be aware of the experiment.
Our next step will be to identify independent variables that we will need to consider, such as student GPA, learning style, technology anxiety rating , and instructional methodology.
In the first week of class, we will administer a learning styles inventory and a technology anxiety survey to both groups.
We will examine the impact of these independent variables on two dependent variables: student satisfaction with the course and the instructor  and student performance .
We will have to accept grades as a measure oflearning.
Web-based instruction does have a few challenges.
As with any technology, sometimes the server fails to function, and both students and teacher need to be prepared with a backup plan.
Some students seem to attract computer problems and continue to have problems no matter how much help or instruction they receive.
Despite these negatives, we remain convinced that Web-based instruction is one of the most useful and energizing teaching tools/techniques that we have encountered.
It gives the instructor more access to the students, it provides more up-t<Hiate real-world materials, and it allows students to effectively critique each other's work and learn from each other in a controlled environment.
Furthermore, we hypothesize that technology can be an effective tool for various types of learners.
Mter reviewing the initial survey data, we are convinced that the technologies used nad a positive impact on the teaching and learning in the classroom.
As we all become more experienced and the technologies continue to improve, we foresee that technology will continue to enhance the education experience and redefine the traditional classroom environment.
