Videotape has become one of the CHI community's most useful technologies: it allows us to analyze users' interactions with computers, prototype new interfaces, and present the results of our research and technical innovations to others.
But video is a double-edged sword.
It is often misused, however unintentionally.
How can we use it well, without compromising our integrity?
This paper presents actual examples of questionable videotaping practices.
Next, it explains why we cannot simply borrow ethical guidelines from other professions.
It concludes with a proposal for developing usable ethical guidelines for the capture, analysis and presentation of video.
In either case, I contend that we are obligated as a profession to try to deal with these issues as effectively as possible.
As a community, we must educate ourselves about potential misuse and encourage responsible behavior.
We must also understand who we are trying to protect and the trade-offs in protecting one group versus another.
We need comprehensive guidelines to help members of the HCI community make ethical decisions.
The next section challenges the perception that video can be treated as an objective record of events and then presents examples of questionable videotaping practices.
I also discuss why the advent of digital video increases the potential for misuse.
The subsequent section frames the discussion within a more general ethical framework.
I briefly review the perspectives of other professional groups, particularly with respect to their use of video.
The last section presents preliminary suggestions for handling video and proposes a strategy for developing more detailed guidelines for the HCI community.
The lights dim in the plenary talk at CHI'95.
You settle back in your seat to hear from one of the early innovators in HCI - in fact, your former thesis advisor from a decade ago.
As expected, he is an entertaining speaker.
He quickly has the audience laughing as he shows videos of early interfaces and very perplexed users.
You see a familiar face projected on the 40 foot screen: it's you, ten years ago.
You watch in horror as the 2500 members of the audience, now your peers and colleagues, laugh at your 'inept' use of the technology.
Could such a thing happen?
What was the appropriate thing to do?
Should the speaker have tried to discover if she were in the audience?
Would 'informed consent' given ten years ago have been adequate?
What was the audience's responsibility?
These are not easy questions and I won't presume to provide definitive answers.
However, I think such examples can raise awareness of the issues facing the CHI community, as we increase our use of video for a wide range of activities.
Video is a powerful medium: it can make a point or convince people in ways that other media cannot.
Video captures aspects of human behavior, such as gaze and body language, that are not available in any other form.
Yet, perhaps it is too powerful.
Just as statements taken out of context can be very damaging, so can video clips misconstrue events or violate the privacy of the subjects involved.
Researchers often treat videotaped records of human behavior as objective scientific data: they can be viewed repeatedly, individual events can be counted and findings can be verified independently by other researchers.
Unfortunately, the appearance of objectivity is just that: an appearance.
Someone must choose a location and field of view for the camera, which must include some and exclude other information.
The choice of when to press the "record" button also includes and excludes information.
More subtly, the context shared by the participants of the videotape may be difficult or impossible to capture and present to subsequent viewers.
The shared context can occur at various levels.
For example, Clark & Schaefer  examined conversations between people.
She may not speak clearly but will continue if she is convinced that he is following her.
Is she misspeaks, she may see him look puzzled and then smile, indicating that he has understood and she should continue.
A camera shot of her face as she speaks will capture the exact words she spoke but not the shared understanding that evolved.
The video records only the fact that she misspoke.
Later, it could be used to "prove" that it was what she "really" meant.
Another problem arises when video captures conversations between people with shared prior experience, who speak in short-hand.
In a live setting, an observer might be puzzled by what is meant or ask for clarification.
With a video record, the same observer could view it repeatedly, develop a theory about the meaning and become convinced she understands, even if the participants meant something else.
People are used to being able to speak informally in daily conversation.
Since both speakers and listeners know their memories can be unreliable, misunderstandings are usually cleared up through further discussion.
When casual conversations are recorded, the ways of resolving misunderstandings changes.
Suddenly, the speaker can no longer say "I didn't say that"; the videotaped record becomes an independent arbiter of what was said.
But what was said is not the same as what was meant.
Since people can change their minds over the course of a conversation, statements that seem to establish what the speaker 'really' meant distort the ongoing process of conversation.
Most people  feel uncomfortable being recorded and change their usual behavior; they are not used to speaking "for the record".
If electronic mail is notorious for generating misunderstandings due to informal writing, recorded casual speech is worse.
Even speaking carefully can be dangerous, since viewers may interpret it as evidence of 'something to hide'.
Broadcast media are thus subject to greater restrictions than print media.
For example, "Recognizing the particular power of radio and television to influence public opinion, federal legislation was passed limiting the involvement of broadcasters in political camps."
The audience and context in which the video is presented may also affect what is understood.
For example, imagine recording a researcher's discussion of a new software interface that 'increases productivity'.
1 I suspect that the reason that political speeches sound so odd is that politicians have learned to speak entirely in "sound bites".
Aware that most people will judge a speech from the short clips selected by the media for the evening news, politicians learn to speak in short phrases that will sound good, even when taken out of context.
Unfortunately, most people have no experience talking this way and often find themselves looking ridiculous when interviewed.
The infamous "sound bite", in which a short clip is selected to represent a longer event, may distort the original message or make rare events appear representative.
Unfortunately, even people who recognize that a videotape is not an objective record find it easy to slip into thinking that it is somehow real.
Video is powerful; care is required both in its production and its interpretation.
The use of video raises ethical questions: we can look to the literature in ethical theory for help addressing them.
The ethical literature is vast, with philosophical discussions dating back to Plato and Aristotle.
The latter two are most relevant for computer professionals: "Consequentialism says simply that an action is right or wrong depending upon its consequences, such as its effects on society.
Deontologists stress the intrinsic character of an act and disregard motives or consequences."
Their goals are to establish their status as a profession, to regulate their membership and convince the public that they deserve to be self-regulating .
Some, such as Ladd , dismiss the notion of organized professional ethics as having few benefits and real potential for harm, while others, such as Bagley , argue that "a written code is a necessity".
Luegenbiehl  argues that "Codes of ethics need be neither authoritarian nor designed for the enhancement of a profession.
Instead, they should help the professional seeking to engage in ethical practice".
Computer science is a relatively new field but already has a large literature on ethics and computing.
The four codes are similar to each other and to other professional codes because they take a generic approach to ethics.
Privacy and confidentiality of data were seen as the only elements that "reflect the unique ethical problems raised by computer technology" .
Since video involves both privacy and confidentiality issues, ethical guidelines for HCI must go beyond general ethical codes.
The ACM Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct, revised in 1992, is generally considered to be the most complete.
Like Luegenbiehl , they argue that the most important function of a code of ethics is its role as an aid to individual decision-making.
They illustrate ethical issues with nine cases that call for individuals to make ethical decisions.
Each case has an individual scenario illustrating a typical decision point that relates to sections of the code.
Bok  reported that over 12,000 distinct ethics courses, including law, medicine, business, engineering, liberal arts, research sciences, religion and philosophy, were taught in American academic institutions.
Discussing case studies in the class room has been shown to be an effective teaching approach  and the SIGCAS newsletter regularly presents such ethical case studies for discussion .
Rather than argue about the merits of different ethical philosophies, I have chosen to follow this strategy, presenting scenarios based on real events and proposing guidelines related to the capture, production and presentation of video.
Ralph is reviewing presentations for a workshop he is running.
Several of the participants propose to show video of users involved in their work.
He decides that it is the responsibility of the authors to obtain the appropriate permissions and does not ask whether the authors have permission to present the tapes in this forum.
What is the reviewer's role?
Should he remind the authors of their obligations?
Should he go further and request evidence of having obtained appropriate permissions?
Under what circumstances should he reject a submission?
Fred is developing a technique for combining real data with video simulations to provide training for pilots.
He takes data from the flight recorders of planes that have crashed and recreates the situation, including external weather conditions and instrument readings.
He plays one of his recreated videos to human factors colleagues, who suddenly find themselves listening to the voice of a real pilot saying: "Oh my God!"
Suddenly the very personal experience of another human being's death was being presented to them, without warning, as a part of a training exercise.
Was it appropriate to show a sensitive video designed for one audience to another?
Was this a violation of the dead pilot's privacy?
Could he have presented his work to this audience without using the real tape?
Linda is preparing her CHI'95 presentation and wants to give an entertaining talk.
She looks through her videotapes of user sessions and finds several funny clips of users doing unexpected things.
At the talk, she makes a joke and shows the clip; the audience laughs.
Is Linda guilty of perpetuating a "candid camera" approach, in which research videos become transformed into a form of entertainment at the expense of users?
Is this an appropriate activity for professionals who purport to support users?
On the other hand, does this mean that we can't have entertaining CHI talks or videos?
Harry conducts usability studies of new software products for his corporation.
He videotapes each usability session and carefully analyzes what causes the user's problems and where they make errors.
He then discusses the issues with the software developers.
Harry is particularly annoyed by one feature and wants to convince the software developer that it should be changed in a particular way.
He shows a video clip of one of the users struggling with the feature as proof that his way is better.
He does not show other clips in which users do not experience problems with the feature.
Is Harry taking advantage of people's willingness to think that video is an objective record in order to win an argument?
Could Harry provide a more balanced view by presenting an overview of the relevant anecdotes?
What would such an overview consist of?
Jane is a trained anthropologist who has just conducted a study of work practices within a corporation.
She and her colleagues have videotaped a number of meetings in which sensitive issues, such as determining who should be laid off, have been discussed.
The participants are very sensitive about being videotaped and have requested that the videotape not be shown to anyone else in the company.
Later that year, Jane presents her work to at a workshop at a CHI conference and includes several clips of video taken from her research.
Is this a violation of her agreement with the participants in her study?
John is preparing a video of his new software system for the CHI'95 conference.
He carefully records what happens on the screen and then edits out a number of "boring" sections in which the system responds especially slowly.
He adds a cut to a separate system, which will eventually be integrated with his, to show what would happen if they were connected.
Mary is the product manager in charge of a new product being exhibited for the first time at CHI'95.
She is proud of their usability lab and shows videotapes of some of the user studies to illustrate how well the interface works.
When asked if she had obtained permission from the subjects of the video, she is surprised and says it had not occurred to her to do so.
She believes she is safe, legally, since the people in the tape were company employees.
Even if she is not legally liable, does Mary have a responsibility to ask permission from the subjects?
When is it appropriate to ask permission?
Prior to recording, after the subject has seen the video, or just before each event in which the video will be shown.
Is it possible for the subject to really understand what the implications of giving permission are?
The aim at present is to shame the offender, but the next step may be to link the system to a police database.
In the past, people had to watch video from electronic surveillance cameras.
Now, computers can watch for us.
The above list is not exhaustive, but illustrates problems of varying levels of severity.
In most of these examples, the individuals are well-intentioned.
In fact, some members of the HCI community will find nothing wrong with some of these scenarios.
But this makes the issue problematic: we need to raise the level of awareness and try to establish guidelines that we can agree upon.
The XYZ research laboratory allows people in the lab to communicate with each other via live video connections.
Privacy issues have been carefully considered and there are a variety of ways for people to select how others may connect to their cameras.
A separate program takes snapshots every few minutes from the media space and displays them in a window.
One day, one of the participants in the media space walks into a room where a group of her colleagues is laughing at something.
She discovers it's a picture of her, with someone giving her a kiss on the cheek .
Since it is impossible to see who the person is, the group laughingly teases her about who it might be.
What is the difference between a temporary record, in which a recently-shot image is displayed, and a more permanent record?
Is it acceptable to select segments from an on-going stream of activity and highlight them?
Since Human-Computer Interaction is a new field, we should learn from other, more established professions.
Some research disciplines, particularly the medical and social sciences, have well-established guidelines for using human subjects and include the use of videotaped records in this context.
Other disciplines, such as computer science, have no history of using video , leaving HCI members from those fields without any guidance.
Unfortunately, even those disciplines that do have guidelines for video do not provide sufficient guidance for the diversity of uses of video found in the HCI community.
This section briefly summarizes the ethical or legal perspectives of various professions.
All the previous examples have actually occurred, based on today's technology.
We face a potentially much bigger problem with the advent of digital video.
At SIGGRAPH '93, a panel of special effects experts showed a "behind the scenes" look at Jurassic Park, in which a stunt woman's image is changed to become that of the main actress.
We fully expect special effects in science fiction movies and are amazed by the skill at which dinosaurs can be made to look real.
What is less obvious is that special effects are used in most Hollywood movies to create images of reality.
These techniques can be used to distort what we see.
Employers already monitor workers through computers.
Pillar  surveyed over 300 CEOs and MIS directors and found that 22% searched electronic mail, voice mail, computer files and other networking communications of their employees.
Lyon  discusses the role of electronic surveillance in society.
Video is increasingly part of that electronic surveillance.
Physicians have a long history of dealing with ethical issues.
The Hippocratic oath urges physicians to "do no harm", i.e.
Key issues include who should choose a patient's treatment plan and how can patients without medical training evaluate risks or give informed consent about procedures.
Doctors must present the options and supply all "material" information to the patient, but not necessarily provide full disclosure.
Macklin  describes the evolution of biomedical codes from the professional community standard, which asks "what reasonable medical practitioners in similar situations would tell their patients" to the current reasonable patient standard: "what the reasonable patient would want to know before giving consent to a recommended therapy."
Studies show that poor communication and lack of information make patients more likely to refuse a particular treatment.
This standard has helped doctors develop better relationships with their patients, with the accompanying danger that better relationships make it easier to obtain consent.
Shannon  and Beauchamp & Childress  provide different views on biomedical ethics.
Collste  explores the question of whether computers, particularly expert systems, cause new moral problems.
Most universities also have a committee that reviews research proposals and approves the procedures, e.g., the Massachusetts Institute of Technology Human Subjects Review Committee.
Subjects in Psychology experiments must sign a consent form that describes how any data collected about the subject will be used.
After the experiment is completed, the experimenter is expected to "debrief" the subject and explain what occurred.
Most guidelines are designed to protect the subject from harm.
The APA guidelines were influenced by a famous set of experiments by Milgram .
Subjects were told to administer electric shocks to people  if they missed questions on a learning test.
Milgram found that subjects followed these orders, even to the extent of believing they had killed the person receiving the shocks.
Understandably, the subjects were traumatized by this experience.
Anthropologists and Sociologists work with people in field rather than laboratory settings.
Videotape is increasingly used to record people's activities in the context of their daily lives.
Both professions have also established ethical guidelines for the protection of their subjects.
Critical issues include the problems of how to handle data collected in the field and how to handle naive informants who may not be able to give true informed consent.
Publishers must obtain copyright permission from the person who created the videotape before they can distribute it.
They are legally responsible for protecting the producer  of the videotape.
Samuelson  discusses legal precedents for the fair use of copyrighted material, including video, e.g., the ability of consumers to videotape broadcast television programs for home use.
Hulteng  describes the chief function of journalism as "the communication to the public of a reasonably accurate and complete picture of the world around us  The central ruling ethic of journalism  to report the news of the world dependably and honestly."
It is ethical to show a person negatively, as long as it is a "truthful" view.
However, Hall  explains that the FCC requires journalists to "contact the person attacked, provide a transcript of the charge and allow equal time for a response."
Ordinary people  may not have their images broadcast without permission, unless the event is 'news' that occurred within the past 24 hours.
Hall discusses journalist's rights and responsibilities, from the Fairness Doctrine, which covers libel, slander and invasion of privacy to the Shield and Sunshine laws, which enable journalists to protect their sources.
Kronewetter , as well as Hulteng and Hall, discuss journalism ethics and Malcolm  and Alley  provide exposes of ethical violations.
Documentary film-makers do not believe in a single, objective point of view.
Their goal is to present a fair perspective, from a particular point of view, through selective shooting and editing.
Participants in their films should feel they have been presented fairly, if not always positively.
Corporations use video for a variety of purposes, from usability studies to product marketing.
Getting permission protects the corporation from lawsuits.
Hollywood's Universal Studios obtains global permission from their visitors: a sign informs them that, by entering the park, they have given tacit permission to be videotaped and their images may be used for commercial purposes.
People who object are directed to a guest relations office.
Trying to understand the goals of each of these professional guidelines reveals a fundamental problem: each is concerned with protecting someone, but they are all different types of people.
Some try to protect the person being videotaped.
Others try to create an objective view for the benefit of an audience.
Some must protect the confidentiality of their clients, while others want to protect the producer of the videotape.
The HCI community includes people concerned with each of these situations; our ethical guidelines must somehow address them all.
Who should the HCI community listen to when developing ethical guidelines for video?
We have a diverse  set of uses of video, both as data about users and technology and as a presentation form for users, customers, management, fellow developers and the HCI research community.
What perspective or perspectives should we consider?
It is not enough to simply say we should "protect everyone"; we might end up avoiding video all together.
We must consider the implications of a variety of uses of video and develop guidelines accordingly.
A good set of guidelines must cover everything from the initial videotaping to its final presentation and address, at least, the following questions: How do we obtain "informed consent"?
How should recording of video be constrained?
Are restrictions on the analyses performed necessary?
Who are we trying to protect?
How can people protect themselves and what social structures are needed to ensure that they can?
What are the legal and cultural implications of videotaping in different countries?
How do we avoid confusing ethics and good taste?
The suggestions presented below are offered as a starting point for discussion, rather than a definitive set of guidelines.
They are based on discussions with members of the HCI community and influenced by guidelines from other professions.
I encourage people to try them and provide feedback about what does and does not work.
For the purposes of clarity, the term producer is used to refer to any person who creates a videotape, including academic researchers, usability specialists and software developers.
The term user refers to any person in the videotape, including participants in laboratory studies or people being videotaped in the course of their daily activities.
If the video will be used in unpredictable settings, describe how the user's image will be disguised, e.g., through blurring the user's face.
Mantei's  "Strauss Mouse" video is a clever example of avoiding potentially embarrassing use of research videos; she used actors' hands to demonstrate the ways executives misunderstood a 'simple' computer mouse.
If a camera is left on, e.g., in a media space or to record an event, let people know when they are on camera and give them the opportunity to avoid being in the camera's view.
A sign should state whether or not the video is being recorded.
For example, EuroPARC's media space uses a camera in the commons area.
A mannequin holds the camera and a sign to let visitors know they are on camera.
Tell users that a videotape record will be made and give them the opportunity to speak off the record or stop the recording altogether.
Consider if the user feels social pressure to agree and make it clear that saying no is legitimate.
Avoiding social consequences may be difficult, e.g., when a meeting is taped and only one person objects.
Asking permission is not a simple matter.
Permission can be given before recording or after the user has been taped, or after the user has seen the tape, or just prior to an event in which it will be shown.
The user can give blanket approval or approve individual events.
Give users sufficient information to make an informed choice and let them change their minds.
For example, in the CHI'89 Kiosk , users who contributed their images for the conference were again asked for their permission when the database was printed on a CD-ROM.
Getting a signature on a piece of paper is not sufficient.
The person requesting consent is responsible for explaining the procedures and ensuring that these procedures, as well as the subsequent use of any resulting information, are fully understood.
Clearly label presentations of technology as envisionments, working prototypes or finished products.
Envisionments propose or illustrate ideas that have not been fully implemented.
Working prototypes have been implemented and should not resort to tricks to make them look more complete.
Products are completed commercial systems and must avoid misrepresenting their performance or features.
For example, Wellner's  videotape includes clearly labelled envisionments of future ideas contrasted with examples of working software.
The SIGCHI executive committee is currently drafting a set of videotaping guidelines to try to balance the needs of audience members with the rights of presenters.
The vision.chi@xerox.com mailing list has been the forum for the discussion of various drafts and the final version will be published in the SIGCHI Bulletin.
Another policy statement on video appears in the CHI Calls for Participation, e.g.
This gives submitters the unfortunate impression that this is solely a legal issue and that once permission has been obtained, the submitter and the conference have no further responsibility in the matter.
The CHI community, given its mix of disciplines and variety of activities, has a unique perspective to offer on the issue of ethics and video.
We should take advantage of CHI-sponsored conferences to raise awareness and generate discussions, e.g.
We can establish an electronic discussion forum and consider collaborations with other organizations, such as SIGCAS , CPSR  and the Electronic Frontier Foundation.
In the late 1980's, SIGCHI sponsored a task force that produced the influential ACM SIGCHI Curricula for Human-Computer Interaction .
Perhaps the time has come for a similar task force to develop an HCI code of ethics that builds upon the general ACM code and addresses issues unique to HCI, such as video.
This paper illustrates how easy it is, however inadvertently, to misuse video.
Because videotape has become so prevalent in our profession, it is time for us as a community to become aware of the potential dangers and develop guidelines for ethical handling of video.
These guidelines must go beyond legal requirements and provide protection for a variety of people involved in the HCI community.
HCI is not the only professional field that uses video.
We can learn from other professional ethical codes.
However, we cannot blindly adopt other ethical codes.
Each profession is concerned with protecting someone: the person in the video, the audience viewing the video, the client paying for the video or the producer of the video.
Since the HCI community must address the needs of all of these people, we are uniquely positioned to create a broad-based set of guidelines that help us make informed, ethical decisions about our uses of video.
If we are successful, guidelines may influence the wider set of organizations who are struggling with how to handle this powerful new medium.
Clearly state the purpose of summaries of video data.
Video data can be compressed in a variety of ways.
Video clips can provide a shortened version of what occurred in the session or can be used to "tell a story".
If clips are presented in random order, they can be combined to show "typical" interactions, highlight unusual or important events, or present collections of interesting observations.
ACM Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct,  Communications of the ACM, vol.
N Y : Abington Press.
American Psychological society  The importance of the citizen scientist in national science policy, APS Observer, vol.
Communications of the ACM, vol.
Bok, D.  Beyond the Ivory Tower: Social Responsibility of the Modern University.
Collste, G.  Expert Systems in Medicine and Moral Responsibility.
DPMA  DPMA Position Statement Handbook.
Dunfee  Integrating ethics into the MBA core curriculum.
The Wharton School of business.
Reseach funded by EXXON Educational Foundation.
Dunlop, C. and Kling, R.
Forester, T. and Morrison, P.  Computer Ethics: Cautionary Tales and Ethical Dilemmas in Computing.
Journal of Business Ethics, Vol.
Gotterbarn, D.  Case Studies: The Captain Knows Best.
NY: Comunication Arts Books, Hastings House.
Hewett, T.  ACM SIGCHI Curricula for Human Computer Interaction, ACM, New York: NY.
Your Guide to Certification as a Computer Professional.
Luegenbiehl, H.C.  Computer professionals: Moral autonomy and a code of ethics.
Lyon, D.  The Electronic Eye: The Rise of Surveillance Society.
Mackay, W.  Video as a Research and Design Tool.
Special issue of the SIGCHI Bulletin, Vol.
Mackay W.  Video Ethics discussion forum, in Proceedings of CHI'90 Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM Press, pp.
Martin, D.C. and Martin, D.H.  Ethics Code Review.Computers and Society.
Milgram, S.  Some conditions of obedience and disobedience, Human Relations, vol.
Pillar, C.  Bosses with X-Ray eyes: Your Employer may be using computers to keep tabs on you.
Queen's University Department of Psychology  Ethics Clearance for Research on Human Subjects, Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario, Canada.
UCLA Faculty Handbook, Supplement A: Policies and Procedures ,  University of California at Los Angeles Publications Office, Los Angeles, CA.
Proceedings of CHI'90 Human Factors in Computing Systems  ACM Press.
Samuelson, P.  Copyright's Fair Use Doctrine and Digital Data.
Communications of the ACM , vol.
