The number of proposals is, in part, a reflection of the scale of the design space.
Identifying which of the potentially hundreds of interesting points in this space is best might be informed by a theory of how people choose to search through results, e.g.
Recent efforts to understand, what Payne, Howes and Reader  call interactive search tasks, have included .
However, it is sometimes difficult to ascertain which interface will be best when the details of the strategy that people will use given a particular task environment are unclear .
In this paper we are interested in the strategy choices that people make about visual search, i.e.
Our focus is on the assumption that people attempt to maximise expected utility given the constraints of the human visual system  and that design changes which change the efficiency of information gathering actions will lead to changes in observed behaviour.
There is some evidence in the visual perception and cognition literature that visual search strategy is adapted to the demands imposed by particular task environments .
It appears that people seek to maximise the efficiency of visual search in the context of the particular display layout.
For example, longer fixations enable more information to be gathered from fovea and peripheral vision, although longer fixations can only be effective if the information is available within the perceptual span .
Moreover, people need to manage the trade-off between the increased information gain of longer fixations and the effort and time cost of holding a fixation.
Some evidence that people adapt their strategy to the task can also be found in the HCI literature.
For example, tradeoffs in the use of wide versus narrow spacing between icons , in more but smaller text versus fewer but bigger text in the same space  and in the use of Hyperbolic browser versus standard browser .
Even in a standard results layout, such as a simple list of links, there is evidence that search strategy is affected by the context in which the relevance of items is assessed .
An important question for Human-Computer Interaction is to understand how and why visual search strategy is adapted to the demands imposed by the task of searching the results of a search engine.
There is emerging evidence that a key part of the answer concerns the expected information gain of each of the set of available information gathering actions.
We build on previous research to show that people are acutely sensitive to differences in the density and in the number of items returned by the search engine.
These factors cause shifts in the efficiency of the available information gathering actions.
We focus on an image browsing task, and show that, as a consequence of changes to the efficiency of available actions, people make small but significant changes to eye-movement strategy.
An important question for Human-Computer Interaction  is how to design the presentation of search results to facilitate visual search behaviour .
Researchers have proposed many alternatives to the standard list of results.
They include Space-filling thumbnails of text , Tabular interface , Faceted category interface , and Textually-enhanced thumbnails .
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
These finding support the view that search and selection is guided by maximising the expected information gain .
Strikingly there is evidence that maximising expected gain can involve fixating on every other item in a list, rather than fixating on contiguous items , particularly in contexts where good results have already been encountered.
In a number of respects people appear to be sensitive to the expected information gain of information gathering actions.
In the following section we review in more detail the literature on the trade-offs that contribute toward the efficiency of information gathering actions during visual search.
We are interested in the broad class of interactive search tasks  but our particular focus is on the visual search strategies and decision-making processes that people use when looking through items returned by an image search engine such as Flickr or Google.
Further, we are interested in everyday tasks with somewhat underspecified target criteria, e.g.
In what follows we consider the relevance of the visual search and HCI literature to understanding these kinds of task.
Although allowing a high degree of experimental control the tasks  lack ecological validity.
For example, Vlaskamp, Over and Hooge  used abstract shapes  in their search task, and, Bertera and Rayner  used an unstructured alphanumeric array.
The different materials may account for the different effects.
Both tasks are far from the real HCI task in which the stimuli are more heterogeneous and complicated.
Researchers in HCI have suggested that the details of interface design affect visual search strategy .
Everett and Byrne , for example, suggested a small difference of 1.6 degrees of visual angle between items can result in participants either fixating on an icon or not.
Similarly, Halverson and Hornof  provided evidence that low density, task-meaningless large words could lead participants to use fewer and shorter fixations and so shorter overall search time than when given high density, small, task-meaningless, words.
Similarly, Pirolli, Card, and Van Der Wege  found that participants used more but shorter fixations when using a Hyperbolic browser than when using a standard browser, especially in areas of the Hyperbolic browser in which small, low information scent items, were grouped closely together.
Visual search strategies are also known to change during the course of a search .
Over, Hooge, Vlaskamp and Erkelens  found that fixation duration increased and the amplitude of saccade decreased gradually as search progressed.
They called this is a coarse-to-fine strategy.
Rao, Zelinsky, Hayhoe and Ballard  used a coarse-tofine matching mechanism to model the skipping saccades because it could increase the probability of an early match.
In contrast, Brumby and Howes  found a fine-to-coarse search strategy.
People increased saccade amplitude once they had found, but not committed to, a highly relevant target suggesting that although it is known that strategy can change, the reasons for change are not always clear.
Also, it is known that people spend more time examining items that are presented nearer to the top of the returned search results , presumably, and in part, because search engines tend to rank order results.
However, what is not clear is whether people change visual search strategy as they examine links further from the top of the results list.
For example, they may be more likely to skip i.e.
In the visual search literature, there is compelling evidence that the density of items on the display has consequences for search strategy.
Ojanpaa, Nasanen and Kojo  found that decreased spacing in a vertical list of words  resulted in longer but fewer numerous fixations.
Vlaskamp, Over and Hooge  found that the fixation duration, number of fixation and search time increased dramatically with decreasing item spacing, as the range of spacing smaller than 1.5 visual angle.
On the other hand, their data showed that at wide spacing range between 1.5 to 7.1 fixation duration, number of fixations and search time increased slightly as the spacing increased.
Bertera and Rayner  found that as the item spacing increased the number of fixations and fixation duration increased.
We assume that people make strategic adaptations in order to improve the efficiency of visual search, that is that they rationally adapt the strategy, given cognitive, perceptual, and motor constraints, to maximise benefits while minimising costs .
More specifically, people adapt their eye movement strategy to maximise the expected gain of task-relevant information and minimise the neural resources devoted to memory  and cognitive and attentional load .
In this paper, we take an "active vision" approach  to understanding the complex interactive behaviours that people exhibit when searching for information.
Understanding these behaviours requires bridging between theories of visual search, visual exploration, and decision-making.
Following Cox and Young  we assumed that people are sensitive to the prior probabilities that any particular item will be the target item.
More search items implies lower initial priors.
Following Ojanpaa, Nasanen and Kojo  we assumed that the information that can be gathered given the perceptual span is  contingent on the item density,  contingent on the duration of fixation.
Combining the theories of Cox and Young  and Ojanpaa, Nasanen and Kojo  we assume that the visual search strategy is rationally adapted to the information that can be gained from the perceptual span.
On this basis we made two predictions:  that packing items together more closely  would allow more information to be harvested from the perceptual span given sufficient time.
We predicate that people would therefore increase the duration spent looking at any one item, and reduce the number of items directly fixated.
That is, they would take advantage of the fact that more information was available for each fixation.
In other words, when there are more results returned we expect people to give each result less time, presumably reducing the quality of each evaluation in order to conduct more evaluations.
The eye movement strategy should switch to a lower cost strategy, involving more item skipping .
This study investigates the consequences of expected information gain for the visual search strategy that people use given pages of thumbnails returned by a search engine.
Participants were asked to imagine that they were choosing where to go on holiday, and that they were using the web to gather information about various places that they could visit.
In particular, their goal was to use a particular image search engine site to find an image of a visually attractive destination.
There were 180 unique sets of images.
Each set included image thumbnails about a place, such as a resort, city or country.
These image thumbnails were selected from the search results responding to keywords or search phrases input in an image search engine of Flickr, a photo sharing website.
Moreover, each set at least contains 1,000 photo results matching the name of the place.
For example, Flickr found 423,166 up-to-date results for photos matching Florence.
We filtered out the tourists' poor quality selfportrait, maps and pictures with special effect, such as High Dynamic Range  images which is not clear in the task thumbnail size.
Finally, we selected 180 photo thumbnails for each set.
The experiment was a within-subjects design and had two independent variables.
These were thumbnail density and number of pages .
Density had two levels with narrow or wide spacing between items displayed in the search task.
Figure 1 shows a sample display from one high density trial.
The edge-to-edge item spacings were 3 pixels  in high density layout.
The edge-to-edge item spacings were 30 pixels  in low density display.
Unlike in Halverson and Hornof  and Pirolli, Card, and Van Der Wege  the size of thumbnails was held constant, so that density was manipulated by changing proximity only.
Number of pages had three levels: 1-page, 2-pages and 5pages.
Each page consisted of exactly 36 thumbnails .
In the 1-page condition, there were 36 thumbnails in total and the first 36 of 180 thumbnails of sets were used.
In 2-pages condition, 1st to 36th thumbnails were used in the first page; 37th to 72nd thumbnails were used in the second page and there were 72 thumbnails in total.
In the 5-pages condition, all 180 thumbnails were used sequentially.
There were page links below thumbnails in any page.
It appeared all the time .
Participants could click these links to switch between pages during a trial.
So, when Participants searched in the first page, they also gained the information about how many pages in this task.
In total, there were 6 conditions .
Each condition had 30 trials.
The total number of trials was 180.
Each set of thumbnails could be arranged into one of six conditions.
The presentations of each set of thumbnails were counterbalanced across subjects.
Normally, eye movement studies analysed participants' search time, number of fixations and fixation duration.
When we observed the participants' search behaviour, we also found the gaze transitions were not always from one item to the next adjacent item; instead, participants skipped one or more items during their saccade.
We calculated how many gaze transitions were not between spatially adjacent thumbnails.
Therefore, in this study, we were interested in visual search performance, particularly in how  search time and  number of item gazes ,  gaze duration , and  the proportion of skipping gaze transitions , are affected by the thumbnails density and number of pages.
The data in the revisited page were not included.
These four measures might reveal the adaptation of search strategy while participants interact with different item densities and number of items.
We predicted that when the thumbnails were displayed close together, participants would spend longer in a gaze, and be more likely to skip thumbnails during search in the display, than when thumbnails were displayed further apart.
In addition, page links below the thumbnails indicated that the number of pages and total items in the task.
We predicted that when there are more pages and thumbnails, people would adopt a different strategy which would be revealed by these four measures.
The experiment was performed with a Tobii 1750 eye tracker.
The eyetracker is embodied in a 17" monitor.
The eye tracker has a tracking rate or the frame rate of 50 Hz.
The temporal resolution of 20 ms is sufficient for monitoring long fixation and eye movements in our task.
Although low temporal resolution could cause noise in signal sampling, noise was reduced by averaging several gazes per page and by testing 30 trials per condition.
The screen resolutions were set at 1024x768 pixels.
Participants were presented with instructions and then a practice block allowed them to become familiar with the task.
After the practice block, the eye tracker system was calibrated.
And then participants completed all 180 trials.
The whole Experiment took between 40 minutes and 70 minutes depending on different participants.
The variation in time was because we didn't give our participants any time limitation.
Some participants were faster than others.
The participant looked at a place label then clicked on the search button to make thumbnail search results appear.
Figure 3: four measures of overall search performance per density and number of page condition.
Error bars indicate 95% confidence intervals and also in all figures below.
Also, pairwise comparison showed that they spent longer gaze duration in the 1-page condition  than 5-page condition , although 2-pages is not significant different to 1-page and 5-pages condition.
There were no significant interactions on total search time, number of gazes and gaze duration, except proportion of skipping gaze transitions, F = 3.73, p < 0.05.
Moreover, following Reiman, Young and Howes , we analysed the revisiting.
Participant revisited around 22% to 27% of visited items for each condition.
Density and number of pages had similar effects on the number of visited and the number of revisited items.
Participants visited and revisited more items in low density  and when there were more pages .
We analysed data in more detail.
In this section we contrast performance in the first page of each condition.
We analysed our four measures  taken from the first page of search results.
We conducted a 2 x 3  repeated-measure ANOVA for each measure separately.
Duration on a page was defined as the total time from the display onset to the time leaving the first page by click a page number link, or from the onset to the start of participants' last fixation on the clicked target.
Figure 5c illustrates mean first page gaze duration.
The main effect of number of pages was not significant.
There was no interaction between density and number of pages.
Figure 5d shows the data of mean proportion of first page skipping gaze transitions.
It was found that that participants were more likely to skip thumbnails in the high density  than in the low density layout .
Every pairwise comparison of number of pages condition was significantly different .
It showed that our participants skipped more often in 5-pages condition , than they did in 2-pages condition , which in turn was more often than in the 1-page condition .
There was no interaction between density and number of pages.
Every pair comparison of number of pages condition with Bonferroni method was significantly different .
The interaction between density and number of pages was not significant.
Results are summarized in Figure 5a.
Figure 5b shows the data of mean number of gazes in the first page.
Every pair comparison of number of pages condition with Bonferroni method was significantly different .
The fewest number of gazes were made in the first page of the high density display when there were 5pages of items.
Figure 6: the four measures of mean search performance per page.
Page 1, page 1 to 2 and page 1 to 5 of 1-page, 2pages and 5-pages condition, respectively in high density condition.
Figure 6 summarises the mean performance of our eighteen participants' eye movement behaviour in the high density condition.
Each bar within a page condition shows the performance on each page of that condition.
For example, the only bar in the 1-page condition shows performance in the 1-page condition, the two bars in 2-pages condition show each performance in page 1 and 2 and the five bars in 5-page condition show each performance from page 1 to page 5, from left to right respectively.
When we examined whether participants adopted different strategies in different pages in a search course, the values of four measures of search performance were taken from each page.
Because there were four participants who didn't have data in all five pages in the 5-page condition, we took out these four participants.
Then, we arbitrarily selected and removed another two participants from the analysis to keep the counterbalanced design.
Therefore, in this section, the results were from analysing eighteen participants' data.
The following analyses were conducted in 2-pages and 5-pages condition separately.
In the 2-pages condition, every measure of four search performance of participants was not significantly different in page 1 and page2.
In 5-pages condition, the results of a 5x2 repeated-measure ANOVA  showed there were main effect of page number and density on every measure of search performance our participants' performance .
The results of search performance per page in the 5-pages condition are summarized in Table 1.
In general, search performance was in page number 1 is different to other pages.
There was a significant difference between page 1 and page 3 in gaze duration.
Although any other pair does not reach significant, there was a trend for people to take longer gaze on page 1 than on pages 2, 3, 4, or 5.
This indicated that participants search in the first page more carefully than other pages.
Search duration, number of gazes, gaze duration and proportion of skipping gaze transitions across per page in the 5pages condition and per density condition.
Longer visits were only used when they were efficient, i.e.
Longer visits to items were combined with skipping.
Participants in the high density conditions skipped items more often, visited fewer items, and spent less time searching overall.
In other words, when the potential information gain for longer visits was high, people made more use of longer visits and reduced the number of items that they directly fixated.
They made more use of the perceptual span when it was rational given the constraints of the visual system to do so, and gained an overall reduction in the required search time.
Participants were observed to reduce the number of items that they visited, i.e.
These findings suggest that skipping was sensitive to the prior probability that any one item would be attractive enough to be selected but that gaze duration was not.
Participants spent more time on an item, when they revisited it than when they visited it for the first time.
This strategy may help participants to parse large amounts of information quickly using lower tolerance to rule out poor quality items and then focus effort on a smaller set.
The difference between  and our study is that our participants didn't sample all items before they started to revisit, especially in conditions with more pages .
This finding suggests that the set size of potential items may be constrained by the capacity limitation in memory.
We also observed participants select an item at the first time visit before sampling all items.
This indicated that people also picked an item immediately when the value of the item currently visited is beyond their satisficing criteria .
Adopting the coarse-to-fine strategy  and employing satisficing  could save lots of visual processing cost for sampling out poor items quickly and gain an item with satisficing value or gain a revisited item with acceptable value.
In sum, the results support the view that people adjusted their visual search strategy to their expectations of information gain, and that these expectations were contingent on  the density of items, and  the prior likelihood that an item is the one that they will want to select.
In the remainder of the Discussion we first offer further explanations for the details of the findings, we then discuss some design implications.
Planning and executing a new gaze so as to bring a foveal fixation to a new place requires effort, both mental and physical effort.
Neurophysiological evidence indicates that making a saccade involves high cost neural processes to keep the visual scene stable .
Therefore, to prolong an old gaze to gain information about an adjacent item can cost less than to plan and execute a new gaze.
For example, in our experiment a new item visit took an extra 400 ms, but a longer gaze took only about 20 ms more.
Although each longer gaze takes more time, fewer gazes are required, reducing the overall visual search time.
Why was it not possible for participants to increase perceptual span to cover adjacent items in lower density displays?
Findings reported by Hooge, Vlaskamp and Over  suggest that information can be gathered from a wider area of a display as gaze durations increase, i.e.
However, there are clearly limits , and it appears as though the reduction in the rate that information can be acquired caused by the lower densities in our experiment pushed participants beyond this limit.
Will the findings generalise to other types of search result items?
There is some evidence that the finding would generalise to word items.
For example, Pollatsek, Perea and Binder  found that fixation duration is longer when a word with more neighbours than few neighbours.
Longer fixation duration in a more dense display suggests that more information within the perceptual span is required to be processed serially.
In contrast, Motter and Belky  showed that fixation duration didn't change as the number of items within a 4 constant area and assumed that this result is because items surrounding a fixation are processed in parallel .
These contrary results could be because of the relative complexities of stimuli in these two tasks are so different.
Why do the findings differ from previous research?
The importance of ecological validity.
The observed density effect on gaze duration and number of gazes are consistent with some previous studies , but contrary to others .
Unlike most of the previous studies, our target was not defined by only one or two visual features 
In contrast to these previous studies, participants in our study had to search a target based on aesthetic judgment.
They spent longer gaze duration in our task than normal visual search task.
These differences in the task environment may lead to the different results of the effect on search performance.
Ecological validity is therefore crucial to understanding the constraints on visual search strategy.
On the other hand, we have chosen to control some variables that are confounded in studies of potential new designs.
For example, in studies of hyperbolic browsers  item size and item density are confounded, i.e.
Although this is perhaps, a natural confound for systems like hyperbolic browsers, failing to isolate what are otherwise independent factors will limit the generality of conclusions drawn from the data.
A downside of our effort to engage our participants in a meaningful task -- looking for attractive images of potential destinations -- was that there was a weak criterion for successful trial completion.
The trial was over when participants indicated that they had found an attractive thumbnail but some participants may have used radically different thresholds for `attractive' than others.
In contrast, experiments in which participants were asked to find a particular item have a strong and measurable criterion for trial completion and moreover participants can make errors.
Although we claim that our design reflects some part of the natural task ecology, it also reduces the strength of the conclusions that we can draw from the fact that participants took less time, overall, when items were presented with a higher density.
The Adaptive Character of Thought.
An integrated theory of the mind.
Eye movements during visual search: the costs of choosing the optimal path.
Good enough but I'll just check: Web-page search as attentional refocusing.
Strategies for guiding interactive search: An empirical investigation into the consequences of label relevance for assessment and selection.
Faster document navigation with space-filling thumbnails.
A Rational Model of the Effect of Information Scent on the Exploration of Menus.
Cutrell, E. and Guan, Z.
What are you looking for?
An eye-tracking study of information usage in Web search.
Generating automated predictions of behavior strategically adapted to specific performance objectives.
Unintended effects: Varying icon spacing changes users' visual search strategy.
Active vision-the psychology of looking and seeing.
13.Fu, W.-T. and Pirolli, P. SNIF-ACT: A Cognitive Model of User Navigation on the World Wide Web.
A persistent problem for HCI is that the exploration of new designs in the absence of adequate empirically grounded theory might lead to the rejection of the design on the basis of false negatives.
Hyperbolic or other fish-eye view projections have, for example, had no impact on the way that most people use computer systems, despite the huge research investment over many years.
It is tempting to take this fact as evidence that hyperbolic browsers are not fit for purpose.
However, an alternative reason for their failure to find a role might be that the particular design instances are not tuned to the detailed constraints and adaptive capability of the human visual system.
Hyperbolic browsers that fail to let people adapt to the constraints and capabilities imposed by their visual system are unlikely to succeed.
Careful empirical investigation in response to well-formed theory and motivated by the ecology of user's real task environments may have the potential to address this problem.
For example, although users might adapt their search strategy to achieve the highest payoff given a particular thumbnail density, some layout designs are better for decreasing of total search time and manual response time.
The results reported above suggest the high density  can facilitate search.
Interestingly, even higher densities than we have explored in this paper are unlikely to produce further gains.
Previous work  has suggested that when the spacing between icons is zero pixels search becomes more difficult.
Thumbnails require at least some space for visual search, which perhaps reflects common intuitions.
