Jason Alexander1, Andy Cockburn1, Stephen Fitchett1, Carl Gutwin2, Saul Greenberg3 2 3 University of Canterbury, University of Saskatchewan, University of Calgary, Christchurch, New Zealand.
In this paper, we show that people frequently return to previously-visited regions within their documents, and that scrollbars can be enhanced to ease this task.
We analysed 120 days of activity logs from Microsoft Word and Adobe Reader.
Our analysis shows that region revisitation is a common activity that can be supported with relatively short recency lists.
This establishes an empirical foundation for the design of an enhanced scrollbar containing scrollbar marks that helps people return to previously visited document regions.
Two controlled experiments show that scrollbar marks decrease revisitation time, and that a large number of marks can be used effectively.
We then design an enhanced Footprints scrollbar that supports revisitation with several features, including scrollbar marks and mark thumbnails.
Two further experiments show that the Footprints scrollbar was frequently used and strongly preferred over traditional scrollbars.
However, rapid and effective revisitation depends on people having attended to the thumb's location during previous visits, remembering it, and reproducing it accurately.
One or more of these activities can fail.
In their comparison of navigation in paper and electronic documents O'Hara and Sellen  observed that people use fingers to mark document regions in paper documents for easy return, and that equivalent methods are lacking when scrolling.
They conclude that scrolling is "irritatingly slow and distracting" and that people need "quicker, more effortless navigation" , pg.
One way to improve support for revisitation is by augmenting the scrollbar region with scrollbar marks.
Such marks are not a new idea.
Attribute-mapped scrollbars, patented in 1990 , used coloured marks in the scrollbar to draw attention to salient properties; scrollbars are well-suited to showing this information, as they provide an overview of the entire document.
However, their focus was on showing history of use, not on supporting revisitation.
Read-wear marks on the scrollbar offer a lightweight method for improving document revisitation compared to traditional scrolling: a mark shows a person where they have been, and provides a navigation cue to help them quickly return to that spot.
However, the idea has not caught on, and we are unaware of any system currently using it .
We believe the poor adoption of read-wear scrollbars is due to a lack of knowledge about how revisitation occurs in the real world, how best to design such a scrollbar, and the potential benefits and harms of using it in realistic systems.
Consequently, we conducted several investigations to address these knowledge gaps.
How do people revisit document locations, and are current tools well used?
Scrollbars are a familiar widget common to graphical user interfaces, and have become a standard idiom for view navigation within documents.
They are compact and conceptually simple, yet powerful, providing useful information about the viewport's location and extent in a larger information space.
In particular, the scroll thumb's spatial cue can help revisitation - returning to previously visited document regions.
For example, a user may know that "moving the thumb roughly four-fifths of the way down will bring me to the Results section".
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Can scrollbar marks improve revisitation, and how many marks should be used?
We conducted two experiments to test the performance of adding marks into the scrollbar.
One study demonstrates that marks can decrease revisitation time; the other shows that people can successfully use a large number of marks.
How can a realistic interface support revisitation?
We designed our Footprints Scrollbar  to maximize support for revisitation, based on principles derived from the log analysis and the two studies.
Is this support used effectively and is it preferred?
We evaluated the Footprints Scrollbar in two experiments: a controlled lab study and a realistic usage study.
The Footprints Scrollbar was frequently and successfully used, improved users' revisitation time, and was strongly preferred to traditional scrollbars.
Overall, our investigations show that revisitation is worth supporting, and that read-wear - long known but little studied - is a valuable and usable technique for improving revisitation.
To our knowledge these studies are the first to analyse real world revisitation in documents and to use the results in the design, implementation, and evaluation of a read-wear scrollbar.
This is why our research interest lies primarily in automatic revisitation support.
Familiar interface controls such as history lists, `Back/Forward' buttons, and `Recent Document' menus facilitate navigation between documents.
These automatic revisitation tools minimally intrude on users' activities: they silently record actions, populate a data structure or visualisation, and provide support when called on.
Their primary disadvantages are that people may not understand the algorithm for recording or presenting events, and the event set may overwhelm or fail to match the interests of the user.
For example, people often misunderstand the behaviour of the web `Back' button, causing frustration when items cannot be revisited ; we have observed similar problems with missing items in `Recent Documents' menus and with users misunderstanding the temporal order of Alt-Tab window switching.
There are also several widely-deployed examples of automatic revisitation tools for navigating within documents.
For example, the web browser's `Back' button works as normal when navigating through internal page links, and Adobe Reader's `Previous/Next View' feature steps through a linear history of scroll positions and zoom levels.
Visual Studio also has a `previous/next' list of lines that the I-beam cursor has visited.
However, these history lists leave no visible trace in the scrollbar, so people cannot visually scan potential target regions without displaying additional windows or menus.
Hill et al's  original Read Wear system showed a histogram overview of the reading history of an entire document within the scrollbar.
Each horizontal line of pixels in the scrollbar encoded information such as the number of edits or length of time reading.
Similar scrollbar marks are used by several code editors, but the marks are used to highlight semantic information such as compilation errors rather than to support revisitation.
The concept of document read wear inspired several researchers to examine a variety of techniques for recording and visualizing activity beyond the scrollbar.
These include Wexelblat and Maes'  `Footprints' system, which provided maps, trails, annotations and signposts for information foraging, and Skopik and Gutwin's  `visit wear' marks for revisitation in fisheye visualizations.
To our knowledge, the idea of combining visitation histories with overview visualizations in the scrollbar has not been pursued since Hill et al's initial investigation.
Zipf's Law , the Pareto Principle  and the "80-20 Rule" all demonstrate that many facets of human behaviour are highly repetitive: although we have extensive vocabularies, wardrobes, or choices at our disposal, most of the time we reuse a small set of favoured options.
Researchers have also demonstrated that many aspects of computer use are also highly repetitive, such as command use , menu selections , and web page visits .
These observations have stimulated research into interface techniques for supporting reuse and revisitation.
Some strategies require manual intervention while others automatically observe actions and update the interface.
For example, bookmark tools in web browsers and Microsoft Word let people explicitly create iconic labels as shortcuts for returning to particular pages or positions in a document.
The Bookmark Scrollbar  is similar, but bookmarks are placed within a standard scrollbar.
However, bookmarks have problems that limit their use in practice .
First, they depend on people knowing in advance that the information will be required in the future.
Second, people must believe that adding a bookmark will yield benefits that exceed the manipulation costs of creating and managing them.
Many researchers have investigated ways to improve scrolling.
Our research bridges the third and fourth approaches, using an augmented scrollbar to reinforce spatial memory and aid revisitation.
First, however, we report the findings of our log analysis of document revisitation behaviour.
We report results only for two-second pauses.
When revisiting document locations, people are unlikely to arrive at precisely the same viewport as the one previously seen.
We therefore define a revisit as returning to anywhere within the bounds of an earlier visit and remaining there for more than two seconds.
Furthermore, revisits are only logged when the person visits another position outside the current view prior to returning.
This condition ensures that actions such as slowly advancing line by line are not logged as revisits.
How do people currently revisit document locations?
Knowing actual revisitation patterns is critical for the design of a revisitation system.
To answer this question, we analysed logs of all navigational actions in Microsoft Word 2003 and Adobe Reader 7 as used by 14 participants  during their normal work over 120 days.
The logging software and initial data analysis are reported in ; the analysis of revisitation discussed below is new.
The logs precisely record the location and extent of the scrollbar's thumb every 200ms, describing the user's viewport independent of zoom level.
Note that in large documents  the logged viewport exceeds the actual one.
Table 1 shows summary statistics of the documents used during the study.
A large proportion of documents were opened and closed without any navigation: 39.6% and 19.6% for Word and Reader.
This is probably due to people launching the application without an associated document , or due to opening the wrong document and immediately closing it.
Removing these navigation-free instances from the analysis shows that 32% of Word and 27% of Reader documents include at least one revisit .
Row 10 shows the mean of participants' maximum daily revisits: 188.8  and 32.3 , indicating that revisitation is a frequent activity in some documents.
None of the participants used Word's bookmarking function or Reader's `Next View' function during the 120 days.
A single participant used Reader's `Previous View' function in two separate documents .
During interviews following the log analysis, all but two of the participants stated they were not aware of the Previous/Next view features.
Word's `Split window' feature is another tool that can support revisitation; it allows users to simultaneously view more than one document region, eliminating the need for repetitive scrolling between two regions.
Seven of the fourteen participants used split windows at least once, with a total of 42 invocations.
One participant accounted for more than half  of these events.
When navigating within documents, people frequently stop over a region without any intention to do so, caused by mechanical demands such as clutching the mouse or scroll-wheel, or by cognitive and perceptual issues such as determining whether the document is correctly positioned.
We therefore need to define a specific pause length as denoting an intentional visit, and to prune visits of shorter duration.
This raises the question of whether recency or frequency is a more effective basis for revisitation support.
One key question for either design is that of how many items should be displayed in the scrollbar: e.g., the two most recently/frequently visited, or the top twenty?
We therefore analysed the logs  to determine the proportion of revisited items covered by a recency or frequency list of length n. Figure 1a shows the results for recency list analysis.
For example, a one-item recency list  would allow users to reach 19% and 28% of previous locations with Word and Reader.
Longer lists rapidly increase the proportion of accessible locations, with ten-item recency lists covering 81% of revisitations with Word and 84% with Reader.
Frequency list analysis  shows a similarly steep slope, with 10 items allowing access to slightly fewer items than the recency list, at 78% and 83% of revisited locations for Word and Reader respectively.
The values for a one-item frequency list are also lower than recency lists at 16% and 13% respectively, meaning that fewer regions would be accessible with a simple `Back' button than with recency lists.
We then conducted an initial experiment to determine whether people would use the recency marks , and whether using them would aid their revisitation performance.
Tasks involved searching for locations in a plain text document  and periodically revisiting them.
The experiment also investigated how performance was influenced by the number of marks in the scrollbar and by the number of revisits to the same location .
Users completed the tasks using a simple document-viewing application that allowed navigation only with the scrollbar.
Two versions were created, whose interfaces differed only in scrollbar type: a standard scrollbar, or a marking scrollbar that showed red marks for visited locations.
Middle-clicking on a mark immediately scrolled the view to its associated location.
In this experiment, marks were only placed when targets were successfully visited or revisited; pausing elsewhere in the document did not place a mark.
Consequently, this is a best-case study for marking scrollbars; it considers questions about whether people will use the marks, whether the marks improve performance, whether the marks distract from other tasks, and how well users learn document locations both with and without marks.
The log analysis showed: that people frequently revisit document locations; that current revisitation tools in Word and Reader are seldom used; that relatively short revisitation lists provide good coverage of the locations that users revisit; and that recency-based lists provide better coverage than frequency based lists.
This last point is intuitively reasonable - users' interests in document regions change over time; for instance, the morning's work at regions x and y may be unimportant during the afternoon's work at regions w and z.
Twelve volunteer university students  participated in the experiment.
The experiment lasted approximately 30 minutes.
A Java-based system was built for the study.
A single window  displayed both the experimental interface  and a task cueing pane .
The task-time dependent measure is analysed using a 2x2x4 repeated measures analysis of variance , with the three factors: interface type , positions visited  and revisit iteration .
Participants were given a brief introduction to each interface and the experimental method before completing three practice tasks with their first interface.
They then completed all tasks with one interface before proceeding to the next, with the order counterbalanced.
Participants completed NASA Task Load Index  worksheets and provided comments after completing each interface.
Tasks involved using the experimental interface to locate sentences displayed one at a time in the cueing interface.
Participants were informed that all target sentences were the first in a paragraph and that tasks were completed by placing the target sentence anywhere within the viewport and clicking the "Finish Task" button.
Successfully completing one task automatically cued the next.
Two sets of ten tasks were generated: the first set within the first twenty pages of the document, and the second set within the second twenty pages.
All participants used the first set with their first interface.
The targets were generated to have similar locations across sets .
Targets were spaced nearly evenly through the 20 page regions, with at least one window of text between them.
Equivalent targets in both sets were revisited the same number of times.
Participants were unaware of these constraints on target placement.
The set of targets were visited as follows.
First, participants found five consecutive targets for the first time, progressing downwards through the document: t1, t2, t3, t4, t5.
Next, they entered the first of two revisitation phases, revisiting items in the order t2, t4, t2, t1, t2, t4, t2.
They then visited the five remaining targets for the first time , resulting in ten marks in the scrollbar, followed by a second revisitation phrase with target order t3, t9, t3, t6, t3, t9, t3.
In total, each participant completed 48 experimental tasks: two targets visited five times each , two visited three times , two visited twice , and four visited once , giving 24 tasks.
These were then repeated for the second interface.
Tasks were automatically completed after 90 seconds to reduce the impact of situations where participants became lost.
Six tasks were discarded due to exceeding the time limit: two with marks, and four with traditional scrollbars.
Figure 3 summarises these results.
There was a significant interface type x positions visited interaction , with the marking scrollbar showing greater benefits with more positions visited.
There was no interaction between interface type and revisit iteration: F3,33<1.
Subjective measures and participant comments supported these positive results for marking scrollbars.
NASA-TLX worksheet results showed lower mean workload and higher mean performance ratings for the marking scrollbar in all categories, although only the overall `Effort' measure showed a significant effect.
Participant comments were also positive: "The scrollbar mark is extremely nice".
One participant noted that the marks helped reduce their spatial search space: "I would usually only be off by one mark if I didn't choose correctly the first time, so it was easy to correct my mistakes."
These results show that accurately placed scrollbar marks helped participants return to document locations, and that the support was appreciated.
Also, as more places were visited, participants gained more from the marks.
The log data showed that 10 marks covers 80% of revisitations, and that 30 marks covers close to 100%.
Yet as Figure 1 reveals, each additional mark covers a smaller proportion of revisitation targets, therefore offering progressively lower utility while increasing the number of distracters.
This study, therefore, investigates how performance is influenced by the number of marks.
The experiment used the same marking interface, cuing interface, and apparatus as experiment one.
In addition, the same people from the first experiment participated in the second, and advanced to the second experiment after a short break.
Revisitation time is analysed using a 4x4 repeated measures ANOVA with two factors: positions visited  and revisit iteration .
Participants completed three preparation tasks and then searched and revisited locations within the first 45 pages of James Joyce's Dubliners using a similar procedure to that used in experiment one .
These results suggest a tradeoff between the number of marks and performance.
Although the participants quickly learned many marks and their associated regions , acquisition times on their first revisit increased steeply with the number of marks .
Nevertheless, these results show that large mark sets are feasible, and that designing to cover nearly all revisits is a possibility.
Since ten marks cover more than 80% of revisited locations, however, , we use 10 marks in our remaining studies.
The results of the first two studies, and our experiences with the initial version of the marking scrollbar, led us to design a new version - called the Footprints Scrollbar  - that contains a number of more advanced features for supporting revisitation.
The Footprints scrollbar supports six related methods for revisiting regions.
First, coloured marks are placed in the scrollbar to provide spatial cues to previously visited areas.
Marks gradually fade from `hot' colours  through to `cold' ones  to denote their increasing age in the recency set.
Pilot studies showed that colours were less distracting than other mechanisms  for representing recency.
Second, middle clicking on a mark causes a rapid, animated scroll transition to the associated view .
Third, when the user moves the cursor over the scrollbar, small thumbnail images quickly fade into view alongside each mark, giving a visual overview of the associated document regions.
Moving the cursor over a thumbnail expands that thumbnail for better visual inspection .
The thumbnails fade out when the cursor moves away from the scrollbar.
Clicking a thumbnail also moves to that view.
Fourth, back/forward functions are invoked by the `left' and `right' keyboard keys; this allows users to rapidly move through the mark history and its corresponding region views.
Fifth, depressing the Shift key and rotating the scrollwheel moves the document position to the closest mark in the direction of rotation .
Figure 4 summarises the results.
There is also a significant interaction between the factors , which is best explained by the large absolute task time reduction between iterations 1 and 4 with 30 marks compared to the smaller reductions with fewer marks.
This should be expected, since learning and remembering thirty marks is clearly more demanding than five.
By the fourth iteration, performance appears to be reaching an asymptote for all conditions, with little performance difference between 10, 20 and 30 marks .
This suggests that participants were not overloaded by 30 marks.
Additional evidence suggesting that users were successfully "deciding" about marks rather than linearly searching them is provided by regression analysis of acquisition time with positions visited, which gives a logarithmic best fit with R2=0.98.
The Hick-Hyman Law  shows that logarithmic functions relate decision time to number of items, while linear functions apply to serial candidate searches.
The two-second timeout has an important impact on the behaviour of the interface: it determines when marks are placed, and it determines the semantics of the back/forward keys.
To help users predict and comprehend this behaviour, the scrollbar thumb depicts the approaching timeout by gradually filling with colour, similar to a progress bar .
Once filled, the timeout expires, a mark is placed in the scrollbar, the region is inserted at the tail of the recency list, and the window view is captured for use in the associated thumbnail.
To precisely describe this behaviour, Table 2 uses comma separated letters a, b, c... to represent visited document regions; the symbol ^ denotes a two second static location; subscripts 1, 2, 3... denote shortcut digits on marks; i and  denote the back and forward keys; and curly braces {...} enclose the comma-separated content of the recency list, with the most recent item at the right hand end of the list.
An underlined item in the recency list represents the region displayed at the end of each action sequence.
Each mark is 16 pixels high , and marks never overlap one another.
Marks are only placed in the scrollbar when the scrolled region remains static for more than two seconds.
Consequently, both continuous scrolling and scrolling with short pauses for device clutching or visual inspection have no impact on the marks and the recency list.
The two second limit provides a compromise between intentional and unintentional pauses in the document.
Scrollbar marks are produced from a recency list data structure that removes duplicates .
Whenever the scroll view remains static for more than two seconds, that region is inserted at the end of the recency list, and any earlier entry for the same location is removed from the list.
The current implementation has a 1:1 correspondence between marks and list entries, but this could be relaxed to allow more items on the recency list than are visualized in the scrollbar: e.g., providing 10 visible marks, but allowing a larger number of previously visited regions, accessible via the Back/Forward keys.
Marks are numbered from 1 to n, where n is the configurable maximum .
To reduce visual distraction associated with scrollbar changes, the numbers are as stable as possible, with each mark after n receiving the mark number of the least-recent member of the recency list.
Experiment four investigates the usability of this model, and how users chose to interact with the system; first, we report on an experiment that tested the performance of the new system.
Log analysis showed that people could benefit from revisitation support.
The experimental results above suggest that people can benefit when using even a simple marking scrollbar, if marks are correctly placed.
Correct mark placement is an artificial ideal, however, and realistic mark placement needs to be evaluated.
This experiment compared the Footprints scrollbar with a standard scrollbar in terms of people's performance and preferences.
Unlike experiment one , this experiment controlled revisits according to mark position within the recency list.
This allowed us to inspect how performance of the Footprints scrollbar was affected by the differing ages of different marks.
The disadvantage of this method is that it artificially made less-recent revisits more likely than our logs show them to be.
Twelve participants  took part in the experiment.
Tasks involved finding and re-finding document regions that were cued by displaying an image of the target region and an initial direction .
Participants began tasks by pressing a "Start Task" button, and completed them by scrolling the target region into the middle two-thirds of the screen and clicking a "Finish Task" button.
A red status message was displayed if the target was not correctly positioned, and the task continued.
Training with each interface was similar to experiment one, and was followed with eight sample tasks to familiarize participants with the procedure.
All participants used the Footprints scrollbar and the standard scrollbar  with tenand forty-page documents .
Eleven target regions were generated for each document by evenly distributing preliminary locations, then randomly adjusting these locations by between 0 and 5%.
The eleven targets were initially presented consecutively from the top of the document to the bottom.
Participants then revisited targets according to their ideal position on the recency list: three times for each position 2-11.
The ideal positions assume that marks only fall on targets.
However, marks were placed whenever the user paused, so the ideal recency list is likely to differ from the user's actual one.
Therefore, latter list positions may not have been visible in the scrollbar when needed, due to being displaced by other marks.
Analysis of the study logs showed that the location in 8th position on the ideal list was in the user's visible list 90% of the time, the 9th 72%, the 10th 52%, and the 11th 15%.
Figure 6 shows the typexlength interaction - both interfaces performed similarly with 10 page documents , but Footprints performed better with 40 page documents .
The typexposition interaction is due to the Footprints scrollbar outperforming standard scrollbars in all but the 11th position on the recency list.
On trials in the 11th list position, the Footprints system provided a corresponding mark only 15% of the time , so users who tried to use marks would have been misled.
Means on the 11th trial were 12.0s and 10.5s for Footprints and standard scrollbars.
All but one participant preferred the Footprints scrollbar; the remaining participant could not choose between them.
Mean NASA-TLX worksheet results were uniformly better for Footprints: significantly so for `Physical Load', `Performance' and `Effort'.
Participant comments from experiment three are discussed below, together with those of experiment four.
Tasks in experiment three were tightly constrained for experimental control, artificially inducing revisitation and exaggerating temporally distant revisitations.
To inspect more realistic tasks, our final study used a structured interview process to observe participants' more natural interaction within a document of their choosing.
Eight participants , all graduate students or faculty from Computer Science, took part in the experiment.
They were asked to identify a favourite research paper, which we loaded into the system.
The experiment began with a two-minute introduction to the system's features, explaining marks, thumbnails, digit shortcut keys, and the back/forward arrow keys.
Participants then completed 25 tasks using whichever methods they chose.
Tasks involved describing the paper to the experimenter in response to a consistent set of questions: "show me what you think is the best part of the paper", "who is on the reference list?
Only one of the participants used digit shortcut keys for navigation, and another one commented that he used the digit marks `to map locations'.
Generally, though, the digit marks were criticized by a few participants as either unnecessary or mildly confusing.
Most participants stated that they understood the behaviour of this mechanism  and that they might use the keys in other documents, but none of the participants actually used them during the tasks.
One mentioned a conceptual clash between the `Forward' key and `forward=down' in the document, despite understanding the behaviour.
Another stated "using back/forward arrows is something that just didn't occur to me".
This comment echoes the findings of the log analysis - current recency tools, such as Reader's `previous/next view' or Word's bookmarks are not sufficiently ready-to-hand, and hence they go unused despite their potential utility.
Lack of control over mark placement.
Some participants felt pressured by the thumb-filling animation, with one commenting that it "made me rush before it dropped a mark" and another stating that "it would be nice to somehow stop the dropping of the marks".
The questionnaires asked participants to comment on whether the two second marking timeout was too short or too long, with several responding that it was "sometimes too short and sometimes too long".
Lightweight controls for manually adding and removing marks, or an adaptive timeout that changes according to previous user actions could solve this problem, but it is unclear whether people would use such controls or whether adaption could be successfully implemented.
Questionnaire responses  show that participants found marks and thumbnails helpful for visualizing and navigating to previously visited locations, with Likert scale  means ranging between 4.5 and 4.9 .
These ratings were achieved without substantial distraction .
Overall, comments were positive, including "revisitation is tremendously useful and would probably only improve as the document increases in size" and "it's additive: no interference with any other widget".
Five participants stated that they would want all of the supported features in their desktop interfaces; three stated they would want some of the features, with all wanting the thumbnails, region markers, and middle-click shortcuts.
Experiments three and four show the value of the Footprints scrollbar for revisitation, especially for longer documents.
This success validates our empirical recommendation that revisitation should be supported , and our initial evaluations of scroll marks in artificial situations.
People also preferred the features of the Footprints scrollbar.
Despite these successes, the Footprints scrollbar is still an early design.
Although the overall system was praised, participants identified several areas for improvement.
Nearly all participants commented that colour poorly communicated mark recency.
Worse, three participants observed that their memory for items was harmed by colour changes - they might remember the `red' mark in a region, only to be confused by later colour reconfiguration.
Furthermore, two participants noted that coloured marks increased the difficulty of visually acquiring the scrollbar thumb.
We therefore recommend that future implementations use stable mark colours  with smaller marks and higher levels of opacity to ensure they do not interfere with thumb acquisition.
Revisitation has been comprehensively investigated in domains such as web navigation and command use.
Somewhat surprisingly, however, region revisitation within documents has been largely overlooked.
Our log analysis demonstrates that users frequently revisit document regions and that short revisitation lists can theoretically provide access to most locations that users return to.
We used these findings to motivate and inform the design of a system, based on Hill et al.
Our Footprints scrollbar works within the current ecology of graphical user interfaces - it augments the familiar scrollbar rather than replacing it, occupying the same location on the screen.
Except for shortcut keys  the input to this scrollbar does not compete with input actions that control other parts of a document viewer or GUI.
Future work will progress in three main directions.
First, we plan to revise the design of the scrollbar according to the user responses discussed above, and produce a version for incorporation into real-world document readers.
Second, we will carry out longer-term evaluations, to provide additional information about how revisitation and revisitation support work in real use.
Third, we will trial a version of the scrollbar that maintains knowledge of the mark positions between document sessions.
