People now routinely carry radio frequency identification  tags - in passports, driver's licenses, credit cards, and other identifying cards - where nearby RFID readers can access privacy-sensitive information on these tags.
The problem is that people are often unaware of security and privacy risks associated with RFID, likely because the technology remains largely invisible and uncontrollable for the individual.
To mitigate this problem, we introduce a collection of novel yet simple and inexpensive tag designs.
Our tags provide reader awareness, where people get visual, audible, or tactile feedback as tags come into the range of RFID readers.
Our tags also provide information control, where people can allow or disallow access to the information stored on the tag by how they touch, orient, move, press, or illuminate the tag.
Similarly, RFID systems for governmental documents are the fastest growing area of the RFID market, with nearly two billion tags across all application areas produced in 2008 alone .
For personal use, people are increasingly carrying and using RFID tags  in a variety of day-to-day situations, where tags contain information or have identifying `handles' to information stored elsewhere.
These include tags that contain: little or no personal information , somewhat benign personal information  and privacy-sensitive personal information such as biometric data  .
This paper concerns the personal use of RFID tags, the risks associated with them, and mechanisms for mitigating this risk.
RFID comes at the cost of an increasing number of possible security and privacy threats and attacks.
Examples include tracking people's location, eavesdropping on communications between tags and readers, and cloning and misuse of data stored on tags .
Even so, we don't advocate abandonment of RFID technology: RFID provides clear advantages such as convenience, low cost, write access to data storage, small size, and reading information from a distance and without line-of-sight .
The question is how to make it more secure.
The typical technical approach is to use a `secure' RFID system based on encryption methods and authentication systems .
Such systems raise problems for the user, however.
As others have shown, people have difficulties in applying them or understanding their functionality .
The problem is that people are often unaware of security and privacy risks associated with RFID, likely because the technology remains largely invisible, uncontrollable and difficult to understand.
To mitigate this problem, we contribute a collection of novel yet simple and inexpensive RFID tag designs .
Our tags provide reader awareness, where people get visual, audible, or tactile feedback as tags come into the range of RFID readers.
Our tags also provide information control, where people can allow or disallow access to the information stored on tags by how they touch, orient, move, press, or illuminate them.
That is, our designs make RFID interaction more visible, controllable, and intelligible, properties routinely proposed as important for Ubicomp systems .
We first review the related work on RFID privacy and security issues , and the various countermeasures proposed.
We then briefly summarize and deconstruct RFID functionality and characteristics, and propose alternative RFID tag designs that implement awareness and control mechanisms.
Next, we provide a scenario envisioning how these new RFID tags could be used in everyday situations.
We then list early feedback of our designs by a DIY community.
Finally, we discuss limitations of our awareness and control mechanisms.
The simplest countermeasure is to disable reading of the RFID tag.
One approach, endorsed by the US Government, suggests protective sleeves to protect the RFID passports .
While a protective sleeve decreases an RFID tag's reading distance, it does not completely block access to the tag's information.
Thus it is still possible for others to read this supposedly protected information .
There are a variety of privacy-enhancing technologies  and methods; Spiekermann et.
However, most were developed for electronic product codes  used for commercial product labels rather than for personal use.
The most common technical approach to securing RFID systems is via cryptographic algorithms, e.g., public-key methods .
Yet embedding these complex algorithms into low-resource RFID tags remains a demanding engineering challenge .
Cryptographic methods, once doable, will be a reasonable base layer for privacy.
However, they are still susceptible to engineering attacks, something our proposed awareness and control methods are better suited to prevent.
Some methods disable tags after use.
These are typically applied to checkout situations to deactivate tags on purchased items so they will not be read again .
The EPC tag kill function completely and permanently disables a tag at checkout2 so that it is no longer usable.
With the disable model , tags are also disabled at a shop's check-out, but a password can re-enable the object tags if needed.
Another method lets people physically disable a RFID tag by providing a layer with the antenna that can be peeled off the tag .
These one-time disabling approaches and heavy-weight methods for re-enabling tags are clearly not adequate for securing personal RFID cards, e.g., passports, EDL, and credit cards.
Another approach lets a person authorize individual reading access to an RFID tag , usually via an auxiliary device that allows the person to allow specific readers to access the tag information.
The RFID Guardian  is a device that can record and display RFID scans, and manages RFID keys to authenticate nearby readers, and can block access attempts of unauthorized devices.
Recent advanced RFID techniques allows authorization by secret handshakes  - performing a particular gesture while holding the RFID tag activates the communication.
This approach does not seem particularly viable for everyday situations: people are unlikely to carry extra devices, or remember gestures for the multiple cards they carry.
Privacy risks associated with personal RFID tags range greatly.
Some tags are benign, as they contain little or no personal information, e.g., transit passes and concert tickets.
Others do contain personal information , but the risk is relatively modest, e.g., customer loyalty cards.
Still others contain privacysensitive personal information, so the risks can be high, e.g., the trend to include RFID tags into passports, credit cards, and enhanced drivers' licences  .
The threats are real, especially in these later cases, and include : * * * * * * unauthorized scanning; unauthorized location tracking of individuals; eavesdropping of authorized communication; leakage of biometric data stored on RFID tags; hacked RFID deployments; cloning of cards.
Ozer  describes insecure and hacked RFID deployments for passport and credit card systems.
In their studies of Ubicomp applications, Beckwith et.
First, people often failed to realize the currently available privacy and security level of the system, often due to the lack of visibility of the system's behaviour .
Next, people's mental models were often naive, incomplete or incorrect .
People were found to have factually incorrect knowledge of the inner workings of RFID , and they often perceived the technology as a black box.
In turn, this led to no understanding of possible security and privacy risks .
For example, people's naive mental models were sometimes based upon line-of-sight communications ; this is incorrect, as line-of-sight is not required .
Participants also expected visual or audio feedback for the `reading' activity of a card by the RFID reader .
If no feedback was presented, participants assumed that the RFID system to be inactive and no information accessed .
Again, this is incorrect: readers  do not have to provide such feedback.
People's knowledge also proved incomplete: most were unaware of the large reading distances of RFID tags, their always on availability, or even that tags store data .
Even without this detailed knowledge of RFID technology and its possible threats, people remained concerned "about their own autonomy and control in the face of an ill-understood and effectively invisible technology" .
They felt powerless, as they did not see themselves in a position to do anything against possible threats .
Even so, people remain positive about RFID.
When asked to weigh potential advantages and disadvantages of RFID applications, most study participants in  favoured the advantages.
Thus the question is not whether to use RFID.
Rather, as summarized by Guenther and Spiekermann , people need to feel that they have the ability to control the RFID infrastructure if they are to trust its services.
Bellotti and Sellen  describe the RAVE framework for privacy in ubiquitous computing that is based on two important principles: feedback and control.
It helps identify privacy problems and supports finding solutions to address these problems.
More generally, Langheinrich  provides six principles for privacy in Ubicomp: notice, choice and consent, proximity and locality, anonymity and pseudonymity, security, and access and recourse.
We consider these frameworks and suggestions in our research, where we explicitly focus on RFID technology redesign that allows people to be aware of and actively control their interaction with RFID-based systems.
To better illustrate the privacy threats mentioned in this section we provide a scenario of how such threats might affect a person's life in everyday situations.
Claire uses the train to commute to work.
She owns a payment card for easy electronic payment of fares.
As she enters the train station, she takes out her wallet  and swipes it over the reader at the entrance as usual.
This time, however, Claire is surprised that the access to the train station is declined, even though she is sure that she just recently deposited several hundred dollars on the train payment card.
When complaining about the rejected payment card at the counter, she is told that the credit balance of her card is $0.
A later police investigation reveals that a criminal, likely located near the station's entrance, has illegally scanned and later cloned and sold copies of Claire's payment card.
Police believe that her identification documents were also scanned - her employee pass, credit card, passport and driver's licence - and that she should be concerned about identity theft and further financial theft.
Claire was shocked; she was completely unaware of the risk of surreptitious wireless access to the personal and financial information stored on the cards she carries.
This is a fictitious but realistic scenario about an extreme case of identity and financial theft.
More and more people will carry RFID-enabled payment and identification cards, increasing the incentive for criminals to misappropriate this technology.
The previously mentioned privacy and security threats are both impending and likely.
Researchers and policy makers are not blind to these problems of Ubicomp in general and RFID specifically, and have suggested various guidelines to mitigate these problems.
Ubicomp system designers should not separate securityrelated decision-making from activities done when using the technology.
When a tag approaches a reader, the signal transmitted by the reader induces an electrical current in the tag's antenna.
This induced current is sufficient to power the integrated circuit on the RFID chip.
When powered, the RFID chip modulates a response signal that is transmitted back to the reader.
The reader decodes this response signal.
This signal minimally provides a unique tag identification number, although some RFID chips can transmit other information  stored in the chip memory.
RFID tags are usually passive: no energy source on the tag is necessary.
A few use auxiliary power , or actively send signals themselves .
RFID standards define diverse frequencies for radio transmissions: the majority of systems transmit via the 13.56 MHz frequency standard .
The maximum reading distance with 13.56 MHz tags is ~1m, although ultra-high frequency RFID tags can be read from over 10m.
RFID tags are designed to be always available, and they transmit a response to all readers that send a valid request via the transponder signal.
The tags are designed as stand-alone units.
Interaction with or control of the RFID tag's behaviour by a person is neither intended nor supported.
These properties contribute to the strength of RFID technology.
Indeed, they are often critical to the successful deployment of many industrial and commercial applications .
However, they also compromise privacy and security.
We question the necessity of these properties in many use cases that involve personal use, for instance, when using RFID in governmental documents such as passports and EDLs.
In our later explorations of alternative RFID designs, we will describe how our designs raise questions about the criticality of each of these five properties.
While equipping RFID tags with embedded sensors is rare , it is relevant to our design strategy.
Thus a few research efforts are described below.
The Wireless Identification and Sensing Platform by Intel  introduced sensing to RFID tags.
With wireless powered circuits and connected sensors, researchers could identify tilting  and temperature changes of tagged objects.
Their context was industrial supply chain applications, for example detecting if the storage or temperature range of an object was correct during transport.
In a separate project, Smith et al.
Overall, building passively-powered sensor platforms onto RFID tags allow enhanced sensor readings and many possibilities for wireless sensor network applications .
Our research  extends this notion by providing simple sensing mechanisms that can enhance people's interaction with RFID systems and the transmission of privacy-sensitive information.
We explored existing RFID technology in-depth.
Our investigations drew on research publications, technical specifications, whitepapers about building RFID antennas , and even disassembling multiple RFID tags and measuring their properties.
This provided us with the bases for building traditional RFID tags, and the expertise to explore and design alternative tag designs with nontraditional interactive functionality.
Our approach was to build functional prototypes.
Several are briefly described below to illustrate our prototyping process and its mechanics; see  for our detailed `do it yourself' instructions.
Discussions about the purpose of these and other designs are deferred until the next section.
Our first prototype adds reader awareness capabilities to a tag.
Figure 2, left, is an RFID reader detector: a lightemitting diode  attached to the tag turns on when the tag is within range of an RFID reader.
The tag is composed of an antenna made with conductive copper tape, a capacitor to calibrate the RFID tag to the reader's frequency, and the LED.
The basic principle we are using is known as energy harvesting: the LED illuminates as the nearby RFID reader induces a current in the loops of the tag's antenna.
We then turned this into a fully functionally tag by replacing the capacitor and antenna with a separate RFID chip ; this arrangement transmits the chip's unique serial number to the reader.
Our next prototypes explored various material properties of tags, where we found basic tag design quite robust in terms of the changes that could be made while still delivering a functional tag.
For example, we found altering the size, length, and layout of the tag's antenna influenced, as expected, the maximum reading distance of the tag .
We also used different materials for building the antenna, where we substituted conductive silver ink and conductive thread to build the antenna loops .
From our review of standard RFID hardware and applications, a number of common properties and characteristics emerge.
Tags are usually embedded and hidden, and manufactured as small as possible .
There is no indication on a tag about its activity when a reader communicates with it.
As mentioned, line of sight is not necessary to establish a connection; thus the reader may not even be visible.
Tags respond to requests with at least one unique identification number.
This number is usually globally unique and cannot be altered.
One of our main motivations was to make the usually invisible activity of RFID systems visible to the individual.
As mentioned, various studies  have stated that people often have an incomplete understanding of the functionality of RFID, which can not only result in misuse, but also fear and insecurity about privacy risks.
We believe that providing feedback about a tag's reading activity can help people to better understand what is going on, even if they do not know how RFID tags technically work.
We designed three tags, each varying the type of feedback about RFID reading activities provided to a person: visual, audible, or tactile feedback.
The visual feedback RFID tag  was already introduced in the previous section.
An LED lights up when it is in range of an RFID reader, i.e., when a reader can potentially read the tag's content.
This proved very easy to implement, especially because energy harvesting suffices to power the LED.
While simple, it is a powerful method for end-users to verify tag activity, to estimate maximum reading distances , and to discover invisible  readers.
Visual feedback, however, is limited to cases when the user is actually looking at the tag; feedback would be hidden if the tag were  in one's pocket, purse or wallet.
Our audible feedback RFID tag and tactile feedback tag overcome this limitation.
The underlying mechanisms are similar to the previous tag.
The audible feedback tag uses a small piezzo speaker to generate an acoustic signal , while the tactile feedback tag uses a vibro-tactile motor connected to the tag whenever a reader is nearby .
This comes at a cost.
Both speaker and the motor need more electric energy than induced by the reader.
Thus a small battery connected to the tag provides auxiliary power .
Indeed, a semi-passive design allows us to replace the piezzo speaker or vibro-tactile motor with a variety of other actuators .
As with cell phones, the choice of a visible, audible or tactile tag depends on the circumstances of the end user.
A tag can, of course, be designed to have all three feedback mechanisms, where a person can chose the desired feedback mode.
This could be done by including a switch, or by swapping plug and play feedback modules onto a tag.
To aid prototype exploration, we can also connect our tags to a generic computer-controlled input-output sensor boards  as shown in Figure 4.4.
The intensity of the electromagnetic field of nearby RFID readers is now measured through its analog input, relayed to a desktop or mobile computer, and  visualized as a graph in software on the computer display .
Thus we can rapidly experiment with software that reacts in different ways according to detected RFID activity.
This approach opens up new RFID possibilities when such boards are miniaturized and integrated with the tag.
In summary, the easy to understand `visible' feedback about ongoing RFID activity provided by these three prototype tags - as well as the tag coupled with a mobile PC - counters the invisibility property of traditional RFID tags.
These feedback mechanisms - especially the LED example - are easy to implement and are reasonably cheap.
Other switch designs provide variations.
Our pressuresensitive RFID tag is activated when a person applies pressure  to a specific area on the tag .
We can adjust the pressure sensitivity of the tag, which changes the threshold that determines when the tag becomes active.
A low pressure threshold could be used for RFID tags containing benign information, whereas a high pressure threshold could be used for RFID tags containing privacy-sensitive information .
The touch-sensitive RFID tag is activated once a person touches large metal contacts on tag with a finger or hand .
A circuit on the tag measures the resistance between the metal contacts and activates the RFID chip once it detects a resistance below a certain threshold .
The contacts begin on the front side of the tag but continue on the backside as well .
This RFID tag design has the advantage that the person using the tag does not have to press a specific button on the tag, but can simply hold the tag in the hand to activate it.
The above examples illustrate the easy integration of buttons and switches into RFID tags, allowing the individual to explicitly turn the tag on and off, or to temporarily activate the tag as desired.
We were also motivated to make the usually uncontrollable reading of a tag and its information controllable by an end user.
We introduce several concepts of how simple control mechanisms can be integrated into RFID tag designs.
We explain the technical concept behind each of these control mechanisms, and illustrate their application by scenario.
Our basic approach physically separates the antenna from the RFID chip, where the connection between the two is controlled by a particular mechanism.
This makes it possible to limit the transmission activity of RFID tag information unless a specific condition is met.
Thus our tag designs counter the permanent availability and autonomy properties typical of common RFID tags.
Our first two examples integrate an on-off switch into the RFID tag.
Thus an individual can use the switch to explicitly allow or disallow communication between the RFID tag and nearby readers.
Depending on the switch, two quite different modes of control can be offered.
Activating or deactivating the tag for long time periods.
A toggle switch with two permanent positions lets a person either activate or deactivate the tag .
The switch remains in the last selected state until toggled again.
A pushbutton is pressed to activate the RFID tag, where releasing the button automatically inactivates it .
Thus the tag is normally inactive, which implements the Privacy by design concept .
This mechanism is suitable for confirmation.
For example, the LED visible feedback is interpreted as a `read request'.
Tag activity state can also depend on implicit sensed properties rather than explicit actions.
We illustrate three RFID tag examples: two tilt-sensitive and one light sensitive.
The tilt-sensitive tag  is activated when in a horizontal position , and deactivated otherwise .
Tilt switches that are connected in series and arranged in a specific pattern close the contact between the antenna and RFID chip depending on the tag's position .
The tag position determining tag activity can be changed by altering the mounting angles of the tilt switches on the tag, and by changing their parallel and/or serial connection.
A flipping tag  also uses tilt switches, but in this case it flips between two different RFID chips.
Depending on which side of the tag faces upwards , one or the other RFID chip is activated.
This design thus gives people the ability to decide what information on a tag to transmit in a given situation.
Next, a light-sensitive tag is activated in normal daylight and deactivated in darkness .
Here, a photo transistor connected to a circuit measures the surrounding light, and activates the RFID chip only if the light is above a  threshold.
This design affords RFID tags that are disabled when stored  but activated when brought outside for use.
Thus unauthorized reading of the tag is inhibited.
The tag includes an RFID chip detectable from a larger distance , and a second chip that is only readable in close proximity to the reader .
These two RFID chips could contain information at different levels of fidelity: while the far-distance chip includes public available information and is detectable by strangers, the close-distance chip includes more personal information that can be only read when the person is very close to the reader.
All our tag designs counter the permanent availability and autonomy properties typical of common RFID tags.
They are not permanently available as people can control their on/off state via either explicit or implicit actions.
They are not autonomous as people have control of tag behaviour.
The proximity-dependent and flipping tag counter the unique identifiability property; multiple identities  are available on these tags, where the identity exposed is a matter of the person's choice and actions.
Usually RFID tags are built to be detectable from the maximum possible reading distance .
The following two tag designs, however, afford variable detection ranges and proximity-dependent disclosures.
The variable detection range tag  uses a slider to interactively modify the actual antenna length and the number of antenna loops used by the tag, which affects the maximum reading distance of a tag.
A person could set the slider to use the maximum reading distance, thus allowing readers to gather information from afar .
Alternately, a person can reduce the reading distance .
The minimal length of the antenna  limits the reading distance to a few millimetres - which affords activation only by explicit direct touch of the card to the reader.
The proximity-dependent disclosure tag varies the information transmitted with the actual distance between the reader and the tag .
Claire is using the electronic payment system for the train.
When she swipes her wallet over the reader at the entrance, her card inside the wallet activates once in a horizontal position; it vibrates, and the reader communicates with the tag to perform the fare transaction.
When Claire puts the card back into her pocket, she knows that her fare has been read.
She also knows her card is inactive, and thus others cannot read and copy her card.
She arrives at work and uses her employee ID card to access the company building.
Following company security policy, she takes her ID card out of her wallet and clips the card onto her shirt; the light in the building switches the light-sensitive RFID card on.
As she passes by computers and doorways, a light on her tag shows her that those devices can be used by her.
When she later leaves the building to drive to the airport, she puts her ID back in her wallet, thus disabling the card.
This is according to company policy, as the company does not want anyone outside its doors to access her employee number.
Outside the airport, her credit card vibrates.
This raises her suspicions about financial theft, so she informs airport security.
They investigate, and capture a person with an illicit credit card reader.
Claire knows that her own financial information has not been read, as the card's communication is switched off.
Once at the airport, she buys lunch at a restaurant.
She places her credit card near a `pay here' spot at her table; her card vibrates, and now she knows she can pay wirelessly at her table.
When she finishes eating, she pays by activating her card and pressing the card's push-button.
Later at the security check for her flight to Paris, Claire hands her passport to the security officer.
The officer opens the passport page, and the light-sensitive switch activates the integrated RFID chip that transmits the passport number to the system.
By touching a sensitive area on the passport, the officer also activates the transfer of biometric data to the computer.
After confirming her passport documents, Claire proceeds to the gate.
This scenario relies, of course, on a somewhat idealised vision of a ubiquitous infrastructure.
However, what we hope it illustrates is how awareness and control methods can be integrated into everyday usage of RFID.
Current tag technologies do not provide such visible reader activity feedback .
Nor do current tags provide a control mechanism to allow or disallow a reader to access the information content on the tag.
This paper is about tag technology and the affordances our new designs have in terms of privacy and security.
As a technology contribution, we believe it is important to stress that our designs are not only accessible, but easily understandable, reproducible, and extendable by others.
They have also sparked interest and discussion.
We published an article with the step-by-step instructions of how to build our basic RFID tag and reader detector on a DIY community website3.
We received electronic4 feedback, and later face to face feedback  about experiments and observations by people that were curious about our technology.
Among these responses were the following types of feedback: * Tags proved easy to build and vary.
Various others not only rebuilt our RFID tag designs, but proposed alternative solutions .
Surprisingly to us, this included people with no prior experience in electronic hardware .
They also exchanged suggestions of where to buy material.
They asked many questions about details of RFID technology .
People described their observations of RFID in everyday situations.
For example, one described how readers at transit stations can detect large amounts of tags simultaneously.
Another described details about the maximum distances of where their RFID cards were detected by RFID readers.
Others described the kind of RFID-enabled cards they personally use , and their experiences with them .
People were opinionated about RFID technology use, especially about its most recent integration into passports.
They described their lack of control, e.g., their inability to do anything against RFID introduced in passports and drivers licences.
Yet people also made positive points, where they discussed the usefulness of integrating RFID into governmental documents.
Our feedback illustrates how our inexpensive and simple tag designs expedited explorations, observations, and discussions around current and our proposed RFID designs, even by technically inexperienced people.
Our design suggestions are enabling rather than predictive.
We do not know yet how our proposed awareness and control techniques might be integrated into existing and future RFID systems.
For reader awareness, perhaps the simpler visual feedback mechanisms would become a reasonable default for personal RFID tags.
Depending on the sensitivity of data on the tag, more noticeable feedback might be included.
Similarly, the control mechanisms default might rely on implicit sensing, but add more explicit user confirmation as sensitivity of stored information increased.
Of course, our redesigned tags are only one of many important mechanisms safeguarding the security and transparency of deployed RFID systems.
We expect them to be interwoven with other security mechanisms, such as cryptographic methods, secure back-end databases, and adequate security policies defining privacy and access .
Moreover, there are many remaining questions that need to be answered before any significant real-world deployment.
For example, would feedback about RFID activity alleviate people's perception of RFID security?
Would it change their mental models of the inner workings of this technology?
How would people handle  the gained control of their ongoing RFID activity?
What realworld constraints and contextual issues must we consider when we choose particular RFID designs?
Our work opens the door to these and other questions.
One argument against the inclusion of more complex interactive functions in RFID tags is the increased costs associated with the production process .
Depending on the technology used, our RFID tags could be more expensive.
Cost is a critical factor for the high quantity of tags required for supply chain management .
However, costs may not be as important when looking specifically at RFID tags in passports or EDLs.
In these cases, the extra costs might be warranted with the increased control over security of privacy.
Interaction costs in frequent and long term situations.
When RFID cards are in daily and frequent use, the user's interaction costs may become problematic.
The many activity notifications  could become annoying.
The required manual activation of the tag  may become an irritant.
Several different paths can help lessen this problem.
First, as with any technological deployment, the use of a particular method must be designed to be appropriate to its setting.
Second, we could put this power into the hands of the people, allowing them to choose a preferred awareness and control mechanism .
Third, we could combine both implicit control mechanisms  to provide a general safeguard, while including more explicit control mechanisms .
Our methods only give feedback about ongoing RFID reading activity.
They do not detail the content of the transmitted information.
This is possible, although we have not done it.
For example, small powered displays on the tag can show the information being read or, as mentioned previously, that information could be relayed to a cell phone or PDA.
This could be valuable for situations where people do not know what the card actually contains.
Our illustrated RFID tags are larger than commonly-used commercial tags and cards.
However, this is an artifact of prototyping.
Industrial manufacturing of much smaller tag designs is possible by using micro components assembled on printed circuit boards .
Indeed, we built several of our RFID tags in a small form-factor PCB design .
For example, Figure 9 illustrates our touch-sensitive  and lightsensitive  RFID tags.
Many other form factors and designs are feasible, as well as more advanced circuits to read sensors, detect switches, and control RFID communication.
RFID technology is inevitably intervening in our everyday life.
It is time to rethink and question common properties and characteristics of this technology.
By deconstructing RFID technology and questioning some of its common properties, we were able to explore a variety of alternative tag designs.
They also give people information control about the tag-reader activity - explicitly by pressing a button or touching the tag, or implicitly by activating or deactivating the tag in response to light, orientation, or proximity.
These advanced RFID tags give people control over the activity of a technology that is usually experienced only passively and often occurs invisibly.
The combination of both awareness and control mechanisms into the design of RFID tags gives individuals the means to assert some sort of agency over this ubiquitous technology.
