Forgotten tasks may be as trivial as returning library books or as crucial as taking important medication.
Being able to remember these tasks can be the difference between having to send people to care homes and enabling them to age in place, in the comfort of their own home.
Even though many people with care needs would benefit from assisted living technology, uptake is still comparatively low .
In order to increase adoption and ensure successful implementation of assistive living technology, we need to provide users with effective, accessible solutions that are enjoyable to use.
These solutions need to be adaptable to a set of devices and interaction modalities that will depend on user needs, abilities and preferences as well as on available services and budgets.
The home is a special interaction space.
Even though it is private and intimate, it is often shared with other people .
A home is a very personal space for everybody who lives there, not just for the intended user of the system but also for a spouse, children or even visitors.
This means that we need to design reminders that are both useable and acceptable to a range of direct end users, i.e.
Reminders need to be adapted to multiple, sometimes conflicting, stakeholder needs , they need to be appropriate in a variety of changing contexts and they need to accommodate a wide range of ability levels .
Existing approaches to reminder design only partly address these complex issues.
There is a clear need for guidelines that allow designers and developers  to create configurable and multimodal reminder systems which can rise to the challenges of home care.
The systems that are discussed in the literature on alerts in the work place , telephone-based health care reminders , and general reminders in the home  are often unimodal, and personalisation is limited to one or two parameters, such as preferred times for reminder calls.
On the other hand, studies that take a wider view of design issues, such as , tend to focus more on home monitoring of frail older people than on reminding.
While there has been a lot of research on the usability of reminders and alarms in the work context, the home has been somewhat neglected despite the importance of reminder systems for telecare and assistive living systems.
We conducted a comprehensive mixed-methods study into the requirements for useable and acceptable reminders in the home.
The study consisted of a questionnaire , 6 focus groups, and 7 home tour interviews.
Our results highlight the need for highly flexible and contextualized multimodal and multi-device reminder solutions that build on existing successful strategies for remembering in and around the home.
We suggest that developers of home care reminder systems should design for diversity, context, priorities, autonomy, shared spaces, and optimal care.
People with disabilities or chronic long-term illnesses are increasingly being cared for at home in the community .
Home care and assistive living solutions are crucial for enabling this user group to stay active and independent for longer in their own homes .
Reminder systems can be an important part of the assisted living telecare package.
Many service users have problems remembering information, tasks, and chores in and around the home.
This can be a consequence of cognitive ageing, the conditions for which they need care, or the medications they need to take.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
With the present study, we address this gap in the literature by studying reminder design using a rich mixed-methods approach in order to understand both trends and deeper social context.
Themes that emerged from a survey and focus groups were cross-validated in the home.
We worked with a broad range of users, including older people and people with sensory impairments.
We distil our findings into six design guidelines that can be used to improve the design of future homecare systems.
While it is tempting to use only those modalities for reminders where acuity is relatively well-preserved, it is in fact important to make reminders in all modalities as accessible as possible to people with varying abilities.
For example, even though touch can function as an alert to take medication, users might not remember which medication they need to take or how many of each pill are required.
This information might need to be presented graphically or sonically.
Designers need to work with care professionals to devise a strategy for accommodating different levels of sensory impairment.
An example for such a strategy for tasks that require dexterity can be found in .
Interventions for people who are cared for in the community are complex .
Many people require care for two or more different conditions, which may or may not be causally related.
Reminder systems must be able to accommodate such holistic care plans and the team of formal and informal carers that manages them .
Due to the potential deluge of reminders for such complex interventions, it is important to choose delivery options carefully, otherwise vital messages may be missed and the system will not be effective.
We advocate a person-centred approach to care similar to  where needs and preferences are regularly reviewed and stored in a format such that they can be easily communicated to relevant stakeholders including end users.
To accommodate this approach, reminder systems need to be highly modular, flexible and easy to configure.
Care plans change over time not just because of new care needs but also due to changes in the available devices and services.
Care provision may need to shift from people to technology because the budget for formal carers is cut or informal carers are no longer able to provide the level of care they used to give.
People's beliefs and behaviours can also change.
Users who were highly sceptical of technology may become advocates after having experienced the difference a well-designed system can make and vice versa.
Good reminder systems need to be able to accommodate these changes.
Making reminders multimodal is particularly important given that the acuity of all sensory modalities declines with age , often as a consequence of the condition that caused the original care needs.
For example, diabetes may lead to impaired vision and, due to peripheral neuropathy , to an impaired sense of touch.
The number of people with both significant vision and hearing impairment is set to increase dramatically in the future, partly as a consequence of the ageing population .
Alerts that are based on touch and smell are particularly important for these users.
In the home care reminder context, we define users as people who choose  to receive reminders.
Direct end users can include the person with care needs, family, friends and formal carers.
For example, a system might remind all members of the household of an appointment, or it might remind the formal carer of tasks such as checking the medicine cabinet.
Stakeholders are defined as those who can directly or indirectly specify requirements and add, delete or change reminders or the information the system produces.
Examples include the health and social care team that manages care, the providers of specialist housing, telecare equipment providers, informal carers such as friends and neighbours, and people who live in the same home but are not directly involved in care.
Many potential conflicts regarding reminder delivery can arise between users and other stakeholders.
For example, a user may prefer auditory reminders, but due to a hearing impairment, these reminders need to be so loud that the neighbours can hear.
A formal carer may have decided to use a loud beep to remind a user to lock the doors at night because this has been identified as a safety threat, but the user perceives this sound to be highly disruptive and disturbing.
These conflicts need to be resolved so that the reminders remain effective while still being acceptable to the user and those sharing the home interaction space.
Since reminder systems are multi-stakeholder, it is particularly important to identify clear pathways for resolving any conflicts.
These pathways need to include explicit mechanisms for seeking user input and validating the selected options.
The different goals and needs that underpin each conflict need to be identified .
In resolving conflicts, clinical efficacy needs to be balanced with an acceptable user experience and institutional requirements.
Ideally, the care team should have a variety of devices, modalities and strategies at their disposal.
For example, potentially disruptive auditory reminders could be delivered straight to the user's hearing aid.
Disruptive beeps might be replaced by a light next to the user's bed that changes colour when the doors are locked.
In order to inform the design of configurable, adaptable reminder systems for the home, we sought to determine * What users need to be reminded of, i.e.
Our user requirements work consisted of a full year of user engagement activities with various user panels , social work professionals, charities and groups specialising in sensory impairment, and technologists and technicians working in the area of assistive technologies.
We designed a mixed methods approach including a questionnaire , focus groups  to more fully understand trends and responses in the questionnaire data and home tour interviews  to probe how social and contextual issues of living can influence the usability and acceptability of reminders in situ.
Using any one of these techniques on its own is common in HCI but each has its own well-reported problems.
Surveys can be cheap to administer but often have a poor return rate.
It is difficult to encourage people to answer anything but forced choice questions, and it is hard to get respondents to explain their choices.
Other techniques are often required to understand quantitative response patterns.
Focus groups are a good way for HCI researchers to probe issues in more depth and to obtain feedback on prototypes.
In discussion, participants will share and elaborate on stories and insights that do not fit into the boxes of a questionnaire form.
It is also much easier for users to comment on reminder technology if they can see, hear and touch, and smell examples.
However, what people claim they do may be different from what they actually do.
An ethnographic component is needed to address this issue.
Cultural probes and in depth interviews in the home have been shown as successful ways to engage with older users .
In this study, we used home tours to gather a rich contextualized understanding of how people use reminders in their own homes and the social and physical context in which remembering succeeds or fails.
Successful reminder strategies could be demonstrated in practice and important details could be observed and recorded  that might not be reported during a focus group.
The temporal sequence of the three methods was designed to support our overall research strategy.
The main online data collection for the survey finished before the focus groups began, so that these results could inform the focus groups.
Likewise, the home tours started after a few focus groups had already taken place.
Therefore, the researcher who conducted the home tours was already highly sensitized to different reminder strategies, which made it easier to observe them in context.
Using these three techniques in combination provided a much richer understanding than any one of the techniques alone.
While the survey enabled us to establish the range of preferences for devices and modalities that should be accommodated in reminder system design, the focus groups allowed us to discuss the pros and cons of different strategies in depth, and the home tours gave a vivid picture of reminder strategies people really use in their homes.
We included younger, middle-aged and older users with and without sensory impairments in our study because people of all ages can be stakeholders in home care systems.
For example, some of our younger participants had sensory impairments or cared for people with sensory impairments.
We were also interested in generational differences in reminder preferences.
Since today's middleaged users will be tomorrow's older generation, reminder solutions that would be difficult to deploy widely today might be almost universally acceptable in a decade's time.
Since we wanted to explore the diversity of the design space, we chose a broad sampling strategy.
Online and postal versions of our questionnaire were distributed through email, social networking sites, Web sites, local user panels, senior's forums, charities and community health partnerships across Scotland.
Our sample was deliberately skewed towards older people, as they are more likely to require home care.
More information about the survey can be found in .
The questionnaire was designed based on previously validated topics and question formats as well as in-depth qualitative work with older users on assistive technology and home care projects by the research team .
We used a balance of open ended and multiple choice questions and piloted the questionnaire with older people from our user panel.
The online survey can be found at http://www.multimemohome.com/get_involved.
To ensure legibility, the postal version was typeset with a large font.
We present an analysis of all 379 questionnaires  that had been returned by the end of July 2010.
The return rate for the postal questionnaire was 19%.
The ratio of female to male respondents was 2:1.
Only 3% lived in sheltered accommodation.
Compared to the general UK population , our sample is highly computer literate.
While only 24% of UK citizens aged 60 and above use the Internet regularly, 75% of our older sample were online .
Nevertheless, our older sample is just as likely to use a mobile phone regularly as the average older person .
20% of respondents reported problems with their vision, 17% had hearing difficulties and 4% each had a reduced sense of touch or smell.
Of the people with a care condition 24% had heart conditions including angina, 18% had mobility problems, often due to arthritis and 17% had hypertension.
We conducted seven Home Tours  with users in their own homes.
Each tour consisted of an interview and a tour of the home to capture current reminder strategies.
Interview responses and the home owner's verbal comments during the home tour were recorded using a digital audio recorder and later transcribed for analysis.
Photographs were taken of objects/items that were used to remember things and strategies that were used to remind people to do things.
The photos were stored digitally and tagged in relation to the context of the interview and observations.
More detailed information about the Home Tours can be found in .
We conducted 6 focus groups  with older adults, assistive technology technicians and younger adults with sensory impairments over a period of three months, starting after the online questionnaire survey had gone live.
This was feasible because the survey was already based on extensive previous qualitative work.
The focus groups were structured around the main research questions outlined above.
Reminder devices and modalities were illustrated using technology probes for four of the five modalities covered in the survey - speech, non-speech audio, touch, and smell.
Participants were also asked to respond to each of the research questions on `sticky notes' and organise the resulting themes into hierarchies of importance to them.
This was used to stimulate further discussion.
The same researcher acted as facilitator across each focus group.
An additional researcher took notes, observed and demonstrated speech technology probes.
41% of older respondents in the questionnaire said that they forgot to do certain things in and around the home often or all the time, as opposed to 32% of middle-aged and 17% of younger respondents.
However, when specifying what tasks they forget, older people ticked fewer boxes than younger or middle-aged people.
All age groups were equally likely to forget medications and appointments.
The most popular responses across the focus groups for the things forgotten around the home fall into five groups: chores around the house , preparing to go out , appointments, health care-related tasks , and ambient or place-specific reminders .
The things that cause people to forget tasks were similar across all methods used.
Memory problems, failing to use reminder strategies, and distractions, e.g.
People also stated that they tended to forget tasks that were not important or urgent.
The only significant difference between age groups in the survey was that middle-aged people were more likely to say they were too busy  than younger  or older  people .
Stress, tiredness, and low mood were cited as further reasons for forgetting.
Some respondents mentioned that physical problems prevented them from remembering or completing tasks.
These problems were not just caused by ill health, but also by the medications people were taking.
In the multiple-choice items of the survey we mainly explored paper-based and technology-based reminders.
Figure 1 shows how often our respondents use six representative strategies.
The other three reminder types emerged from the open questionnaire items, the focus groups and the home tours.
Diaries and calendars were used as memory aids for information about past events needed to plan future ectivities.
One couple noted down when they had last replaced watch batteries so they knew when the next replacement was due, and one person recorded information gained at important medical appointments to help him manage his care.
Calendars and diaries were the most popular, followed by to-do lists and sticky notes.
In the questionnaire sample, older people were more likely to use diaries and calendars, and were less likely to set alarms or use an electronic personal organizer .
While the survey revealed the central role of paper-based reminders, the home tours allowed us to fully document the complexity of such systems.
Many people had multiple calendars, diaries and notebooks and complex systems for annotating them and working between them .
This could involve one calendar for the family events and appointments and one for an individual's activities.
It also included strategies for copying selected diary appointments on to the calendar while some remained in the diary only.
Temporal reminder strategies emerged as central throughout our research.
A common strategy was to integrate tasks that would otherwise be forgotten into routines, e.g.
This plays to older people's strengths, because this age group found it particularly easy to remember daily chores.
Temporal cues could be external, such as radio programs that served as indicators of the time.
The importance of a close fit between reminder strategy and daily life is illustrated by the large variety of physical reminders, which were a prominent feature of our home tours.
Many people left visually meaningful or salient objects such as packaging in places where they would noticed.
For example, people left out empty food packaging to remind them to log their daily food intake on their computer.
Other examples include leaving library books by the door as a prompt to return them .
Technological reminder strategies such as pill boxes were supplemented by the physical reminder of empty medication packaging near the television.
Kitchen surfaces such as a fridge or a blackboard/whiteboard  often acted as a todo list.
The surfaces were used for leaving messages to other family members, detailing shopping lists and posting reminders of upcoming appointments and things to remember to take out of the house.
Physical context and spatial location even affected the reminder system used.
A questionnaire respondent listed, for example, " shopping list on the freezer door.
A to-do list on my mobile phone with alarms attached to the individual items  " .
66% of questionnaire respondents who expressed a modality preference wanted visual reminders, 37% liked speech, 30% non-speech audio, 23% touch and 3% smell.
Device preferences were even more varied than modality preferences.
83% of respondents expressed a preference for one or more devices.
The main difference in device-related preferences between age groups concerned phones.
40% of our older sample wanted reminders to be delivered by landline phones, whereas fewer than 5% of younger and 8% middle-aged users favoured this mode of delivery .
In the questionnaire, we collected extensive quantitative data on device and modality preferences.
First, we asked respondents whether they would prefer to receive visual, tactile, olfactory, speech, or non-speech audio reminders.
21% of questionnaire respondents did not state any preference, 46% expressed a preference for one modality, 21% named two modalities and 12% found three or more modalities acceptable.
Only a third of those older people who liked reminders on landlines also wanted to receive them on mobile phones.
To investigate associations between devices and modalities, we looked at the device preferences of 174 respondents who selected only one modality for reminders .
For each device, we determined how many of the people who had chosen this device wanted to receive visual, haptic, spoken, or other auditory reminders.
Smell was excluded because there were too few data points.
The results are summarized in Figure 4.
Visual reminders dominate for screens and desktops.
Of the two mobile devices, mobile phone and watch, the watch shows the greatest range of desired modalities.
Mobile phones, on the other hand, appear to be mainly associated with visual reminders such as text messages.
Speech and sound figure prominently in reminders delivered via TV and landline.
In the qualitative component of our work, five strong themes emerged regarding the type of reminders people would find useful and acceptable: adaptability, integration, privacy, accessibility, and choice.
Audio reminders, in particular, can startle or scare users if played unexpectedly.
Screens should be placed where users are most likely to see them, such as in the living room or kitchen.
Many people favoured the idea of a controllable panel in the hallway.
Users also liked the idea of more ambient display technologies  that act as generic reminders.
Surprisingly, location was also an important factor for phone-based reminder systems.
People were concerned that they might not be able to get to a landline phone in time or that they might not be able to hear mobile phone reminders because they did not know where their mobile was.
A final aspect relevant to the theme of seamless integration was robustness.
Quite a few users doubted the reliability of technology, and they were wary of the disruption that a malfunctioning reminder system was likely to cause.
Users wanted a system that can be adapted to their own preferences and capabilities.
Several survey respondents highlighted using paper calendars and diaries instead of technology, extending strategies people already successfully use.
Some also wanted to receive reminders by post, when appropriate.
Speech output in particular should be configurable.
Individual reactions to gender, politeness, accent and length of message were very strong and varied.
The family home tour revealed clear generational effects.
The middle-aged mother discussed solutions that could exploit her mobile phone, the young children were very positive towards wearable devices and the grandmother was keen to exploit mainstream technologies such as their TVs.
The youngest participant summarized the need for personalisation as follows.
Conflicts due to privacy and shared interaction spaces were highlighted in particular during the home tours - they did not emerge as strongly in the focus group and survey components.
I would need to be able to pick which ones went to my phone  so that only I could see them."
Many users raised concerns about usability issues such as the font size of visual reminders and intelligibility of audio reminders.
However, this does not mean that people with a visual or auditory impairment would not use visual or auditory reminders, In our focus groups with people with severe hearing impaired people , one person said "Some speech is okay with my hearing aid ...
Thus, even for people with severe sensory impairment, the choice of delivery modality is not straightforward.
Users wanted a reminder system to be easily integrated into their daily life and their physical surroundings.
Overall, modality preferences depended did not just depend on the modality itself, but also on the amount of information to be conveyed with beeps and vibration favoured for more simple alerts.
Some users wanted to be able to remove reminders once the associated task had been completed while others would like a view of the history of reminders they have attended to.
Participants reacted positively to the idea of smell and tactile reminders but this may have been due to the novelty of these delivery methods.
This limits the extent to which mobilephone based location-sensitive solutions like PlaceMail  can be deployed with the current generation of older people.
Personalisation is particularly important if users are to successfully integrate the reminders into their identity as a person with a chronic condition.
For example, in their study of the mobile health management system MAHI, Mamykina et al.
This was only possible because MAHI was sufficiently flexible.
We would expect to see a similar picture for any deployed reminder system.
The associations we found between age groups and devices or modalities are tendencies, not rules.
We would strongly caution against creating reminder technology packages that are mainly differentiated by the intended age group.
Each person weighs the tradeoffs between modalities differently, and therefore, should be able to choose from a range of options.
Age might however influence the interaction techniques that users are familiar and comfortable with and therefore find most acceptable.
Since our older user group consists of people over the age of 60, their preferences provide a good estimate of the design space for accommodating the oldest old of the next decade.
Technologies that are required to cater for today's older users may be all but obsolete by the time our middle-aged group might require assistive living solutions a couple of decades from now.
Many people with sensory impairments wished to receive reminders in the impaired modality.
Their wishes should be accommodated as much as feasible, because reminders delivered using unwanted modalities are more likely to be ignored or switched off.
Designers therefore have an obligation to provide visual, auditory, and haptic reminders that are accessible and usable even for people with mild to moderate impairments of these modalities.
People who configure reminder systems  also need to be aware of this so that modalities are not excluded from a tailor-made solution purely because of a known impairment.
In order to support multimodal multi-device reminder delivery, systems should monitor what devices are currently available and people who configure systems should monitor what the users' current needs and preferences are.
If there are any significant changes, systems should be adaptable with a minimum of effort.
An example of such a highly configurable system is presented in .
Reminder strategies are only effective if people can adhere to them.
Adherence can be affected by health problems.
For example, a person with depression may choose not to act on reminders when feeling low.
A few users argued that their needs were so complex that they could not be met by a reminder system alone.
For example, one older male respondent was a diabetic who sometimes forgot his insulin.
Since double doses of insulin can result in complications, what this person needed was not simply a reminder to take his insulin, but also a way of monitoring that he had already taken it.
The very routines that are crucial for establishing successful temporal reminder strategies can also interfere with adherence.
Participants noted that existing habits can interfere with new habits that need to be established as a response to care needs.
Conversely, a lack of routines means that users lacked a temporal scaffold to which tasks and events could be attached.
Some of the respondents who did not state any modality or device preferences disliked the idea of automated reminders because this would result in an external locus of control, i.e.
Others did not think they needed them, reflected in comments like "don't feel I am in this category" .
For these users, reminder systems were a threat to their identity and autonomy.
Our methodology allowed us to develop a rich picture of the breadth and complexity of the design space involved in creating reminder solutions for people from a range of age groups and with complex care conditions.
We found that if novel reminder systems are to be usable and acceptable they will need to exploit existing metaphors and strategies of reminding.
Knowledge of the home and the structure of daily life is also required to ensure that that reminder systems can be seamlessly integrated into users' lives.
In this section, we synthesize our findings into a set of six design guidelines.
These are intended to be used by health and social care professionals to inform their prescription and deployment of assistive technologies involving reminder systems, and by designers and technologists to produce systems that are more likely to be used and accepted in the homes of users in the future.
Reminders need to be highly personalizable, because one size does not fit all.
Contextualization figures heavily in the successful reminder strategies that emerged from the data.
Reminders are most effective when delivered at the right location, at the right time and through the right device.
Systems should be configurable based on the devices that are acceptable and available to the user.
For example, many people favored reminder screens at the hub of the home, which is often the kitchen  or the living room.
These can be used to remind inhabitants of general tasks and schedules, while a screen by the front door can be used to alert people to security precautions when leaving the house, for example.
Temporal contextualization is also a powerful reminder strategy.
Our results suggest that integrating tasks and reminders with a person's habits and routines is key to effective, personalized reminder solutions.
Such integration requires sophisticated planning algorithms that combine knowledge of the user's schedule and habits with information about the nature and duration of the tasks that need to be supported .
This is also the point where data from monitoring devices like bed sensors can be integrated.
With this study, we aimed to scope out a design space that would reflect the needs and preferences of people without major cognitive impairments.
We made this decision because  many chronic conditions that require home care involve at most mild cognitive impairment and  telecare solutions for older people may be implemented before they are needed to ensure the systems are in place and familiar to users when they are needed.
Detailed specific guidelines for adapting interfaces to people progressing through dementia can be found in .
It is also worth noting that our sample consisted of native speakers of English.
Therefore, appropriate care should be taken when extending them to different ethnic or cultural groups.
Reminders should reflect the urgency of the task.
This helps users decide whether and when to attend to the reminder.
It also prevents overload, which may result in users ignoring reminders on principle.
Users should be able to choose appropriate modalities depending on urgency.
For example, a loud spoken reminder could warn the user that the stove needs to be switched off urgently, while ambient lights might be as a gentle reminder of an upcoming appointment.
Autonomy is a fundamental issue in the design of pervasive technology for healthy ageing .
Reminder systems should support users as autonomous agents who are in control of the system, not the other way around.
For example, users should be able to silence reminders that are no longer required.
Another important option are simple `reminders to remember'.
These more ambient reminders are similar to reminders that people without care needs use, which makes them potentially less stigmatizing and, crucially, support users' ability to remember tasks themselves.
The guidelines presented have emerged from a large study where a common set of research questions was investigated using three highly complementary user requirements methods; a survey, focus groups and home tours.
Emergent themes were cross-validated and triangulated across all three sources of data.
Including a large postal element to our survey allowed us to reach a wide range of older users with and without care needs and sensory impairments.
The focus groups allowed us to target specific user groups more precisely and to obtain feedback on somewhat unusual reminder strategies using technology probes.
Finally, home tours allowed us to explore reminder strategies and needs in the homes of users and to gain a richer understanding of the social and physical context that might influence what is and is not acceptable in electronic reminder systems.
The next step is to test our design guidelines in practice.
To this end, we plan to evaluate different multimodal reminder strategies under controlled laboratory conditions, before implementing our findings and guidelines in a pilot reminder system that will be evaluated in longitudinal home trials with users.
Throughout this empirical validation phase, we will be working with system configuration experts, health care professionals, and end users to achieve the highly flexible and adaptable assistive living reminder solutions that users both want and need.
Given our findings, we have argued that reminder systems for assistive living need to be designed for diversity, context, priorities, autonomy, shared interaction spaces, and optimal care.
In order to achieve these goals, reminder systems need to be configurable to accommodate a range of needs, preferences, and impairments.
Once such a system has been set up, it can then be easily adapted to changing care needs and contexts of care.
As soon as other people share the home with the intended recipient of the home care reminders, issues of privacy and obtrusiveness arise.
Reminders that cannot be easily interpreted by visitors provide privacy, especially if users do not want to be seen as needing care.
For example, while spoken reminders are explicit, clear indicators of care needs, the meaning of non-speech sounds such as Earcons is opaque unless explained .
At the same time, reminders should not unduly disrupt other people living in the home.
While reminders that can only be perceived by the recipient, like haptic messages, do not disrupt other members of the household, the complexity of information that can be transmitted may be too limited to be useful.
It is particularly important to consult with all relevant stakeholders to ensure the right balance is struck.
We would also like to thank Falkirk Sensory Services Centre, Hearing Concern Scotland, the Centre for the Older Person's Agenda, and Queen Margaret University for their support.
McBryan, T. and Gray, P. A Model-Based Approach to Supporting Configuration in Ubiquitous Systems, In Proc.
International Conference on Design, Specification and Verification of Interactive Systems, LNCS 5136, Springer , 167-180.
McGee-Lennon, M.R., Wolters, M. and McBryan, T. Auditory Reminders in the Home.
Requirements engineering for home care technology.
McGee-Lennon, M.R., Wolters, M. K. and Brewster, S. Designing Reminders for the Home - The Role of Home Tours.
Morris, M., Lundell, J., Dishman, E., and Needham, B.. New Perspectives on Ubiquitous Computing from Ethnographic Study of Elders with Cognitive Decline Proc.
Aware technologies for aging in place: understanding user needs and attitudes.
Persad, U., Langdon, P. and Clarkson, J. Characterising user capabilities to support inclusive design evaluation.
Pollack, M. Intelligent Technology for an Aging Population: The Use of AI to Assist Elders with Cognitive Impairment.
Ritchie, J. and Lewis, J. Qualitative Research Methods.
SENSE for deafblind people UK.
Human factors in alarm design, Taylor and Francis, London UK, 1994.
S. Waller, P. Langdon, and P. Clarkson.
Using disability data to estimate design exclusion.
Watson, M. and Sanderson, P. Sonification Supports Eyes-Free Respiratory Monitoring and Task TimeSharing.
Designing usable and acceptable reminders for the home.
Arking, R. Biology of Aging.
Biem, H. J., Turnell, R. W. and D'Arcy, C. Computer telephony: automated calls for medical care.
Journal of Assistive Technology, In Press .
Consolvo, S., Roessler, P., Shelton, B. E., LaMarca, A., Schilit, B., and Bly, S. Technology for Care Networks of Elders.
National Service Framework for Older People, London: The Stationery Office .
Deshpande, A. D., Harris-Hayes, M. and Schootman, M. Epidemiology of diabetes and diabetes-related complications.
Garde, S. and Knaup, P. Requirements engineering in health care: the example of chemotherapy planning in pediatric oncology, Requirements Engineering 11 , 265-278.
House of Lords Science and Technology Committee.
