Recommender systems have been developed to address the abundance of choice we face in taste domains  when shopping or going out.
However, consumers currently struggle to evaluate the appropriateness of recommendations offered.
With collaborative filtering, recommendations are based on people's ratings of items.
In this paper, we propose that the usefulness of recommender systems can be improved by including more information about recommenders.
We conducted a laboratory online experiment with 100 participants simulating a movie recommender system to determine how familiarity of the recommender, profile similarity between decision-maker and recommender, and rating overlap with a particular recommender influence the choices of decision-makers in such a context.
While familiarity in this experiment did not affect the participants' choices, profile similarity and rating overlap had a significant influence.
These results help us understand the decision-making processes in an online context and form the basis for user-centered social recommender system design.
Recommender systems, online advice-seeking, social networking, decision-making H.5.3.
Information interfaces and presentation : Group and Organization Interfaces - Collaborative Computing.
In effect, choice has become a burden .
Although recommender systems aim to filter choices according to the consumers' preferences, they usually do not provide any or very limited explanations as to where these filtered results come from.
For instance, consider the following scenario.
Mary has just come home from a long week of work and wants to relax at home with a DVD from her local DVD rental shop.
Unfortunately, she does not have a clear idea of what she wants to watch, and her DVD shop has about 3000 titles on offer from all kinds of genres, directors and years.
Normally she would ask her best friend Jane for a recommendation, because Jane likes the same films and goes to the cinema more often.
But what if Jane is not around?
Mary's DVD shop offers a movie recommender system that asks her to rate a couple of films and then generates recommendations based on that.
Mary rates 40 films, which takes her about 10 minutes, and in the end receives ... 316 recommendations!
Collaborative filter RS seek to solve the problem of choice overload by emulating the social process of seeking recommendations from friends, while drawing on the data in a large user database .
But merely providing filtered lists of available choices is not the same as receiving a recommendation from a friend .
Without any explanation or justification, the user of a RS struggles to convert this data into meaningful information.
This is a problem a RS should solve rather than create.
Similarly, since people inherently know which of their friends to trust for a particular recommendation, RS should imitate this naturally occurring evaluation and decision-making process.
It is therefore necessary to understand how people arrive at their decisions in such domains and which recommender characteristics are important to them.
The background section of this paper presents a brief overview of RS.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
The recommender experiment section then details the experimental method and procedure of our study with 100 participants.
Our results show that profile similarity, in combination with rating overlap, had a significant impact on the participants' choices.
We proceed to use these results to show how user profile similarity and rating overlap visualizations can aid decision-making and present how basing recommendation explanations on profiles can help consumers judge the appropriateness of recommendations they receive.
This is revelatory about online decision-making processes and opens interesting new research avenues for social system design.
RS have been deployed in various e-commerce contexts, such as book or music shopping like Amazon , general rating sites , and specific rating sites such as MovieLens .
RS aggregate the information received and redirect it to the appropriate recipients.
Depending on the recommendation strategies or algorithms employed, users are presented with options based on their personal preference profiles identified through ratings, keywords, usage history, content analysis, item to item or user to user correlation, to name just a few.
While many strategies for computing recommendations have been explored such as item-based collaborative filtering , Bayesian networks  and factor analysis , user-user collaborative filtering  comes closest to emulating real world recommendations because they are based on user rather than item matching.
Recommendations are generated for a given user by comparing her existing ratings to those of all other users in the database.
In doing so, a neighborhood of similar users is established, and based on that rating predictions are computed for items that the user has not yet rated, but her closest neighbors have.
The assumption behind this strategy is that, if Mary and John have rated several items in a similar fashion, chances are that they have a taste overlap.
Thus items that John has rated highly, but which Mary has not yet acquired might be of interest to her.
RS research to date has predominantly focused on designing algorithms for more effective and efficient computation of rating predictions .
Precision effectiveness is tested through existing rating data sets, where part of the rating set is deleted, and the prediction results from algorithms are compared against the real ratings.
Prediction efficiency is concerned with the computational cost in terms of time and resources for calculating these predictions.
Even trust has been examined from an algorithmic perspective .
The research approach presented in this paper, however, is to take a step back from the above evaluation approaches.
Instead, we examine the psychology literature of advice-seeking and decision-making to establish the purpose and process of seeking recommendations as a basis for designing RS.
The advice-seeking literature to date has predominantly focused on objective domains where advice can be classified as right or wrong .
Generally, advice-seeking is seen as a problem of weighting of different information sources to come to a final conclusion.
One of the key questions is how decision makers arrive at their weightings.
The classic approach to this problem argues that "decision makers are exquisitely rational beings in solving judgment and choice problems" .
Studies have shown that advice-seekers tend to place a greater weight on their own opinion than that of the advisor  .
The assumption is that advice-seekers can assess what they know and the strength of their opinions, which they are not able to do for the opinions of others.
Related to that is that the confidence in one's opinion depends on how much evidence can be retrieved that supports it .
Whereas the benefit of combining opinions in matters of fact is well understood, the same is not true for matters of taste .
Simple aggregation of opinions in taste domains raises conceptual difficulties as people are entitled to different opinions on movies, music or restaurants.
Yaniv  argues that the most promising strategy to examine these factors in taste domains is to consider the personal match between decision maker and recommender, assuming that the greater the similarity between them, the greater the impact and benefit of advice received.
A recent qualitative study into advice-seeking in taste domains  has shown that decision-makers tend to consult familiar advisors, for a number of reasons.
Applied to the scenario in the introduction, these reasons are: 1.
Mary knows where her tastes overlap with those of Jane, and where not.
Therefore she can judge whether Jane can give appropriate advice or not.
Mary might have previously received good advice from Jane.
If this is the case, ... the risk of receiving bad advice is already reduced for Mary.
Mary does not have to expend a lot of effort in evaluating the advice Jane gives her because of the above.
She can simply rely on it.
Even if Jane did not like the same movies as Mary, being a close friend of Mary's, Jane would probably know Mary's tastes sufficiently well to be able to give her good advice.
Bonhard & Sasse  suggest that matching people according to their profiles in terms of hobbies and interests - rather than item ratings or user neighborhoodstatistical data alone - and explaining recommendations terms of similarity, would make it easier for users to judge the appropriateness of a recommendation.
It is worth noting that Cosley et al.
The aim of the study presented in this paper was to represent similarity in a RS context, and see if familiarity and visualizations of profile similarity and rating overlap would influence the choice of recommendations and their perceived usefulness.
The experiment aimed to explore what makes people trust recommenders in an online context.
More specifically, what combination of familiarity, profile similarity and rating overlap would have an influence on the choices people make in a RS context?
Would a visualization of profile similarity between the decision-maker and recommender influence the decision-maker's choice as suggested before ?
Since every participant would be different in terms of demographic data, interests and tastes, we had to create an experiment that would adapt to each individual participant, while conceptually remaining consistent for everyone.
To do this we devised a film festival scenario where participants receive fictitious movie recommendations from recommenders  that were familiar or unfamiliar, similar or dissimilar, and either had the same or different film tastes .
The individual characteristics of the recommenders were adapted on the fly to each participant.
A total of 100 participants completed the study, which lasted 30-45 minutes, in a computer lab.
The age range varied from 18-44 with a variety of backgrounds including students and professionals.
Social systems like Friendster  or Orkut  are based on people revealing information about themselves such as demographic data, hobbies and interests.
RS, on the other hand, almost exclusively use item ratings to define the user profile for the system.
We propose that RS can be made more effective and usable by appropriating some functionality from such social systems.
They believe that in a brick-and-mortar setting, the process of recommendation is intrinsically dependent on a mutual knowledge of each others' tastes.
A mutually reinforcing dynamic ensues where the recommender's knowledge of the decision maker's tastes are incorporated into the recommendation process.
On the other hand, the decision-maker's personal knowledge and past experience of the advice from a particular recommender helps her evaluate the appropriateness of the recommendation.
RS therefore need to model the user, which involves the representation of her preferences and interests.
Social psychology has shown that people like others who are, among other things, familiar, similar to themselves and with whom they have a history of interaction .
Gigerenzer also suggested that when choosing from multiple options people generally prefer familiar ones  .
They found that participants preferred to cooperate with people with a similar demographic background, yet interest similarity did not have an effect on cooperation.
They suggest that a social recommender system should take demographic data in combination with the interest profile into account, when generating recommendations.
Each participant encountered 4 phases .
In the first phase, each participant was required to provide a basic profile, consisting of demographic data such as age, gender and profession, but also preferences and interests such as preferred film genres, hobbies, leisure activities and music tastes.
In phase 3, participants chose from a series of 48 pairs of films recommended by people who - the scenario made out - had already seen those films.
Phase 4 consisted of a post study questionnaire, where participants rated some of the profiles they had previously seen in terms of familiarity, profile similarity, rating overlap and trust., and provided qualitative data  about the decision reasoning.
Considering that people consult known sources for recommendations, we aimed to simulate familiarity with a recommender through repeated exposure as suggested in social psychology  and the advice-seeking and decision-making literature .
Exposing participants to a limited number of profiles before actually receiving recommendations simulates the process of getting to know that particular profile in relation to one's own.
This variable had two levels, familiar and unfamiliar.
Thus during the rating phase 2 of the experiment , after each rating, participants would see one of four "buddy" profiles and be told whether these buddies had rated those films the same way or not .
A dissimilar profile on the other would show little or no overlap in terms of interests and preferences and significantly differ in terms of demographic data.
Rating overlap was based on the film ratings participants had previously supplied .
Thus recommenders could either have high or low rating overlap, which was visualized in one of two ways .
The text visualization, similar to the profile similarity visualization, showed explicitly highlighted, which films the participant and the recommender had rated in a similar fashion .
The symbol visualization showed a Venn diagram with two overlapping circles.
A large middle circle would represent a large rating overlap  and a small middle circle would represent a small rating overlap.
All possible combinations of these resulted in eight recommender profiles outlined below:
Profile similarity was based on the demographic data, film genre preferences and interests and had two levels, similar or dissimilar.
Thus a similar profile would be the same gender, similar age , same profession and have a significant overlap in their film genre preferences, hobbies and interests.
Profile similarity was visualized through highlighting of the interests or preferences the participant and recommender had in common .
There were three condition types .
Within each of these there were four pairs of choices, where the recommenders differed in each of the independent variables while keeping the other two constant, resulting in 12 different conditions on total .
In addition to the actual choice, we recorded a confidence rating on Likert scale from 1 to 5 for each choice.
Each individual pair was repeated four times to allow within-participant consistency checking and position counter balancing .
Thus, there were a total of 48 recommendation pairs.
Participants saw every recommender profile the same number of times .
Figure 6 below shows an example of a choice between two recommenders that are both familiar  and have similar profiles, but differ in rating overlap.
Since each condition was repeated four times, we were able to conduct a within participant consistency check.
The average  of those four values allowed us to see if the participant consistently chose a particular recommender: * Average = 0 - 0.25 Participant tended to select familiar, similar profile or high rating overlap recommenders Average = 0.5 Participant chose recommenders randomly Average = 0.75 - 1.00 Participant tended to select unfamiliar, dissimilar profile or low rating overlap recommenders.
We wanted to test the prediction of  that in taste domains, people prefer recommendations from familiar over those from unfamiliar recommenders .
This is also in line with the idea in social psychology, that familiar people are judged to be safe and unlikely to cause harm .
Even though participants would not be actual friends with the recommenders they encountered during the phase 2, the idea was that merely having been exposed to their profiles and film ratings might have an influence on the participants' choices.
We wanted to examine if, in an online RS context, similarity in terms of demographic data, interests and hobbies would result in decision makers preferring films from recommenders who are like them.
In phase 3 , participants saw the titles or completely fictitious films and profile information of the recommender.
The reason for not providing any fictitious reviews or synopses was to minimize noise through a possible participant bias towards any film based on the film's properties.
Each recommendation pair was a forced choice, thus the dependent variable was which film the participant would choose and in turn which recommender they would trust.
While this is the underlying assumption behind user collaborative filter RS, it has not yet been tested as a separate independent variable in a quantitative fashion.
Our aim therefore was to confirm that decision-makers in taste domains actually do prefer recommendations from people with a high rating overlap, given other profile characteristics such as familiarity and similarity.
Overall profile similarity and high rating overlap had an effect on the choice of which recommender to trust.
Participants rated the same profiles in terms of trust in phase 4 of the experiment.
Interestingly, the trend for the trust ratings is the same as the one for the profiles chosen, except for the profiles 7 and 8.
Here participants trusted the familiar profile more, whereas they chose the unfamiliar one more often.
Since in each condition recommenders differed in one characteristic, while the others were kept constant it is worth examining the independent variables individually within each condition type.
The results are summarized in Figure 9 below.
We analyzed the data from phase 2 in three ways: 1.
The choice ratios were analyzed using a 2x2x2 repeated measure ANOVA.
The profile choices for each of the three condition types, were analyzed separately with an independent one sample t-test on the within participant consistency average  The confidence ratings were analyzed within each condition type with a 2x2 repeated measures ANOVA.
In ANOVA analysis the effect of familiarity in this experiment was not statistically significant =3.85, p > 0.05.
All other conditions were not statistically significant .
Thus overall our hypothesis 1 was not supported, which is in contrast to Bonhard & Sasse's predictions .
Thus participants generally chose films from recommenders with whom they had a high rating overlap, which supports hypothesis 3.
Examining the different visualizations of rating overlap, text & symbol, it is worth noting that there was a higher tendency to choose films from recommenders with high rating overlap in the symbol conditions  than in the text conditions .
Interestingly, the ANOVA analysis revealed an interesting interaction between familiarity and rating overlap.
No other interaction effects were statistically significant.
For every choice participants provided a confidence rating on a Likert scale from 1 to 5.
We considered a significant deviation of the mean from 3  as examinable.
With the exception of condition 10, all rating means significantly deviated from 3 .
In those conditions it was interesting to observe that participants were more confident in their choices in conditions 5 and 7 where recommenders had a high rating overlap, than in conditions 6 and 8 where recommenders had a low rating overlap with the participant.
The ANOVA analysis of the confidence ratings confirmed a significant influence of the rating overlap variable =236.966, p<0.01.
Similar to the profile similarity conditions, participants were more confident in their choices in conditions 9 and 11, where the recommenders had a similar profile, compared to conditions 10 and 12, where the recommender profile was dissimilar.
The ANOVA analysis of the confidence ratings confirmed a significant influence of profile similarity on the confidence ratings =192.698, p<0.01.
The aim was to check whether participants actually understood that they are familiar/unfamiliar with, similar/dissimilar to and have a high or low rating overlap with a particular recommender.
Examining the ratio of the difference of mean ratings over the maximum rating  for the two recommender profiles for each condition was indicative of whether the variables were understood correctly.
The differences for each variable in each condition type significantly differed from 0 , which means that participants understood the different characteristics correctly.
We also asked participants to rate how important the following are  when making a movie choice decision in such an online recommendation context as well as when they are seeking advice from friends .
Film title, Recommender Age Gender 5.
Similar recommenders will be preferred - this was overwhelmingly supported.
Participants predominantly chose films from recommenders with similar profiles.
This was also confirmed in the choice confidence ratings, the post study questionnaire ratings and qualitative data.
Recommenders with high rating overlap will be preferred - this hypothesis was also supported.
Participants predominantly chose films recommended by people with whom they had a large rating overlap.
This was also confirmed in the post study questionnaire ratings and qualitative data.
In the online context, hobbies were rated as more important  than in a real-world context where they were not important .
Rating/film taste overlap were rated important in both contexts.
Participants could also include comments about reasons for their decisions in this online context, as well as when seeking recommendations in the real world.
A total of 151 comments were examined using content analysis .
In an online context, while there was a universal consensus that rating and film taste overlap was very important; it was revelatory to see that a large number of participants judged profile similarity as an important factor in their decision-making.
Many of those actually mentioned profile similarity and rating overlap together as an important factor .
Further, whether participants had had past experience with recommendations from a particular person played an important role .
The results provide a number of insights into decisionmaking processes in taste domains in an online context.
Our hypotheses and the results were as follows: 1.
Familiar recommenders will be preferred - this hypothesis was not supported.
Thus, combinations of different profile characteristics had a definitive influence on participants' choices, which lends itself to a new view on recommender systems design.
Friends from whom we seek recommendations are not just a source of information for us: we know their tastes, views and they provide not only recommendations, but also justification and explanations for them.
The results of our study suggest that RS should be more than intelligent databases that filter the information according to our taste profile.
Seeking and receiving a recommendation is a social activity that often involves the discussion of a particular item.
Why did the recommender like it?
Would she want to experience/buy it again?
Will the experience change after a while?
Revealing recommenders' profile information and supporting communication between users, brings back this social element.
Thus, integrating recommender with social systems capitalizes on that in that the focus is not limited to recommending items, but also bringing likeminded people together.
This idea goes back to Perugini et al.
Though participants stated in the post study-questionnaire that their relation to the recommender is important in a real-world context, in our experiment, familiarity did not have an effect on the participants' choices.
We believe that this was based on a failure to operationalize the variable successfully.
Brief exposure to profiles in the early phases of the experiment was not sufficient to induce familiarity, even though these were repeated online encounters.
With hindsight, to properly examine the effect of familiarity on decision-making in an online context, profiles of friends or people actually known to participants need to be used.
Interests and preferences and their visualizations, especially with regards to showing similarity are at the core of any social networking application.
Yet RS have to date ignored the potential of visualization, and just displayed rating scores.
Our results demonstrate that recommender characteristics, such as interests and preferences, and not just ratings, are important to decision-makers when choosing taste domain items.
Both the confidence in their choices when high rating overlap combined with a similar profile, as well as the importance rating of hobbies and music tastes in an online context confirm that this information helps consumers judge the appropriateness of a recommendation.
We are not arguing that profile similarity should replace ratings as the core of a recommendation strategy, but it has huge potential to complement rating functionality.
Basing recommendation explanations on people, rather than items relations  or rating statistics used by collaborative filtering, makes it easier for consumers to judge the appropriateness of a recommendation.
While rating overlap is the raison d'etre of collaborative filter-based RS, this is the first experiment to employ a visualization of rating overlap between a single decision maker and a single recommender.
We explored one symbol and one text visualization.
While both had a significant effect on the participants' choices, the symbol visualization had a slightly stronger effect.
In a social recommender system that allows more information to be revealed about a recommender, a decision-maker could choose to see more details about what films exactly she and the recommender agree on.
Our results show that rating overlap in combination with profile similarity can be a powerful source of information for a decision-maker when judging the validity of a recommendation.
Further, these results have shown that participants were more confident in their choices when the recommender had a high rating overlap with them in combination with a similar profile.
This was further confirmed by the post study questionnaire ratings as well as the qualitative data.
In communities of thousands of users this can become quite cumbersome.
RS already match users in order to generate recommendations, but they do not use this information in any other form.
Revealing profile information of a particular user's neighborhood of similar users could not only help the user judge the appropriateness of recommendations, but also allow communication within that neighborhood.
By doing so, a social recommender system would effectively bring back the inherently social element of the recommendation process as suggested by Perugini et al.
To apply this to the scenario introduced in the introduction, if Mary and Jane were both registered with a social movie recommender system, Mary could easily find out about films that Jane has seen lately and liked.
Not only that, but she could also find other people who might be similar to Jane and herself, and thus extend her network of sources of potentially useful recommendations.
Further research should investigate how much actual familiarity with the recommender  influences the decision-making and trust.
Which specific characteristics of a profile are particularly important to consumers and why?
How can profile similarity be incorporated into the recommendation strategy?
There is also the question of privacy, i.e.
Also, how can the combination of rating overlap and profile similarity information be used to combat malicious attacks on or manipulation of RS?
Accounting for taste therefore is not merely about considering item ratings.
Since taste is an intricate phenomenon, we believe that incorporating profile similarity into social recommender system and algorithm design has the potential of improving the user experience of such systems.
We especially hope that this paper will give algorithm designers useful input in order to tailor recommender algorithms to better suit users' decision making and advice seeking behavior.
We encourage researchers to consider our results for more detailed explorations of familiarity, profile similarity and rating overlap, as they can be instructive on a theoretical and practical level for social recommender system design.
D. T. Gilbert, Fiske, S. T, and Linzey, G., The Handbook of Social Psychology Vol.
I thought it was terrible and everyone else loved it" - A New Perspective for Effective Recommender System Design.
Empirical Analysis of Predictive Algorithms for Collaborative Filtering.
Collaborative Filtering with Privacy via Factor Analysis.
Studying the effect of similarity in online task-focused interactions.
An Introduction to Qualitative Research.
Fast and Frugal Heuristics: The Tools of Bounded Rationality.
Taking Advice: Accepting Help, Improving Judgement, and Sharing Responsibility.
An Algorithmic Framework for Performing Collaborative Filtering.
Trust-aware Collaborative Filtering for Recommender Systems.
A collaborative filtering algorithm and evaluation metric that accurately model the user experience.
