We present two experiments to evaluate wrist-worn wearable tactile displays  that provide easy to perceive alerts for on-the-go users.
The first experiment  focuses on the perception sensitivity of tactile patterns and reveals that people discriminate our 24 tactile patterns with up to 99% accuracy after 40 minutes of training.
Among the four parameters  that vary in the 24 patterns, intensity is the most difficult parameter to distinguish and temporal pattern is the easiest.
The second experiment  focuses on dual task performance, exploring users' abilities to perceive three incoming alerts from two mobile devices  with and without visual distraction.
The second experiment reveals that, when visually distracted, users' reactions to incoming alerts become slower for the mobile phone but not for the WTD.
Perceiving alerts on handheld devices while on-the-go is relatively expensive because the interaction often requires visual attention and motor distraction.
The wide use of vibrating alerts in commercially available mobile phones implies that utilizing the sense of touch as an alternative attentional channel is especially beneficial for mobile interaction, during which audio-visual attention is often unavailable.
The recent commercialization of wearable interfaces such as wristwatch phones reflects the emerging trend towards ready-athand mobile interactions.
One of the benefits of wristwatch interfaces is fast device acquisition .
We wish to explore how integration of these two promising trends, mobile tactile displays and wristwatch interfaces, can facilitate distractionfree alert perception.
In this paper, we present the design and evaluation of wearable tactile displays  that are developed to eliminate the need for visual attention for alert perception and motor engagement for device acquisition.
The first experiment explores how easily users can identify 24 tactile stimuli  on the wrist by discriminating four parameters .
Since we focus on the perception of the tactile stimuli on the wrist, more sophisticated factors  in designing tactile information such as mapping the tactile patterns to meanings  or learning are not included in current study.
The second experiment investigates the benefits of the WTD in visually distracted conditions.
We compare user perception with the WTD with vibro-tactile alerts on a consumer mobile phone.
Mobile computing generally implies multitasking .
Researchers have explored several issues that are considered in designing multitasking friendly mobile user interfaces  such as proximity and access time , resource management for attention , and alternative modalities to deliver information .
Whether the attempt to perform multiple tasks is processed simultaneously or successively while the user is on-the-go, appropriate management of attentional and motor resources is a key issue in designing multitasking friendly mobile UIs.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Tactile sensation is initiated by the contact between the skin and an object when the distribution of the skin deformation excites four mechanoreceptors across the body: Meissner corpuscles, Merkel cells, Ruffini endings, and Pacinian corpuscles.
Sensitivity to perceive tactile stimuli depends on various factors such as the characteristics of the stimuli  , placement, gender, and age .
Studies reveal that spatial and temporal patterns are easier to discriminate than frequency and intensity .
In general, human perception to localize the locus of the vibro-tactile stimulation is maximized when the sensation is generated near anatomical points of reference, such as the wrist and elbow .
Tactile displays, which are composed of single or multiple actuators, utilize the sense of touch to render information.
Researchers have explored the contribution of tactile displays in many areas such as sensory substitution for vision or hearing , spatial orientation and navigation , and exploration of virtual environments to support augmented user experiences or tele-manipulation .
In onedimensional tactile displays the characteristics of the stimuli are generally determined by intensity, frequency, and temporal patterns focusing on a localized single tactile actuator.
Brown and Brewster  explored the recognition rate of 27 tactile patterns with three types of rhythms and three types of roughness that were generated on a single point actuator in three positions at the forearm.
Two-dimensional tactile displays enable more sophisticated patterns by utilizing the spatial configuration of multiple actuators.
In two-dimensional tactile displays, spatial patterns often involve a directional sensation, in which the stimulation is generated in a sequential manner from locus to locus rather than in isolation.
In the directional patterns, a sensory illusion, which is known as sensory saltation or the cutaneous rabbit phenomenon , is generated between loci as a gradual movement.
Sensory saltation is affected by several factors such as the two-point discrimination threshold in the distance between actuators, inter stimuli interval , saltatory area, and repetition .
Borst and Baiyya  investigated the recognition accuracy of three parameters  in a two-dimensional tactile display and revealed that people can interpret multiple parameters in combination.
A wrist-mounted tactile display with three vibrating motors .
A tactile pattern that starts at 1 and moves in the clockwise  direction with strong intensity and steady vibration .
A pattern that starts at 1 and moves in the CW direction with weak intensity and pulsed vibration .
The result of Schumacher's study indicates that humans can perform dual tasks to some extent when the S-R channel for one task does not overlap with the S-R channel for the other task.
Thus, touch may provide an appropriate alternative modality to present information in mobile UIs when users have to reserve their visual attention for other tasks.
As recommended by Chen et al.
Unlike Chen's study that only explored the identification of the localized tactors on the wrist, our study focuses on the discrimination of the multiple parameters that are configured to generate directional tactile patterns on two-dimensional WTDs.
The design of the temporal patterns  is based on our previous research  in which subjects reached 90% accuracy in perceiving twelve directional patterns in a 4x4 grid .
Unlike our previous study, we increased the center-to-center distance between actuators from 16mm to 30mm to ensure easier perception.
In our WTD system, three button-shaped shaftless vibrating motors  are attached to an elastic wrist strap.
WiringT M microcontroller  is connected to a laptop computer to control the motors.
Twenty-four directional tactile patterns were designed by manipulating four parameters: starting point , direction , temporal pattern , and intensity .
The pattern of the tactile stimulus is repeatedly generated on the wrist until the participants respond through the mouse or keypad.
The start-to-start duration of each pattern is 2.25 seconds, including the interval for repetition.
In the testing interface, starting point  and intensity 
Humans perform multiple tasks simultaneously or successively based on their strategy for managing attentional resources .
When multiple stimuli are presented, the decision to select, prioritize, or ignore the stimuli is mostly affected by the consistency of the information or user proficiency to process attentional phenomena  .
In general, the limited capacity or bottleneck of human attention induces the selection of one task at the cost of other stimuli  or time-sharing of multiple tasks at the cost of inefficiency .
When designing multitasking friendly mobile UIs, exploring the ability to manage attentional resources is essential to ensure safe and efficient interaction.
Rubinstein's  and Schumacher's  studies revealed that people's ability to perform dual tasks depends on resource management for stimulus-response  channels.
In Rubinstein's study  where only one S-R channel was provided to process interaction , dual task performance was worse than single task performance because of the frequent shifting of visual attention between tasks.
On the other hand, in Schumacher's study  which provided an independent S-R channel for each task , the tasks did not interfere with each other and people concurrently per-
Both experiments were conducted in a quiet lab setting.
During the test, participants were asked to wear ear plugs and headphones to block audio cues from the system that might affect the performance.
The three main dependent variables for analysis are accuracy, reaction time and information transfer .
ITest  is calculated as shown in formula  for each experiment to assess the combined result of accuracy and reaction time  and the number of correctly recognized patterns .
Through a pilot test with three participants, the intensity for weak patterns  was selected as a minimum threshold for detecting incoming patterns.
To find the minimum threshold where subjects can clearly distinguish incoming tactile patterns, the input voltage of the system was gradually increased from zero to maximum.
In formula , which is widely used to summarize the results in similar research , k is number of stimulus alternatives, n is total number of trials, i and j are the indices for stimuli and responses respectively, nij is the number of trials when the stimulus i is reported as j, ni is the total number of trials that the stimulus i is presented, and nj is the total number of trials that the user responds as j.
This paper explores people's alert perception performance in WTDs through two experiments.
The first experiment explores user ability to perceive 24 tactile patterns associated with four parameters.
The second experiment explores the benefit of WTDs in perceiving three patterns in visually distracted conditions.
Additionally, we compare our subjects' ability with the WTD to their ability to perceive three alerts on a current mobile phone.
The data for the first and the second experiment was collected from 28 participants  who were recruited from the Georgia Institute of Technology.
Twelve people participated in the first experiment and 16 people participated in the second experiment.
None of the subjects of the second experiment participated in the first experiment or vice versa.
Four of the participants were left-handed.
However, since all left-handed participants used their right hand when controlling the computer , all participants were effectively righthanded in both experiments.
The average width of the left wrist  for male and female participants was 57.46mm and 50.76mm, respectively.
The average circumference around the wrist for male and female participants was 168.08mm and 146.75mm, respectively.
The purpose of this experiment is to explore people's ability to perceive patterns of incoming tactile stimuli on the wrist, which involves the simultaneous perception of multiple parameters.
Based on the promising result of our previous study , we hypothesize that people can reach at least 90% accuracy.
Participants were asked to wear a WTD on the non-dominant wrist while using a mouse with the dominant hand to control the testing interface  on the laptop computer.
Once the participants pressed the alert button at the bottom of the testing interface, a 2.25 second long pattern  was generated and repeated until the participants press an icon on the screen .
The pattern for the next trial was generated when the participants pressed the alert button again.
The experimental was divided into three sessions: introduction , practice , and main .
For each set in all three sessions, each pattern is generated only once.
A minimum five minute long break is enforced between sessions.
Between trials of each session, participants are encouraged to adjust the location and tightness of the strap to maximize perception sensitivity and comfort and to take enough break time to avoid a possible adaptation effect that may decrease perception sensitivity.
In the introduction session, the color coding and symbols in the testing interface was explained to assist participants.
Then each pattern was generated in numeric order as the participants pressed the alert button .
The purpose of the introduction session was to allow participants to experience each parameter of the tactile patterns and to see its associated icon on the testing interface.
In the practice session, 72 patterns were generated in random order .
The purpose of this session was to help participants practice matching what they feel on the wrist with what they see on the screen.
The practice session also allowed subjects to optimize the tightness and comfort of the hardware as much as possible.
In the main session, 120 patterns were generated in random order .
During the practice and the main sessions, the accuracy and reaction time for discriminating incoming alerts were measured.
After completing the main session, participants were asked to complete a survey to rate their difficulty in distinguishing each parameter.
The confusion matrix for the main session indicates that intensity is the hardest parameter to recognize .
However, confusion on intensity level is reduced with practice  from 75%  to 30% .
A post-hoc analysis indicates that the effects of the temporal pattern in accuracy  and the effect of the intensity in the reaction time  are statistically significant after Bonferroni correction.
This result indicates that patterns with the pulsed vibration are distinguished more correctly than patterns with the steady vibration.
This result indicates that patterns with the strong intensity enable faster reaction time than the patterns with weak intensity.
The effect of the other parameters in the performance are not statistically significant after Bonferroni correction.
The average time to finish the practice  and the main session  was 15.54 minutes and 20.90 minutes, respectively.
The break time between trials in the practice and the main session was 4.19 seconds and 2.96 seconds respectively.
The break time between the practice and the main session was 7.67 minutes on average.
The learning effect across all eight sets across practice and main session is statistically significant  both in accuracy and reaction time using a one-way ANOVA .
After the 40 minutes of training, as we hypothesized, people achieve up to 99.32% accuracy and a reaction time of 6.05 seconds when identifying 24 tactile patterns.
The ITest , the bits per second, and number of correctly recognized patterns are 4.28 bit, 0.60 bit/sec, and 19 patterns respectively.
The participants' subjective rating of the difficulty in perceiving each parameter is slightly different from the confusion that was measured from their performance.
For subjective ratings that range from -2  to 2 , participants reported that intensity was the most difficult parameter to perceive , followed by the starting point , and the direction .
However, the temporal pattern was the easiest parameter .
Difficulty in perceiving intensity was observed in two aspects.
Some participants reported that the difficulty was caused by the fact that the difference between the strong and weak patterns was not significant.
On the other hand, other participants reported that although the difference between the weak and strong patterns was significant, the weak patterns were too weak for them to clearly distinguish other parameters such as the starting point.
Additionally, some participants reported that a weak pattern generated after a strong pattern was harder to discriminate.
This result indicates that sensitivity in perceiving intensity in tactile patterns varies from person to person and from situation to situation.
Difficulty in perceiving the starting point was mainly caused by misaligned hardware and adaptation effects.
The tightness of the strap and motor alignment on the skin affected the participants' sensitivity in perceiving the starting point.
Participants reported that this difficulty was mostly eliminated by readjusting the hardware during the practice session.
An adaptation effect was partially observed during the test.
Some participants reported that they felt like the skin under a particular motor was immune to sensation.
Difficulty in perceiving direction was mostly caused by an unfamiliarity in constructing a mental model for circular movement.
Some participants reported that building a mental model for clockwise  and counterclockwise  was difficult.
Other participants reported that matching tactile direction on the skin with visual direction on the display was difficult.
Unlike other parameters, difficulty in perceiving temporal patterns was rarely observed.
Most people reported that they could easily discriminate the temporal pattern.
The easy perception of the temporal pattern affected people's strategy for narrowing down the selection from 24 patterns.
Most of the people began narrowing down the selection by discriminating the temporal pattern first.
The rest of the procedure varied from person to person.
Among the four parameters that are investigated in this experiment , intensity is the most difficult parameter to perceive.
Intensity especially affects reaction time whereas temporal pattern affects accuracy.
The subjective ratings and self reports indicate that people have difficulty discriminating intensity, direction, and starting point for various reasons.
However, difficulty to perceive temporal pattern is rarely observed.
This experiment explores the benefits of the WTD in visually distracted conditions .
However, WTDs are less affected by the distraction than the phone.
On-the-go use of mobile devices involves both interaction with the world  and interaction with the mobile device .
Here and throughout the paper, we define the interaction with the world as the primary task and interaction with the mobile device as the secondary task.
A visual screening task with three difficulty levels  is selected as a primary task .
An alert perception task with two mobile devices  is selected as a secondary task.
Performance of the primary and the secondary task is measured both in the single and dual task conditions.
Dual tasks are composed of one primary task and one secondary task .
A forced-choice visual screening task with three difficulty levels is provided as a primary task.
Participants are asked to find the target stimulus  among other two digit numbers in the screen in five seconds and verbally respond with `yes' or `no'.
50% of the trials contain the target stimulus and are presented in random order.
Participants stand while facing a screen that is configured on the eye level .
The modality for S-R channel  is selected to avoid modality conflict with the secondary tasks .
The number of stimuli to provide the three difficulty levels for the primary task was selected from a pilot test.
In the pilot test with seven participants, visual screening performance with five levels  was measured.
Participants were asked to find `57' in the screen and provide a vocal response.
For each participant, 30 trials with five second intervals were provided for each level .
Based on the result of the pilot test, three levels with 9, 25, and 36 stimuli were selected because the resulting accuracies  were evenly distributed as 99%, 95%, and 91%.
A 5 second interval was long enough to perform the task in the level with nine stimuli.
However, people rarely provided the answer within 5 seconds when presented with 36 stimuli.
A wireless keypad is attached on the dominant hand side and a mobile phone is placed in the pocket of non-dominant hand side.
For the trial with the mobile phone, a four second vibrating alert  is generated along with a visual alert that displays 1, 2, or 3 on the phone .
Once the participant perceives the vibration from the phone, she takes the phone out of the pocket, reads the number on the screen, presses the corresponding button on the wireless keypad, and restores the phone to the pocket.
The S-R modality  for the phone alert task is designed to simulate representative interactions in the real world.
In the test with the WTD, participants were asked to wear the tactile display on their non-dominant wrist.
Three tactile patterns are selected based on the result of the first experiment .
In these three patterns, the starting point varies , but direction , intensity , and temporal pattern  are constant.
Once the participant perceives the pattern of the incoming alert on the wrist, they key the appropriate response on the wireless keypad.
For the secondary tasks, the subjects' ability to perceive three types of alerts from the WTD worn on the wrist or the mobile phone  stored in the pocket is explored.
Thus, we used an apron with pockets to standardize device acquisition and alert perception with the mobile phone .
A wireless keypad is attached on the surface of the dominant hand side of the pocket to enable vision-free motor responses.
A mobile phone is stored on the non-dominant hand side of the pocket .
All keys in the wireless keypad except three buttons are deactivated and covered with a plastic lid to avoid motor errors .
Participants are asked to stand during the test to ensure easy access to the mobile phone in the pocket.
Since individual sensitivity varies in perceiving tactile stimuli, a within-subject design method is used in this experiment.
The order of the task conditions  and distraction conditions  are balanced .
The order for three difficulty conditions  in the primary task is randomized.
The experimental procedure is divided into three sessions: practice, main, and post.
In the practice session, five trials for each level in the primary task  and six trials for each device in the secondary task  are provided as single tasks.
Since the spatial configuration between the three motors in the WTD  and three buttons in the keypad  is inconsistent, participants are asked to build their own mental mapping between the two during the practice session.
In the main session, the data for accuracy and reaction time is collected through logged data from the secondary task and audio-video recording for the primary task.
Primary tasks with three levels and secondary tasks with two devices are tested both in the single and dual task conditions .
In the single task conditions , the performance of the three primary tasks and two secondary tasks are measured independently.
In the dual task conditions , each level of the primary task is paired with each device of the secondary task.
The number of trials in each condition for the primary and secondary tasks is 60 and 15, respectively.
The interval between trials in the primary task is five seconds .
The interval between trials in the secondary task is randomly assigned between six and 18 seconds .
The duration for the secondary task depends on the subject's reaction time.Participants have a short break every 15 minutes to avoid fatigue.
In the post session, a semi-structured interview and a workload assessment survey with the NASA-TLX focusing on the mental, physical, and temporal demand is performed.
In the perception task with the phone, the effect of the distraction is statistically significant with respect to the reaction time  and the accuracy  using a paired t-test.
One of the features that might affect the reaction time for the phone alert is device acquisition time.
Time to acquire the phone from the pocket is measured by collecting the brightness of the light received by the camera on the Motorola E680i phone.
While the participant perceives and responds to the incoming alert on the phone, the changing light level is collected to track time stamp data for each event .
This technique is the same as the one used in the similar study that explored the device acquisition time of mobile phones .
Participant pulls the phone from the pocket Event3.
Participant clicks the button on the keypad Event4.
Participant replace the phone to the pocket Time stamp events Alert is generated Light level changes to bright.
Button press Light level returns to dark.
The accuracy in perceiving incoming alerts with the WTD and the mobile phone  is above 96% in general.
In the perception task with the WTD, the effect of the visual distraction is statistically significant with respect to reaction time  but not with respect to accuracy, as determined by a paired ttest.
Interestingly, compared to the single task condition for WTD  and dual task with level 1 , the reaction time to perceive incoming tactile alerts is faster in a visually distracted condition .
As the amount of distraction increases to the moderate  and difficult levels , the reaction time to perceive incoming tactile alerts decreases.
However, reaction time to perceive incoming tactile alerts in the most difficult dual task condition  is still faster than the single task condition .
We will discuss this counter-intuitive benefit of distraction later.
The time between each event in Table 3 is defined as pocket time , in-hand answer time , and replacement time .
The effect of the visual distraction on the pocket time, in-hand answer time and replacement time is not statistically significant.
The average time from event 1 to 4 is 3.89 seconds.
The ITest for the WTD in single  and dual task condition with difficult distraction  are 0.56 bits/sec and 0.58 bits/sec respectively.
This number indicates that although the user is interrupted by the high level of distraction, the information transfer rate did not deteriorate .
Participants reported that temporal workload was the most dominant factor that affected the primary task due to the five second time limit in each trial.
Thus, when the dual task trial arrived, people tended to prioritize the primary task rather than the secondary task, which could be temporarily set aside and performed later.
Compared to the single task condition, mental workload increased in the dual task conditions.
Physical workload such as fatigue in the eyes and legs was observed when performing the primary task in both single and dual task conditions.
Physical workload was the most dominant factor in phone alert perception both in the single and the dual task conditions, possibly due to the device acquisition.
Mental workload was rarely observed either in single or dual task conditions with phone alert perception.
We assume that the distraction does not affect the primary task because of the strategy that prioritizes the primary task to manage multitasking.
The ITest for level 1, 2, and 3 when distracted by the phone alerts perception task are 0.54 bits/sec, 0.26 bits/sec, and 0.19 bits/sec, respectively.
These numbers slightly increase to 0.58 bits/sec, 0.29 bits/sec, and 0.22 bits/sec when distracted by tactile alerts perception task with the WTD .
On the other hand, mental workload was the most dominant factor in tactile alert perception with the WTD both in the single and the dual task conditions.
Five different types of mental models were observed from 16 participants when mapping the spatial configuration between the triangular motor layout and linear keypad layout that is associated with the numeric labels  .
Although participants performed the task with their own preferred mental model, they still reported that matching these two different concepts was difficult.
The sequential movement of the stimuli with the WTD contributes to reduce the temporal workload.
Even though the participants failed to perceive the first locus in the pattern, the consecutive loci of the remaining two motors guided them to determine the missing locus.
When performing the secondary task, the effect of the visual distraction is observed only in reaction time but not in accuracy.
In the single task condition, the reaction time of the WTD is slower than the phone reaction time.
However, in the dual task condition, the reaction time of the WTD is faster than the phone reaction time.
Interestingly, when perceiving alerts from the WTD, the reaction time in the dual task condition is faster than the single task condition.
In the reaction time for the phone alerts, pocket time to acquire the device took longer  than the in-hand answer time .
When performing the primary task, the distraction caused by the secondary task did not affect the performance.
Different types of the workload were observed across tasks from the workload assessment: temporal workload for the visual screening task, mental workload for the alert perception task using the WTD, and physical workload for the alert perception task using the phone.
Due to the temporal workload of the primary task, people tended to prioritize the primary task in general.
The mental, physical, and temporal demand for the six conditions  are explored during the post session through open-ended questions guided by the NASA-TLX survey and a semi-structured interview.
We assume that higher performance with the WTD in the single and the dual task conditions is possible as the task becomes more automatic.
Since our participants reported that the mental workload in perceiving alerts with the WTD was problematic, automatic processing might be facilitated by improving the system  and by practice.
However, this improvement would be surprising with the mobile phone because the performance is mainly limited by the inherent motor constraints and inefficient timesharing of visual attention.
Although the effect of engagement, stress, and emotion is not measured in our experiments, this different effect implies that the difficulty of the primary task is perceived differently across two devices.
According to the Yerkes-Dodson Law, the performance decreases when the difficulty is too low  or too much  .
On the other hand, the medium level difficulty maximizes the performance by generating optimal arousal and engagement .
Thus, we assume that the perceived difficulty caused by the light visual distraction is too much in one device and moderate in the other.
That is, when the light visual distraction  is applied, the perceived difficulty of the phone alert perception changes toward a distractible level that results in a slower reaction time whereas the perceived difficulty of the tactile alert perception with the WTD changes toward an engaged level that results in a faster reaction time.
As already proven by a similar study that measured the relationship between task difficulty and engagement , we observed that a small amount of visual distraction was still manageable in perceiving tactile stimuli from the WTD and eventually increased the performance engagement.
However, since our second experiment was performed in a controlled lab setting, the external validity of this result in the real world situation is unclear.
Thus, to generalize this result, future studies that explore the benefits of the WTD in more natural conditions are required.
We have observed various aspects of multitasking behavior in daily interaction.
Some of our participants reported that multitasking while on-the-go is unsafe, inefficient, and impolite.
However, other participants reported that multitasking while on-the-go helps save time and is becoming more and more ubiquitous.
Subjects who already knew or even experienced the unsafe nature of mobile multitasking reported that they were still inclined to do mobile multitasking on a daily basis.
As users consume up-to-date services and applications using today's mobile devices, augmenting the safety of on-the-go users by using vision-free WTDs is a promising way to support increasingly ubiquitous mobile interaction.
Although the main focus of this study is limited to the perception of tactile stimuli on the wrist, additional features that may affect the results of the experiments were added while designing the experiments: mapping tactile patterns to visual representations ; constructing mental models to map the triangular layout of the tactile loci to the linear layout of the keypad  .
The effect of these factors in the result of the experiments is unclear.
Our study explores only one type of distraction.
However, distraction in the wild is richer, more complicated , and less controllable.
Based on the result of this study, adding and evaluating the effect of other distractions would help to explore the benefits and limitations of WTDs in more realistic scenario.
We also observed possible adaptation effects on the skin in the first experiment and mechanical fatigue  in the second experiment.
A more longitudinal study with less trials over multiple days would improve these issues.
Since the average age of our participants is mid-20s, performance of other age groups should be investigated to ensure the universal benefits of WTDs.
Our participants' strategy to prioritize the primary task in the dual task condition implies that selective attention is employed to manage the attentional bottleneck.
In the selective attention paradigm, the costs are mainly observed when processing novel and inconsistent information .
Unlike control processing, automatic processing is ideal to bypass attentional bottlenecks .
In our secondary task configuration in the second experiment, the alert perception through the WTD, which is novel and requires the additional workload to construct the mental model, is control processing whereas the alert perception through the mobile phone, which is already well-established through the daily use, is automatic processing.
Despite this disadvantage in processing attentional phenomena, the ITest in perceiving incoming alerts is higher with the WTD than with the mobile phone.
Discriminating four parameters  to perceive 24 tactile patterns was easy  after 40 minutes of training.
The reaction time to perceive three different incoming tactile alerts on the wrist was not deteriorated by visual distraction.
Based on these results, we conclude that wrist-mounted tactile displays are appropriate for implementing multitasking-friendly mobile user interfaces that enable easy alert perception.
H. Kajimoto, Y. Kanno, and S. Tachi.
Forehead electro-tactile display for vision substitution.
In Proceedings of the EuroHaptics, 2006.
S. C. Lee and T. Starner.
Mobile gesture interaction using wearable tactile displays.
S. C. Lee and T. Starner.
Constructing mental model to label spatial tactile patterns on the wrist.
Foundations of transparency in tactile information design.
Methods for haptic feedback in teleoperated robot-assisted surgery.
A. Oulasvirta, S. Tamminen, V. Roto, and J. Kuorelahti.
Interaction in 4-second bursts: the fragmented nature of attentional resources in mobile hci.
Stress: A tactile display using lateral skin stretch.
Farther than you may think: An empirical investigation of the proximity of users to their mobile phones.
J. S. Rubinstein, D. E. Meyer, and E. Jefferey E. Executive control of cognitive processes in task switching.
Automatic and control processing and attention.
In R. Parasuramin and D. Davies, editors, Varieties of attention, pages 1-27.
Virtually perfect time sharing in dual-task performance: Uncorking the central cognitive bottleneck.
A haptic back display for attentional and directional cueing.
Intensive and extensive aspects of tactile sensitivity as a function of body-part, sex and laterality, chapter 10, pages 195-218.
The relation of strength of stimulus to rapidity of habit-formation.
This material is based upon work supported, in part, by the National Science Foundation  under Grant #0812281 and Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute .
We thank Dr. Hong Tan of Purdue University for her advice in designing tactile patterns, Dr. Bruce Walker of Georgia Institute of Technology for his advice in designing the second experiment, Nirmal Patel for his help with the mobile software implementation, Tavenner Hall for her help with documentation, and our participants and members of Contextual Computing Group of Georgia Institute of Technology for their participation and discussion.
