Because nafiative can be suspended or altered at various decision points, or foci of interactivity, the rearra$kgement of discrete elements generates new texts and new meanings .
Narrative structures as traditionally understood are not therefore appropriate for interactive multimedia but an Aristotelian concept of narrative  is locked into western European thought and shapes our expectations.
Students can discern narrative more easily when using textbooks or video because these media generally conform to generic narrative expectations.
There is not yet this heaitage to draw on for MILES and so students often have :problems engaging with materials and making sense of them .
Both formats have structures, the issue is the extent to which they are perceptible to users.
Although encyclopaedia-style software is more commonly supposed to be lacking in structure, at least at the highest 1,svelit is recognisably an encyclopaedia, even if the specifics of navigation are not clear.
Tutorial-style multimedia software does not have a comparable provenance:because it is based on live interaction with a teacher, so although it may seem to lend itself to a narrative structure, the lack of precedentsmakes design decisions difficult, especially given the lack of empirical work in this area.
Either way, comprehension problems can be exacerbated for users when compared to books, videos or live tutors, mainly because the procedures and operations involved in using them get in the way of understanding.
Where tealchersare not on hand to provide guidance, it is even more important that it is provided by the software.
Narrative is fundamental to the ways we make sense of texts of all kinds because it provides structure and coherence, but it is difficult to see how this works in the context of multimedia interactive learning environments .
We tested our hypotheses about the form and function of narrative in MILES by developing three versions of material on CD-ROM which had different narrative structures and analysed the impact of the different versions on learner behaviour.
We present a theoretical framework in which we explain the concepts of narrative guidance and narrative construction and their application to the design of MILES.
Narrative is not simply an aesthetic issue.
It is fundamentally linked to cognition and understanding, so an understanding of how it works is particularly relevant to the design of multimedia for learning.
There has, however, been less interest in the role of narrative in non-literary texts and, particularly, of educational media.
Our aim is to develop an approach which emphasises the importance of structure but recognises that narrative cannot be studied in isolation from the dynamic processes of interaction if it is to be applied to multimedia interactive learning environments .
We discuss the relationship between narrative and usability and how MILES can provide the narrative guidance necessary to facilitate the user's construction of narrative.
Permission to make digital or hard topics of all or part of this work for personal or classroom USCis granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the tirst page.
To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute lo lists.
Narrative is typically thought of as being synonymous with `story', but whereas `story' implies both form and content our observations suggest that, for MILES, it is generally the structure rather than the content which is problematic.
An example of this is Clkmentine, a CD-ROM designed to teach French to poorly motivated teenagers.
The macro-narrative involves Clementine having to raise a million francs to save the Bengali tigers and all the subtasks, such as designing posters, arranging coverage on the local radio station, and Clementine's appearanceon a TV charity quiz show, relate to this.
The structure is relatively linear becausethis was seen as more appropriate for the guided progression needed for language skills.
But an explicit macro-narrative does not necessarily lead to a coherent learning experience.
School Disco had a strong narrative of organising a school disco but the tasks involved  did not always bear a clear relationship to the narrative, or were so complex and time-consuming that it became forgotten.
In such an example there is a tension between the macro-level of the narrative and the lower-level task units.
Students need to be able to relate the constituent units to the high level structure but also perceive the relationship between sub-units.
The structure provides a linear dynamic which can accommodate diversions and tangents and allows learners to maintain their plans and goals.
It has both cognitive and affective impact, performing an essential organising function for the learner by shaping the creation of meaning from texts of all kinds.
It helps us think, remember, communicate, and make senseof ourselves and the world.
Learners constantly adjust their understanding in accordancewith their exposure to conventional narratives, making the construction of narrative a central cognitive goal.
Learners favour clearly structured and navigable texts so MILES generally produce cognitive costs in terms of narrative construction.
The very nature of a medium which brings with it the benefits of interactivity and a multimedia format also results in a fragmentation of the narrative which is normally present in linear media such as books: the narrative can be suspended and altered and may thwart or confuse our expectations, producing a multiplicity of pathways and disruption of the flow of the user's experience.
The freedom to explore the material and choose its pace and sequenceis liberating but it can also be confusing because it results in frequent, sometimes gratuitous, interactions with the computer.
This can mean that the interactions which are integral to the experience of using MILES impede learning.
In such contexts narrative not only exists in the software with which students interact but must take account of the interactants, what they bring to its interpretation, and the processes of interaction.
We describe the two main interdependent processesas narrative guidance and narrative constrzztion.
The focus of the research reported here is how students make sense of their learning with multimedia by constructing their own narratives in conjunction with the narrative guidance presented by the text.
Previous observations  of school use of commercially available CD-ROMs showed that group discussion was associated with operations and procedures rather than the educational content, meaning that students were unable to construct a sustained narrative because their learning was so fragmented.
One of the problems in designing MILES is the tension between providing integral learning activities and providing information and resources for externally provided tasks.
This can manifest itself as a series of units with varying degreesof relationship to each other and to the overall structure.
We have characterisedthis in terms of the macro-narrative of the global structure and the micro-narratives of the lower-level task units.
The design elements presented by the software constitute narrative guidance and can be a combination of features specific to interactive media, such as the need for clear navigational procedures, with features associated with traditional media, such as recognisable narrative and a clear relationship between tasks and the macro-narrative.
We have observed ways in which teachers compensate for its absence by providing their own narrative guidance.
They mediate its use for the classroom context by constraining the range of responses,offering interpretative possibilities and elaborating the task.
An example of this is a task in which students aged 11 had to use Encarta to find information relevant to a forthcoming trip to a Roman site.
They were going to act out, in costume, a play they had written based on a newspaper account of the discovery of a skeleton at the site; they were able to locate and use information more purposefully than others who did not have this guidance.
This example of the teacher providing narrative guidance is unusual because it involves a lot of preparation and familiarity with the materials.
More often, students use MILES in a context where they do not enjoy such committed teacher input and the narrative guidance needs to be embeddedin the software design.
Narrative construction is the active process of meaningmaking, stimulated by the text and the environment, combined with the vast reservoir of knowledge that each person brings with them to the experience.
It is a process of both discerning and imposing a structure on the materials, making links and connections in a personally meaningful way.
Although this active process of meaning-making is cognitive, it cannot be divorced from cultural context, whether this is the classroom or exposure to other media.
Prior knowledge may prove to be counter-productive if, for example, learners' experiences of paper-based texts lead them to assumethey can interact with multimedia in ways which do not translate from one medium to another or if they expect the strong narrative typical of computer games.
Or prior knowledge may be beneficial if learners are able to make meaningful links to other texts and sources of knowledge.
Galapagos is a CD-ROM in which we have manipulated the type of narrative guidance in each version and prcovided a model answer, script of the audio track, notepad and easily accessible statement of the task to support learners in their narrative construction.
Galapagos uses Darwin's experiences in the Galapagos Islands to teach the principles of natural selection and aims to stimulate users to think about how wildlife arrived on the newly formed volcanic islands given they are so distant from the nearest land mass.
This in turn stimulates thinking about how variation in the islands' bird population has arisen and all learners are given the task of explaining the variation in the wildlife observed by Darwin and constructing their answer to this task using the on-line notepad.
All l.earnen have accessto a model answer once some text has been saved in the notepad.
All versions have the same content , use the same video sequencesand audio tracks, but have different structures.
The linear version was designed to present an easily identifiable narrative so we could explore the extent to which MILES should emulate more familiar narrative structures.
The resource-based learning version was designed to reflect existing commercially available CDROMs we had observed in classroom use, and the guided discovery learning version was designed to c.ombine guidance of the type offered by classroom teachers with the benefits of an interactive medium.
Figure 1: The cycle of narrative guidance and narrative construction Although we have separated them for the purposes of explication, narrative guidance and narrative construction are not discrete processes but, in a productive learning experience, a dynamic cycle.
The construction of narrative is a collaboration between designers, teachers and learners.
The learner's inclination to supply narrative continuity, to bridge the gaps at the foci of interactivity, is based on their own input in addition to what is presented by the software and their co-learners.
The relationship between the designer and learner is symbiotic, each dependent on the other, and not so different from Steiner's description of the `full act' of reading books as being one of `dynamic reciprocity' .
In this sense, there is little difference from books and other media with which narrative is more closely associated.
The notion of an active reader is nothing new: Sterne played with such conventions in his eighteenth century novel Tristram Shandy and, more recently, reader response theory  has promoted an understanding of the ways in which author and reader jointly construct narrative.
In an educational context, teachers are also included in this process.
We have developed three versions of Galapagos as a research tool, based on extended observation of students using commercially available CD-ROMs in schools.
We hypothesised that students need some form of presented narrative guidance from the software because the narrative in MILES is not easily discernible and there may be multiple narratives depending on the route taken.
Students also require support for narrative construction as this increases understanding of the material.
The linear version is designed in such a way that :students are led through the eight sections of the CD-ROM in sequence and it is closest to a traditional narrative as presented in, say, educational television.
There are no search mechanisms and users cannot change section, except by going backwards or forwards, until they have seen all eight sections once.
The interface ,is active compared to the other versions: video segments start as soon as they are on the screen and learners are relatively passive.
After the voice-over welcome users are invited to proceed by selecting the `Next' button.
The educational rationale for this design was that it would be more suitable for novice users as the scope for machine interaction was limited and it would encourage them to see enough resources to be able to answer the set question; left to their own devices, they may not see everything available.
There is no explicit external support for narrative construction other than that provided by all versions; narrative guidance is provided by the familiarity of a traditional linear structure.
The guides are not animated or intelligent agents although this is an area for future development.
Users do not have the same Worn to move around as provided by the RBL menu but, as with the RBL version, users are expected to be active, although the range of choices they can make at any given point is constrained.
After the voice-over welcome and introduction to the package, task, and toolbar buttons, attention is drawn to the `Guides' button.
The educational rationale for this version was to encourage and support learners in locating appropriate resources to complete the task.
There is explicit support for narrative construction through the provision of this guidance.
The approach learners adopt to complete the given task is therefore determined partly by the version they use.
In addition to the narrative guidance manipulations which are outside the learners' control, other features such as the availability of a model answer and notepad editor scaffold the task  at different points in the narrative construction process.
Use of these supports depends on whether students choose to adopt them because, as table 1 shows, they are available in each version.
Although on a smaller scale, its closest equivalent is a multimedia encyclopaedia.
The eight sections of the RBL version can be accessedfrom a main menu or the simple word-search mechanism at the top level.
When resources appear on screen, they are not activated until the user clicks on them.
The style is exploratory and users are free to go where they want; the only constraint is that they cannot access the model answer before they have entered some notes in the notepad, as is true for all versions.
The interface is static and more complex as learners have to make selections for control and navigation.
This could mean a cluttered and intimidating screen, so we provided sufficient features to enable effective RBL but from a clean and attractive interface.
The educational rationale for this version was to encourage independent learners who are able to search through the resources to research their answers and complete the task.
In this design manipulation learners need to construct their own questions in order to decompose the task into manageable chunks.
There is no additional support for narrative construction and no explicit narrative guidance.
The guided discovery  version offers guidance in breaking down the task by providing paths through the material, questions to stimulate enquiries, and direction to specific resources.
Of the three versions, this is closest to the support given by a teacher.
It does not present the narrative as strongly as the linear version but provides more guidance than the RBL version.
Four groups of three students, aged between 15 and 21 years, used each of the three versions of Galapagos.
The 36 students were based in two different institutions and all were studying for a national examination in Biology.
A session using Galapagos to complete the task to their own satisfaction typically took about 45 minutes.
The study maintained ecological validity inasmuch as use of the CD-ROM was integrated into their studies at an appropriate point in curriculum delivery and provided an authentic task within the syllabus.
However, each group was randomly assigned to one version of the CDROM and none of the students was aware of the different versions.
It was not our intention to measure learning  but to identify ways in which learning can be supported.
Every session had two video-recorded sources: one recorded the group of learners at the computer to capture talk, movement, gesture and machine interaction; the other was the screen image, taken from the computer via a scan converter.
Following completion of the task, individual learners were given a tape-recorder and asked to record their responses to questions which ranged fi-om checking on accuracy of factual recall to asking them to recount the lesson for an absent friend.
We analysed the notepad answers constructed during use of Galapagos, as they provide the most accessible means of insight into their emerging understanding, and a teacher evaluated how well they fulfilled the task requirement of explaining the variations in wildlife.
We also collected information about each learner's prior experience with computers, their predicted examination grades for Biology and the teacher's assessmentof their oral abilities.
Interacting with Galapagos The linear version presents a high degree of n;zrative guidance and little opportunity for learners to decide their own narrative path so they have relatively little control.
This is more apparent in the early part of a session as all eight sections were viewed in sequence, even though learners were able to move backwards and forwards.
Once they had seen all eight sections Ilearners exercised more control but still retained a fairly linear path through the material.
For the RBL version, the reverse is true.
There is very little narrative guidance offered and learners have to construct a narrative by making decisions about sequence,so there is a high degree of user control and heavy use of the menu to decide the route.
In some cases, this meant that they did not access all available sections.
The GDL version was designed to offer a balance between narrative guidance and support for narrative construction and this is reflected in a more even balance between user and system control: learners are able to determine sequenceand their course of action but are offered guidance in doing so.
Given that the main purpose of Galapagos was for students to represent their knowledge in a Iwritten response to a question, one measure of difference between the versions is how many sections they access in composing their answer.
There is a total of eight subject-related sections and a model answer available.
Attempts to open the model answer before sufficient text has been entered into the notepad results in learners being advised that they can only access the, model answer when they have typed 50 words into the notepad.
Analysis of video recordings shows how many sections of Galapagos were accessedfrom the point at which they started composing the answer, ie after first opening the notepad, and before accessing the model answer.
The mean for students using the linear version was only two sections  and they did not return to any sections subsequently.
Students using this version did not take notes, and they did not interrupt the flow of the narrative or alter the order of the presentation, although their behaviour often changed when they reachedthe end of the sections with its reminder of the task.
At this point they began to behave more like students using the other versions, going back over other material and focusing on the construction of their answer.
Most sections  were accessedby the GD:L users becausethe guide had encouraged them to be interactive in their approach and to use the material to support their response.
This was confiied by teacher analysis of the completed written responses.
The RBL users accesseda mean of three sections.
This could be because they were forced to be more interactive than the linear version users but did not receive the guidance of the GDL users.
Because the students used Galupagos in groups their experience is most clearly revealed through their talk.
This is particularly useful for illuminating the processes of narrative construction, especially discussion involved in producing an answer to fulfil the task requirements.
This data is supplemented by ' navigational information from the video recordings.
As the route taken is determined to some extent by the version used, this gives us information on narrative guidance, although neither source of data can be analysed in isolation.
For analytical purposes, each group was conceived of as a small case study and we did not attempt to find quantitatively defined relations between groups and the version used.
Our focus of interest was in local relations between design features and behaviour for the various sources of data we had.
Some of these were generatedby the group , others were generated by individuals .
Because the subject matter of Galapagos was evolution, there are also religious differences of interpretation.
We have not, so far, analysed our findings from these perspectives although support for narrative construction should provide for individual differences to some extent.
The presence or absence of narrative affects whether learners interact productively with MILES and so affects usability.
Teachers provide narrative guidance and support for narrative construction because they are able to assimilate digressions, repeat points and tie up threads in a highly interactive way which takes account of the individuality of learners, the social context, relevant artefacts and the environment.
They are able to elicit knowledge from students and respond to what they say, to initiate, confirm, evaluate, reformulate, and give feedback.
Narrative guidance and narrative construction are interdependent because the guidance provides the means for learners to construct their own narratives and the additional support for narrative construction leads to greater engagement with the narrative guidance .
MILES are not as sophisticated as teachers in this respect but our findings suggest that improved design and awareness of this interdependence would lead to benefits for learning.
Narrative guidance The linear version of Galapagos demonstrates a relatively traditional narrative structure but this is not necessarily a solution to the design of MILES.
Although navigation is straightforward and learners accessall parts of the content, this design encourages students to enter text in the notepad without reference to other sections, thus undermining a potentially beneficial feature of interactivity - being able to move easily between different sections.
A strong narrative can be motivational and contribute to the dynamic of the text but it can also detract from the real learning content.
A previous example is Stowaway, a CD-ROM which provides a database of information about fighting ships in the 18th century.
One observed problem was that the game of trying to spot the stowaway became a diversion from the information even though it provided a strong narrative link .
The presence or absence of the teacher is also a key variable.
Students are more able to cope with multimedia encyclopaedias, for instance, if the teacher is available to offer guidance.
Where teachers provide a strong narrative structure for the task, we observed fewer problems and noted that low-level interface and navigational problems can be more easily accommodated .
If more effort is involved in interacting with the text, mental resources available for comprehension am reduced.
Task talk was highest for linear version users at 73% of the total number of utterances, but there was no difference between RBL  and GDL  users.
For procedural talk about navigation and operations there was no difference across versions, all three being between 17% and 20% of the total number of utterances.
We cannot read too much into this given the small number of groups, but the minimal difference in procedural talk could be attributed to the fact that all versions featured the same explicit learner support and this may have overridden problems inherent in different structures.
The same features appearedin each version so as not to favour a particular narrative structure.
By doing this, however, we lost some of the clear differences in the types of talk we had identified in earlier classroom observations of commercial CD-ROMs which did not offer such support.
Analysing simple differences in the amounts of talk generated by different versions also risks eliding the role of individuals and, in some cases, individuals were a more important factor in group behaviour than the version to which they were exposed.
The points at which talk takes place and the effortfulness involved are more revealing.
There was a low initial level of procedural talk for users of the linear version because there were fewer procedural and operational decisions  to be made.
However, there was also a relatively low level of task talk  early in the session as the students simply sat back and watched the multimedia sequences unfold.
During this time them was minimal student collaboration.
The level of procedural talk increased once they had seen all eight sections because they had to assume some control, but this subsequently levelled off.
Although the level of procedural talk was similar for the resource-based students they spent less time on answer construction and we have already noted that they referred back to fewer sections.
This is reflected in an initial analysis of their self-recordedindividual accounts after the event, with RBL students using less than half as many words  than either the GDL or linear users .
Procedural talk tended to relate to using either the search or the menu facility as a central spine around which navigation to other sections of the CD-ROM was managed.
The guided discovery  users demonstrated low levels of talk in the early stages, but once the guides had been identified procedural talk decreasedand task talk increased because the written guidance helped them to focus on the task and suggested routes.
There was a tendency for the text to be entered in small sections, none longer than two short sentences, and to refer back frequently to other material, whereas some of the linear system users constructed large parts of their answer without referring back, an approach which was only observed with the linear version.
Not all groups made revisions after accessing the model answer.
This suggests less involvement and the possibility that the procedural overhead meant that their attention was diverted from the task, as demonstratedby the minimal narratives offered to explain their experiences after the event.
It is not usually possible to design a software-embedded narrative structure similar to the linear or GDL versions for multimedia encyclopaedias but it is possible to provide the means for learners to develop narratives which encompass the task and the route required to complete it satisfactorily.
The role of teachers in mediating the information can also be critical.
Design features which we identified as effective in engaging learners, supporting meaning-making processes and eliciting e,ffortful activity included: a clearly defined goal to encourage productive collaboration; a balance between narrative guidance provided by software design and the provision of facilities which allow learners to determine their route and construct a meaningful narrative; easy accessto the task and notepad enabling learners to search for information relevant to their task and use it to construct a narrative of their emerging understanding; a model answer which motivates learners both to start constructing an answer of their own and, once opened, prompts revisions.
The design dilemma is that building in support for narrative construction requires more tools and a more complex interface.
The three versions varied in the amount and type of guidance offered but they all offi similar help for narrative construction  as we hoped that comparisons could be more easily drawn.
The existence of a model answer motivated learners to start constructing an answer of their own and, once opened, the model answer itself prompted revisions.
Even though all versions have the same features supporting narrative construction, the take-up of these features varies according to the version used.
For instance, users of the linear version do not access the notepad until they have seen the whole sequence of eight sections and do not use the back/forwards buttons, even though they are clearly accessible and their function is described in the spoken introduction.
It is not that the linear version precludes them from using these features, but the interface design affects their responsesso they do not actively engage with the task.
The design also affects their interaction with each other, as a lower level of collaborative talk was observed for this group.
Although users of the linear version did not need to cb as much work at narrative construction they did not seem to use their cognitive resources to tackle the task more effectively than other groups.
It is as if a strong, recognisable narrative structure encourages users to jump aboard and be transported to the final destination but they can't easily get off.
This narrative seduction works well in traditional linear media such as films but is less appropriate for MILES because it doesn't maximise the potential benefits of an interactive medium or the interactivity offered by a good teacher and so is less suitable for learning.
The impetus to narrativise is so strong that in the RBL version cognitive resources are directed at constructing a route and finding structure rather than a content-rich narrative.
These are small-scale, exploratory studies and we: do not claim a simple causal relation between a version of Galapagos and effective learning.
Rather, we have explored a dynamic relationship in which the learners' experiences of design features affect both group and individual behaviour and this, in turn, affects their experience of design features.
We have explored this relationship with particular reference to the cyclical processes of narrative guidance and narrative construction because they are central to learning.
The generation of narrative is an active process of meaning-making.
It is a process through which we create a structure for interpreting and understanding connections and links between people, texts and events.
Texts which appear to have a strong surface narrative.
Even for more experienced users, if effort is involved in interacting with the material, mental resources available for comprehension and achievement of the learning goal are reduced.
MILES do not yet accommodate d:iversions, interruptions and repetitions as human teachers do, so although students are usually able to follow i.ndividual units of content they are not given the help they need in getting the bigger picture of how units interrelate.
Productive learning experiences benefit from the interplay between the processesof narrative guidance and narrative construction.
Multimedia interactive learning environments need to be designed so learners are able to both find narrative coherence and generae it for themselves.
Scaffolding learners' constructions of narrative.
In A. Bruckman et al.
Proceedings of Third International Conference on the Learning Sciences , pp.
Film techniques applied to the design and use of interfaces.
This research has been conducted as part of MEN0 , funded by the Economic and Social Research Council's Engineering Programme, grant no.
The Galapagos CD-ROM was developed by Matthew Stratfold.
We are indebted to the schools, teachers and students who made this research possible and to the reviewers, for detailed and valuable comments.
Narrative and the comprehension of educational interactive media.
Proceedings of the 8th European Conference on Cognitive Ergonomics , Granada, Spain, eds.
Narrative, linearity and interactive interactivity: making sense of British of Educational multimedia.
The `Primitive Mode of Representation' and the evolution of interactive multimedia: some design issues for group use.
An ethnographic approach to analysing navigation and task structure in interactive multimedia.
In People and Computers VII, 4s.
Cognitive structures in comprehension and memory of narrative discourse.
Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore.
Multimedia and the learner's experience of narrative.
Teaching and Learning with Interactive for Educational Media.
An evaluator's toolkit for tracking interactivity and learning.
Innovation in the Evaluation of Learning Technologies, pp.42-64.
University of North London, London.
