Recent advances in digital game technology are making stereoscopic games more popular.
Stereoscopic 3D graphics promise a better gaming experience but this potential has not yet been proven empirically.
In this paper, we present a comprehensive study that evaluates player experience of three stereoscopic games in comparison with their monoscopic counterparts.
We examined 60 participants, each playing one of the three games, using three selfreporting questionnaires and one psychophysiological instrument.
Our main results are  stereoscopy in games increased experienced immersion, spatial presence, and simulator sickness;  the effects strongly differed across the three games and for both genders, indicating more affect on male users and with games involving depth animations;  results related to attention and cognitive involvement indicate more direct and less thoughtful interactions with stereoscopic games, pointing towards a more natural experience through stereoscopy.
In both cases, existing games and well known game concepts are extended with S3D vision as a toggle option.
Nevertheless, to have such an option, players are required to purchase new display systems, glasses, or consoles.
It remains unclear whether S3D actually offers a substantial additional value to players.
Industry representatives announce S3D gaming as "the most exciting and engaging way to deliver an immersive game experience"1.
While recent studies actually indicate an increased engagement and improved experience, the reason for such an effect is not understood .
In addition, negative impacts on user experience through S3D are known as well: visual discomfort is expected to occur, especially at intensive depth levels involving large parallax settings or drastic changes in depth .
We expect subjective player experience in S3D gaming to differ both positively and negatively from monoscopic gameplay.
In this paper, we focus on understanding the quality of the actual impact and why users feel the way they do when playing games in 3D stereo over a 2D display.
How do different game concepts and target groups affect the experience?
Can we automatically improve every experience with S3D, as often promised by industry and expected by users?
By answering these questions, game designers can begin to take this knowledge and use it to assist in developing more compelling 3D stereo games.
Since the success of James Cameron's Avatar, many new digital media productions have promoted stereoscopic 3D vision as a strong benefit, be it movies, 3DTV, or games.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
The impact on experience of playing games using S3D compared to regular monoscopic displays is unknown.
Such a subjective experience while playing a game is often referred to as user experience , player experience , or game experience.
Positive and negative effects of stereoscopic vision on user experience have been intensively studied in the domain of image perception, 3DTV, and with virtual reality applications.
According to Tam et al., S3D image sequences are generally preferred over non-stereoscopic versions, perceived depth is rated greater for S3D sequences than for non-stereoscopic ones, and perceived sharpness of stereoscopic sequences is rated the same or lower compared to non-stereoscopic sequences .
In addition, animations in depth are perceived faster in S3D .
S3D also has a powerful impact on providing information about spatial location, size, shape, or orientation of 3D objects .
Virtual scenes  and video clips  experienced in S3D induce an increased perceived presence.
The latter study also reports more attention towards details requiring more time to explore a S3D scene.
S3D images are generally perceived more naturally and induce a better viewing experience .
In contrast to these benefits, current stereoscopic displays with a fixed screen plane cause several human visual cues to conflict with each other; the most prominent ones being accommodation and convergence.
This conflict is known to result in a negative experience due to visual discomfort  associated with symptoms of visual fatigue  .
A common solution is to reduce parallax settings to a comfortable viewing range , effectively limiting stereoscopic effects.
Additional distortions occurring from exaggerated disparity may include cross-talk, binocular rivalry, blur, compression artifacts, noise , or geometric distortions .
For objective assessment of image quality, 2D image quality metrics are not appropriate and 3D quality metrics are not available yet .
In addition, the perceived quality of stereoscopic presentations depends on the 3D display , varying with individual user physiology .
Even watching good quality 3DTV induced symptoms of simulator sickness in a pre-/post-comparison .
Such symptoms are already noticeable after less than five minutes of exposure .
Rajae-Joordens evaluated gameplay of Quake III: Arena on an autostereoscopic, lenticular display for 2D vs. S3D display modes .
S3D caused an increase in emotional arousal while the heart rate remained unaffected.
A questionnaire showed significantly higher presence and engagement results for S3D.
Additionally, no visual symptoms or simulator sickness was found.
The gaming performance  initially was higher in S3D but equal to 2D after prolonged use.
Most of the participants  preferred S3D over 2D.
LaViola and Litwiller also investigated user performance benefits of S3D with 40 participants playing five current digital games.
Their results indicate that although participants preferred playing in S3D for the tested games, it did not provide any significant advantage in overall user performance and learning.
Still, the users reported an improved experience and increased engagement while playing in S3D.
Interestingly, the variety of the evaluated games showed no influence to these results .
In a recent study, Takatalo et al.
Compared to monoscopic vision, they found a higher presence experienced with medium parallax settings only, not with high settings, probably due to visual discomfort.
With their slightly lower resolution setting, they did not find any effect in emotional factors such as the experienced flow, fun or enjoyment.
However, in another study, novel display technology  was found to amplify impact from S3D on user experience .
Overall, previous work proposes that S3D in some games is generally preferred.
However, it remains unclear exactly how player experience actually benefits from stereoscopic presentation.
How does it relate to known advantages of stereoscopy in general?
What is the impact of varying game design, modern stereoscopic display technology and rendering quality on novel stereoscopic gaming experience?
The aim of our study was to examine how player experience differs between playing a game being presented in stereoscopic vision  and playing it in monoscopic vision .
Stereoscopy results in a different game experience compared to a monoscopic display.
Playing stereoscopic games confirms benefits and flaws of experiencing other stereoscopic visuals , resulting in increased presence and increased simulator sickness.
These results are independent of the game.
The participants were tasked with playing through preselected sections of one of three different games.
Before the study, more than 20 S3D-enabled games were tested based on several suitability criteria.
None of the games were primarily designed with stereoscopy in mind but provided stereoscopic vision as an option, provided through the 3D vision driver.
Other 3D related aspects  were tested subjectively on the test system  as recommended before.
Besides stereoscopic properties, we focused on game playability.
The games needed to provide easy entry to keep the whole test setting within a reasonable time-frame and suitable to untrained players who might have never held a gamepad before.
Game controls thus had to be similar between the games and should avoid a possible impact from active body movements on psychophysiological measures .
Hence, all selected games had to be playable using cursor keys and a few additional keys on the keyboard.
The games needed to appeal to a broad audience but also needed to differ significantly in genre and visual setup.
The latter aspect refers to the strong depth effect of stereoscopy on the user.
For each game, two parts were selected, one for each experimental session.
The parts were selected to offer similar game mechanics and tasks within each game while allowing gameplay for both casual and experienced players.
The S3D settings for each game were set to provide a comfortable viewing on the used display.
The age of the chosen sample varied between 19 and 33 years, with a median of 21 years.
For both AV and BL half of the participants were male, while TR was played by 14 females and six males.
The median age for AV was 22 years and 21 years for the other two games.
A similar age is important as stereoscopic vision abilities are strongly affected of aging .
All of the participants successfully passed a prior S3D vision test.
The participants were offered free fruits, candy and beverages during the test sessions.
They received "study points" they need to earn in order to conduct experiments in their courses.
The evaluation was approved by our ethics board.
AV is a 3D action game played in third person view.
The player controls the player character through a 3D game world and has full control over the camera view in a certain range around the player model.
The task is to explore the 3D world, to collect items, to interact with non-player characters, and to shoot enemy creatures.
The first session consisted of the first level of the game, the second session started with the middle part of the second level.
The testing room was designed with a constantly low light source that did not interfere with the shutter glasses.
The games were run on a quad-core desktop PC running Windows 7, with a GeForce GTX 275 graphics card and a Samsung 22" display at 120 Hz with 1680 x 1050 pixel resolution.
To later sort out any participants possibly faking play activities, the gaming sessions were recorded using Fraps  by Beepa Pty Ltd. For the recordings, we used decreased resolutions and frame rate to ensure interactive frame rates>25 fps.
A MindSet headset was connected via bluetooth.
We recorded the data using open source software Puzzlebox Synapse by Brainstorms.
Due to stability problems, the software had to be controlled using an external PC.
Thus, sound could not be provided using the Mindset and so participants had to wear additional in-ear headphones beneath the MindSet device.
Since there was an impact on the subjective feel and comfort by wearing the full gear , the participants had to wear the 3D Vision glasses during both sessions .
In monoscopic display, both shutters of the glasses are open, providing an image slightly darker than without glasses but brighter than the stereoscopic version and similar in color tone .
BL is a racing game where the player controls a car from a third-person view while the camera moves into depth.
This effect is exaggerated when the player switches into a boost mode, drastically increasing the speed.
Six races at medium difficulty were selected, three from the first and three from the second level.
TR is an action-adventure game where the player controls one of three different fantasy characters through a sidescrolling world with primarily lateral camera animations.
The world is constructed from 3D models and spans across several depth planes, thus leaving a spatial impression.
For the playing sessions we selected the start of the game and the first part of the second level.
All participants had to play a game in both vision modes  in a within-subject design.
The sequence of the vision modes was randomized to alleviate possible learning effects and a potential impact from small differences between first and second levels.
The population was randomly broken into three groups of twenty users, where each group played one of the three games  in both vision modes.
The purpose of this decision was to enforce a comparison between vision modes, not between games.
It further allowed us to reduce duration times of the testing sessions and to minimize impact from personal preference.
The order of vision modes was randomized in a mixed design, where half of the participants started with SV and the other half with MV, equally distributed across games and gender.
To minimize impact from personal preference for a certain game or genre, the games were randomly selected and equally distributed across gender.
Our choice of metrics was based on Affective Ludology , an approach which propagates a mixture of subjective self-reporting tools and objective psycho-physiological metrics to assess both cognitive and emotional sides of gameplay experience.
In addition to demographic data, we asked participants about prior experience with gaming as well as with stereoscopic entertainment .
At the end of each trial, each participant was asked for their personal preference of vision modus and problems experienced during the sessions.
We used the Game Experience Questionnaire's 2 core questionnaire module.
It contains seven dimensions: Immersion , Flow , Competence , Tension , Challenge , Positive Affect , and Negative Affect .
These are each measured using five to six items per dimension , each on 1-to-5 disagree-agree response Likert-scales.
We used the German version provided by Nacke .
The GEQ further includes a social presence module and a post-game module which were discarded in this study to shorten the overall test duration.
Presence was measured by the MEC Spatial Presence Questionnaire  .
It includes four process factors: Attention Allocation , Spatial Situation Model , Spatial Presence:Self Location  and Spatial Presence:Possible Actions .
Two additional variables relating to states and actions  and Suspension of Disbelief  are also part of the MEC-SPQ.
We used the short version offering four items for each scale.
Possible dizziness or other subjective disorders were measured using the Simulator Sickness Questionnaire  .
It contains three dimensions, Nausea , Oculomotor , and Disorientation , measured through 16 items on a 4-level Likert scale .
The three dimensions are then combined to create a Total SSQ metric .
In our study, we used the German translation previously applied by Mehlitz .
Psychophysiological data was acquired using the NeuroSky MindSet.
The headset measures electroencephalogram  data using contact dots.
Three of these dots are included in the left ear cushion while the forth dot rests on the subject's forehead.
The data consists of custom interpretations in so-called eSense meters: Attention  and Meditation .
Although little data on the validity of these scales is available, previous work indicates positive GEQ, developed by K. Poels, W. A. IJsselsteijn, and Y.
A. W de Kort at the Game Experience Lab Eindhoven ,  in the European project FUGA.
All participants were informed about the aim and procedure of the study and had to sign an agreement including a list of possibly occurring symptoms such as epilepsy, vision disorders or dizziness.
All participants were tested for stereoscopic vision through the medical test image provided by the Nvidia driver settings.
This introduction took about seven minutes on average.
The experiment began with a five-minute introduction to the experiment and the signature of the participation agreement.
In the following ten minutes, the participants completed a questionnaire at another PC that focused on demographic data and personal prior experience with games and stereoscopic vision.
The participants were then seated in front of the gaming PC.
They were introduced to the gear  and were asked to remain seated in a constant position.
Before the tests started, the game was presented and could be tested for about ten minutes, until the participant understood the core game mechanics and was able to control and play for her- or himself.
Each of the two following gaming sessions, one per vision mode, lasted about fifteen minutes.
During play, the participants were left alone by the experimenters, who could not see the current display content.
Each gaming session was followed by a questionnaire session of about fifteen minutes.
The whole experiment took about 1.5 hours per participant.
We collected data of frequency of play for all participants.
None of our participants played more than 20-30 or more than 30 hours per week.
The typical weekly playing duration was 4.9 hours across all participants.
Male subjects  played noticeably more frequently than females .
Again, experience with genre differed between both genders: females are better used to Puzzle games , Jump'n'Run , and Strategy/RPG games .
Males had generally higher experience levels, maximizing in Strategy , Ego-Shooter/RPG , and Jump'n'Run/ActionShooter .
Considering BL, Racing was better known among males  than among females .
Only a few of the participants had played the games we tested.
Seven reported to have previously played AV one to ten times , one had played BL one to ten times  and two had played it for more than 25 times .
One player had previously played TR one to ten times .
Prior experience with S3D was collected for cinema, TV and digital games.
Of the 60 participants, four had never seen a 3D cinema movie, 34 one to three times and 22 four to nine times.
Fifteen had previously watched 3DTV one to three times, one had watched four to nine times, the others never.
Only six participants had previously played S3D games .
These results were similar for both genders.
Female participants showed no significant difference.
More effects became visible for the male group only .
For males playing BL, a Wilcoxon-Signed-Rank test showed a significantly higher Flow value in SV than in MV .
In TR, male subjects experienced Challenge significantly lower under SV than under MV condition .
No effects were found in the female group.
Comparing SV with MV, the GEQ data revealed higher mean values of Immersion, Flow, Positive Affect, and Negative Affect and lower mean values in Tension and Challenge in the stereo condition .
Looking at these results for each gender , a dependent two-sample T-Test confirmed the significant difference only among male participants 
Stereoscopic vision also had an impact on the amount of experienced symptoms of simulator sickness : The mean value of Total SSQ was significantly higher  in SV than in MV.
All three subscales  also showed higher SV mean values, but only the difference in Ocu was significant .
Surprisingly, this increase in symptoms was only reported by the male subjects.
The female subjects reported lower mean values in SV than in MV, but these differences were not significant.
Within the game conditions over all participants, no significant differences between SV and MV were found.
No effects were found for Trine, nor for the female group playing any game.
Comparable to previous findings, 51 participants  had more fun with the SV mode.
Of the nine others, five had played BL, three had played AV and one TR .
We also asked for any problems during play.
For some participants , the game difficulty was too low.
We further collected both positive and negative comments .
The positive ones state a new and fun experience with a more spatial connotation; the negative remarks were related to comfort and reported unsuitable game interaction for stereoscopic vision .
According to the GEQ data alone, stereoscopy resulted in increased Immersion and thus enhanced game experience, confirming our first hypothesis.
Most of the other results in MEC-SPQ and SSQ correspond to previous findings on stereoscopic applications  seem to induce an increased spatial presence, but cause a higher level of simulator sickness than monoscopic games.
This also confirms our second hypothesis.
Interestingly, and other than what we had expected based on previous findings , all of these effects are strongly altered by the choice of games which clearly rejects our third hypothesis.
In addition we found a strong impact from the gender of the players, which we did not expect to happen.
A second aspect is a possible higher affinity of males for 3D animations and spatially complex environments and the known gender difference in spatial abilities .
At the same time however, SV was strongly preferred for any choice of game in both gender groups.
Hence, it will require further research to allow forecasting preference and quality assessment from analyzing user experience characteristics.
Our data does not indicate whether the distinctive preferences found may result from a possible novelty factor of stereoscopic games and may vanish with longer playing times.
Stereoscopic vision affects particular users differently for varying games .
GEQ only showed differences for male users: BL caused males to report higher Flow; in TR they experienced less Challenge when playing in S3D.
SV seems to have more impact on Immersion in those games which offer a lot of depth animation  than in a side-scrolling game .
For the former two games, males were more strongly affected in game experience and simulator sickness than females.
Similarly, the MEC-SPQ had different impact for the games and gender.
SV in BL increased presence primarily in males; SV in AV had an effect on presence in both gender groups.
SV in TR had more impact in presence on females.
Effects of simulator sickness were found to be increased in SV for the whole sample, but again differently for the separate games and gender .
The TR group did not report any such impairment, nor did the female subjects which partly contradicts previous findings .
This effect could relate to the used display technology, as a previous study using a lenticular display did not find an impact on SSQ .
We consider the strong impact of SV across all metrics on males to be affected for two reasons.
First, our male users stated a greater prior experience with game genres and report more frequent use of digital games than female subjects.
An increased spatial presence was generally experienced while playing stereoscopic games.
Players felt more directly located within the stereoscopic game and increasingly urged to actively participate.
More attention was also allocated by the game.
At the same time, higher cognitive involvement was reduced under SV, so players seem to less actively reflect their playing on a meta-level.
As with game experience, these effects differed for the three games.
While BL had more impact on male users, TR only affected female users in their spatial presence.
In AV, we found similar effects for both male and female users.
The MindSet data showed a lower mean Attention during SV game play.
It is questionable how this decrease might be related with the MEC-SPQ values of increased AA and decreased Higher Cognitive Involvement in SV.
We did not find any correlation of Attention with any other metric.
However, as the MindSet is primarily designed as an input device in order to allow players active control of a computer using brain activities, we would rather expect this value to reflect self-induced or conscious attention.
As such, it does not contradict the increase of AA found in the stereo MEC-SPQ which reports how a game allocates or draws attention of a player.
Hence, we argue that stereoscopic presentation draws more attention but leads to less thoughtfulness and attentiveness, possibly contributing to a more intuitive and natural interaction with a game.
A possible reason could be the generally more natural visual experience with stereoscopic images, also reported in .
Besides the Immersion effect, SV had only little overall impact on game experience as no other differences were found across all participants.
In general, the GEQ is able to show such differences, visible when analyzing the variances between the three games: All but one GEQ-dimension were significantly different between the three games in MV, correctly reflecting their differences.
In SV however, only four of seven dimensions were different for the three games, they were effectively more similar to each other in SV than in MV in terms of game experience.
We have to note that none of the evaluated games were primarily designed for stereoscopic vision.
As previously stated, all current games have SV as an option and must remain playable without it .
In comparison, stereoscopic movies are thoroughly produced for S3D presentation, taking into account actual movie theater configurations and display settings .
They differ in parts  from their monoscopic versions.
Movie makers can build on a long history of stereoscopic cinematography that directs visual attention towards certain depths of interest within a scene.
These solutions are hardly applicable in games, where the camera and scene depths often change dynamically and interactively.
Many current games further suffer from certain S3D rendering problems and interface artifacts.
Bernhaupt, R. User Experience Evaluation in Entertainment.
In R. Bernhaupt, ed., Evaluating User Experience in Games Concepts and Methods.
The development of the Game Engagement Questionnaire: A measure of engagement in video game-playing.
Crowley, K., Sliney, A., Pitt, I., and Murphy, D. Evaluating a Brain-Computer Interface to Categorise Human Emotional Response.
Dodgson, N. Variation and extrema of human interpupillary distance.
Correlation between Heart Rate, Electrodermal Activity, and Player Experience in FirstPerson Shooter games.
Vergence-accommodation conflicts hinder visual performance and cause visual fatigue.
Holliman, N., Froner, B., and Liversedge, S. An application driven comparison of depth perception on desktop 3D displays.
Howarth, P. Potential hazards of viewing 3-D stereoscopic television, cinema and computer games: a review.
Ophthalmic & physiological optics: the journal of the British College of Ophthalmic Opticians  31, 2 , 111-22.
Hubona, G.S., Wheeler, P.N., Shirah, G.W., and Brandt, M. The relative contributions of stereo, lighting, and background scenes in promoting 3D depth visualization.
Our goal in subsequent work will be to develop a game design which is experienced differently when presented in stereoscopic vision.
The effects found here give a first direction, indicating an impact of depth animation, showing that SV can contribute to a particular game experience, when taking into account how the design affects the core target group.
Future assessment should also examine if the given results for these games are valid for similar games, allowing for systematically estimating a benefit of stereoscopy for a certain type of game or genre.
This paper provides a comprehensive study on the impact of stereoscopy on gaming experience.
We analyzed three different games by comparing two vision modes using GEQ, MEC-SPQ, SSQ and EEG-related metrics.
Our results contain three major contributions.
First, we confirm previous findings that playing games in S3D is clearly preferred over mono.
It increases experiences of presence and immersion while causing more symptoms of simulator sickness.
Second, we show for the first time that these effects depend strongly on the game and the gender of the user.
For a racing game with compelling 3D camera movement, we found more impact on male users, while a side-scrolling-game with less spatial animations had more effect on female users.
Avatar, offering dynamic 3D scenes with side- and depth-relative camera movements, affected both genders.
Measuring Stereoscopic Image Quality Experience with Interpretation Based Quality Methodology.
Hakkinen, J., Polonen, M., Takatalo, J., and Nyman, G. Simulator sickness in virtual display gaming.
Proceedings of the 8th conference on Human-computer interaction with mobile devices and services MobileHCI '06, ACM Press , 227-230.
IJsselsteijn, W., Ridder, H. de, Freeman, J., Avons, S.E.E., and Bouwhuis, D. Effects of Stereoscopic Presentation, Image Motion, and Screen Size on Subjective and Objective Corroborative Measures of Presence.
Jumisko-Pyykko, S., Utriainen, T., Strohmeier, D., Boev, A., and Kunze, K. Simulator sickness -- Five experiments using autostereoscopic mid-sized or small mobile screens.
Kennedy, R., Lane, N., and Berbaum, K. Simulator Sickness Questionnaire: An enhanced method for quantifying simulator sickness.
LaViola Jr, J.J. and Litwiller, T. Evaluating the benefits of 3d stereo in modern video games.
Visual Discomfort in Stereoscopic Displays: A Review.
Aufbau eines medizinischen VirtualReality-Labors und Entwicklung eines VR-gestutzten neuropsychologischen Testsystems mit einer praklinischen und klinischen Evaluationsstudie.
3D movie making: stereoscopic digital cinema from script to screen.
Towards a Framework of Player Experience Research.
Perceived 3DTV Viewing in the Public: Insights from a ThreeDay Field Evaluation Study.
