Children engage in free play for emotional, physical and social development; researchers have explored supporting free play between physically remote playmates using videoconferencing tools.
We show that the configuration of the video conferencing setup affects play.
Specifically, we show that a shared visual scene configuration promotes fundamentally active forms of engaged, co-operative play.
Many early psychologists emphasized the importance of physical and social play in early childhood development --both for the development of practical motor skills, and cognitive and social reasoning skills.
In contrast, our interest has been to engage children in more active forms of free play--where children can actively explore space, and devise rules for interaction with a remote participant.
Our approach is based on the idea that for children, play is not strictly limited to toys in a "play area"; instead that a child's body, and his/her interaction with his environment functions as the play space .
Thus, our interest is in allowing the child and his/her entire environment to be the subject of play, along with the play partner.
As illustrated in Figure 1, where a mother and child play "paddycake", OneSpace  is a video conferencing tool that merges the video feeds of two remote sites into a single shared visual scene .
Consequently, the visual scene, inhabited by the child with his/her partner, becomes a shared play area.
Copyrights for thirdparty components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the Owner/Author.
Copyright is held by the owner/author.
We evaluated OneSpace as a tool to support play between 14 participants , comparing it to a conventional video conferencing configuration.
Our findings demonstrate that the OneSpace configuration produces an entirely different "flavour" of interaction--one whose nature is fundamentally physical, and with high levels of engagement .
Several prior authors have explored the use of video conferencing tools with children.
While an extensive review is beyond the scope of this note, we synthesize findings from prior work relevant to our purposes here.
Children have a difficult time understanding "visibility" in conventional video conferencing.
In real life, if I can see grandpa, he can see me; however, this is not necessarily the case in video conferencing: while I may see his face on screen, I may not be visible to the camera on my side .
The children co-opted both the projected rug and the image of the remote person's body into their play, suggesting that a person 's body as an object  contribute to play.
Size of the capture area is important --likely, if we capture and present more of a person's body and environment, we would expect to see increased physical activity.
The OneSpace configuration was designed to address these challenges .
Drawing on early work , we merge two remote spaces, placing participants in a shared visual scene, where their entire bodies  are represented.
It simplifies issues of visibility, and reduces the number of screens that are important to pay attention to.
Most related to our work is WaaZaam, which allows people to personalize/customize the environment and gesturally transform themselves .
We then interviewed the participants.
How does the OneSpace video configuration change the nature of interaction between remote parties?
We conducted an observational study where we compared free play between the OneSpace configuration, and a more conventional configuration .
Our goal was to understand the nature of free play in these mediated environments, in terms of the kinds of play , the nature of engagement between the participants, and the level of physical activity participants would engage in.
We were interested in whether OneSpace offered alternative ways for movement and play with the physical body.
To support our efforts, we rely on previous work studying play types and engagement.
While many schemes exist for describing play types, we adapted Bronson's scheme to comprise six types of play activity among children : active; make believe; manipulative; creative; learning; object play.
As a measure of engagement between participants, we rely on Parten 's articulation, where each level describes the level of engagement  for a child with regard to the play of another : unoccupied; solitary; onlooker; parallel; associative; cooperative.
For each scale, we also categorized "transitions" between activities.
Table 1 shows ages and sex of the 14 people we recruited .
We selected only children between 6 and 10 years.
We employed a simple within-subjects design with two conditions: OneSpace configuration and conventional configuration.
Participants were recruited as pairs , and after minimal warm-up  were separated into two independent spaces.
They were then asked to play with each of the two configurations , where presentation order was counterbalanced across groups.
We captured video data  during sessions, recorded audio of interviews, and collected field notes.
The video data was coded according to both Bronson's types of play framework, and Parton's engagement framework at a sampling interval of 5s, with the dominant play type/engagement level coded.
One rater coded all the video, while a second rater coded two groups' data to ensure reliability .
Play in the two configurations was different in terms of depth of engagement, and overall type of play.
Even though the quality of the video in OneSpace was poorer , we saw many activities in OneSpace that were impossible in the conventional condition.
The OneSpace setup seemed to encourage a more engaged co-operative and organized play, where both participants would take on an active role in structuring the play with one another.
Since participants ' actions would have visual consequences in the shared video scene, this would tend to stimulate additional discussion and action.
Figure 2 provides an illustrative example of G3, where the child and the father have set up a scene where the blocks  are now being virtually destroyed by the child's dinosaur.
The father stands out of the "visible" area, and responds to the child 's movements by taking apart various parts of the tower.
In contrast, as illustrated in Table 2, the conventional configuration exhibited fairly high levels of parallel and associative play.
This was particularly striking in our parentchild pairs, since parents were actively trying to engage their child.
As a fairly instructive example, in G7, a child sat to draw a picture, while his father did the same.
This continued for five minutes, and while the father initiated some small talk, neither looking up during the activity.
Parten's phrasing of Associative Play really resonates with our observations here--in our child-parent participant groups, when the child "disengaged" in joint activity, the parent would try to strike up conversation with the child.
The type of play also varied substantially between the two conditions, with more active play in OneSpace compared to make-believe being the main driver in the conventional configuration .
The nature and affordances of these video configurations have a strong impact on the style of play that participants choose.
Figure 3 provides an illustrative account of an active and learning episode from the OneSpace condition.
Here, the child is playing with a hulahoop.
Her mother tries to join in, but has lost her hulahooping skills.
The child then begins instructing her mother on how to properly hulahoop by standing next to and in front of her mother, demonstrating the correct motion for her mother to mimic.
Perhaps because the conventional configuration enforces the separation of space, participants playing across the sites needed to engage in make believe to feel closer.
As an illustrative example, G4 decided to play through a fashion show together, dressing up dolls in various costumes and creating a narrative between the characters.
The physical separation between the spaces is extremely evident in these instances--the only real bridge between these spaces is the conversation to create a shared imaginary domain, and a video link that shows the facial reactions of one's partner.
The OneSpace configuration seems to afford physical activity by virtue of the shared visual space that encompasses the entirety of both participants' bodies.
The fact that both shared the same visual space means they are, in a sense, competing for the visual stage.
Recognizing this seemed to spark instances of playfulness, where participants would take turns trying to upstage one another.
G5 used this technique to make a four-armed mosquito, where the child pretended to be the mother's arms by standing "in front of" her mother, but flapping her arms around.
In this way, their bodies became objects of play in this shared space.
Active  play was characteristic of play that we observed in OneSpace--participants  generally moved about the scene far more.
For instance, groups played "tag" in OneSpace, or would run from one side of the shared scene to the other, and so forth.
Figure 1 illustrates a pair playing "paddycake," while others would also play fight, miming punches and kicks, and feigning injury.
What is striking about these physical activities is that it seemed representative of the same Trans.
Of Conventional course, how they would "touch" one Table 2.
Engagement levels on 5s intervals across groups.
Active Make-believe Manipulative Creative Learning Object another was different, but the character of OneSpace 150 477 110 16 7 34 27 the movement was natural.
In contrast, the conventional configuration seems to afford more solitude among participants.
Instead, a lot of play centered on activities that each could engage in by themselves, and instances of "show and tell" where one would ask the other to look at something on their side.
Children did seem to understand in the OneSpace condition what could be seen--they would regularly play with their partners in the video scene.
Yet, we still observed instances in the OneSpace condition where children would ask, "Can you see me?"
There, we observed far more instances of the parents  coaching the child, "Why don't you back up so I can see you all the way?
In one instance, a child asked, "What are you looking at  it doesn't look like you are  ," even though the parent was looking at the screen.
Here, the child had noticed that the eye gaze of the parent was incorrect .
In this case, the parent explained to the child how cameras worked, etc.
Similarly, one pair discounted OneSpace entirely, citing its poor, blocky resolution and low framerate as reasons why they would simply not use it.
One concern with generalizability of these results is the novelty effect.
In future work, we will conduct longterm deployments of OneSpace into participant homes.
We will also explore digital entities such as costumes or objects  in the shared play space.
This work contributes to the ongoing discussion in the research community about how to provide playful environments to connect children at a distance.
Rather than focusing on a shared activity  or play surface , we focused here on giving children a visual representation that shows themselves with a playmate.
Based on our study, we suggest two major lessons for future work in this space: first, for children, the body is actually a "play area" and that this should be an area of exploration, and second, creating a shared space environment for remote play can lead to a more active and physical play--thus forcing us to ask questions about what closeness and separation actually mean to people that inhabit these spaces.
Our application of these ideas to the domain of child freeplay is a natural extension of this, recognizing that children also consider their bodies and environments as objects of play.
Although the size of our subject pool is small, we believe the results to be generally representative.
The differences in the quality of the play and the type of engagement between OneSpace and conventional video conferencing was immediately striking--not only to us, but to at least some of participants, one who noted: "Before  we felt really close; now using Skype, it feels like we're really really  far apart.
While it does address attention across two disjoint displays, the subtleties and details of interaction  are meaningful and powerful cues to children.
This is perhaps unsurprising, since this age group is learning to read and respond appropriately to non-verbal social cues.
