INTRODUCTION When people communicate with each other they use a wealth of interaction techniques.
The multitudes of gestures, intonation, facial expressions, and gaze set the context for the spoken word, and arc usually essential in human interaction .
The Advanced Human Interface Group at the MIT Media Laboratory is exploring how the three modes of speech, gestures, and gaze can bc combined at the intcrfacc to allow people to use their natural communication skills in interacting with the computer .
The work is aimed at widening the means to communicate with computers and to make computing power available to the widest range of people.
The prototype system we have designed allows a person to interact in real-time with a graphics display by pointing, looking, asking questions, and issuing commands.
The systcm responds with graphical manipulations and spoken answers to the user's request.s.
INPUT TECHNOLOGIES Speech A head worn, noise-cancclling microphone feeds the speech to an AT 386 computer with hardware and software that allow for discrete word recognition, The recognized words arc in turn scnl to onc of two host computers .
Hand The VPL DataglovcTM gives information about finger posture of the user.
The position and attitude of the hand is given by a magnetic sensor on the back of the hand, Pointing gestures arc recognized on a host compulcr by a template-matching algorithm.
Once a gesture has been rccognizcd, a 3-dimensional vector extending out of the hand is intersected with the scrccn to find point of reference,
The resulting eye data is analyzed intojixations, saccudes, and blinks, Position of the head is found by using a magnetic sensor attached 10 the cyc tracker.
Fixations are sent to the host computer along with the user's head position during each fixation.
These data are then combined to arrive at the user's point-of-gaze on a graphics scrccn .
An cyc tracker , microphone , and glove  allow the user to refer to objects on the screen by pointing, s~aking, and looking.
SYSTEM DESCRIPTION The systcm running on the two host computers has two basic components: an object-oriented map, with icons representing airplanes, trucks, helicopters, fire-fighting crews, and fire locations.
The map is maintained by a graphics manager that keeps track of the position of all its icons, as WCI1 as their color, class, and name tag.
The second part of the system is a collection of modules called the Agent.
The Agent can request information from the map manager about the layout of objects, and integrate it with the user's multi-modal requests.
The Agent can thus arrive at an appropriate response for any request that the user issues.
Resolving Missing Information Whenever the Agent receives a request that is under specified in speech, for example "delete duzt object," it will try to fill in the missing information by looking at what the user did in the two other modes around the time he said "that."
The Agent looks for a pointing gesture and where on the screen the user fixated during that time.
If one object is clearly singled out as the most Iikcly referent, as indicated by the proximity of fixations and pointing to the object, then that object will be chosen as the rcfcrcnt and subsequently deleted.
When vital information is missing from the speech input, and the Agent cannot find a referent based on either hand or eye it will ask the user for further specifications.
Resolving Multiple Reference The Agent can reason about relations between objects.
This allows a user to say "delete the truck south of that fire."
A rcfcrcnce is made to two objects, but onc is derived by the location of the other, "Move" commands involve two rcfcrcnccs; onc 10 an object and one to a new location, as in "move that helicopter to there."
The systcm can successfully deal with a continuous input of such commands by looking at the lime that actions occurred and comparing it to the time that the user utters the important words of the phrase .
FUTURE DIRECTIONS By allowing for multi-modal interaction, people can usc their social skills in interacting with the computer.
We will be looking at further ways to make such interaction possible; giving the computer a greater sense of twohanded gestures as they occur naturally in 3-dimensional space, and the role of gaze in communication.
Other tasks include giving the Agent a memory, a greater understanding of spatial relationships, and a face that can glance back at the user .
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The authors acknowledge the contributions of graduate students Brent C.J.
Britton and Edward Hcrranz, assistants David L. Bcrgcr, Michael P. Johnson, Mathew Kaminski, Brian Lawrence, and Christopher Wren, and research affiliate Ma.saru Sugai, NEC, Japan.
This research was supported by the Defcnce Advanced Research Projects Agency under Rome Laboratories, contract F30602-89-C-O022.
Argyle, M. & Cook, M. Gaze and Mutual Gaze.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, England, 1975.
Lifetime Learning Publications, Belmont, CA, 1984.
Unpublished Master's Thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1991.
Ncspoulous, J-L, & Lecours, A. R. Gestures: Nature and Function.
In The Biological foundations of J-L. Geslures: Motor and Semiotic Aspects, Ncspoulous, P. Perron, & A. Roth .
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Hillsdale, NJ, 1986, pp.
