User activities in peer-production communities have mainly been examined under the assumption that individuals are rational individuals who are always cognizant of what they are doing and why.
We argue that not all use is the same; while some behaviors are governed by conscious motivations, others may be a habitual response that is developed out of routine.
We take a more granular approach to explaining what people are doing in online communities and how motivations and habits explain their use of specific features.
In the context of the peer-production community Everything2 we employ both server log data and self-report, finding that habit is a non-conscious-driven behavior that is more associated with less cognitively-demanding tasks than content production.
Activities can range from simply reading the content of others, to posting original content, interacting with other users, or administering content through rating or editing.
We take a granular approach to explaining what people are doing in online communities because the activities that users engage in can range from passive consumption of content to active production of content.
Previous studies that have taken a more nuanced look at the different types of behaviors within online communities  have found that conceptualizing activities in online communities in a uniform manner may not paint an accurate picture of user behavior.
It is important to understand what contributes to sustained user participation in peer-production communities, which often have social or economic value.
For example, Wikipedia provides information freely and broadly, but has been shown to be losing editors over time .
Previous research has tried to explain and understand why people consume and contribute to websites with user-generated content.
Some have used theoretical frameworks, including cost and benefit paradigms , social psychological explanations , and social learning theory , to study participation.
Others have examined the issue from more of a design perspective, reporting that specific features of the media , characteristics of the content , or design elements can motivate people to participate .
Much of the research has focused on explaining participation of new users  though more recent studies have looked into motivations of long-term users .
Despite the different approaches that scholars have taken to study these communities, the one thing that they have in common is the underlying assumption that users consciously choose why and how they want to use the site.
In other words, it is expected that users are rational beings in that they actively make their decisions.
However, to what extent is this presupposition true?
Could it be that some of our behavior online is more or less conducted without much thinking?
In this paper, we introduce the concept of habit as an important psychological construct that helps predict sustained user participation in online communities.
Habit is an automated cognitive heuristic that helps people make decisions about system use without having to incur the cost of conscious decision processing on a regular basis.
By creating a heuristic of use, habit may be a more salient concept to explain sustained use than motivation, which involves conscious choice and may be more prevalent at the inception of online community participation.
Previous research has shown that the way people participate in peer-production communities is not monolithic.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
We distinguish habits as properties of an individual and routines as a property of a group or organization.
Recently, media researchers have started to suggest that conscious motivations are more salient when someone is just beginning to use a system, but gradually become comingled with habit .
We adapt this focus on habit from media research as a potential explanation for why users participate in social media.
We also shift the focus from how much time people spend in online communities to how much time they are spending on individual activities.
In the context of the peerproduction community Everything2.com, we employ both server log data and self-reports, we present how habit predicts different uses of the website.
In this sense, habits respond to the efficiency in which cognitive resources are used, as the brain does not have to make the same decision each time a behavior is performed.
Although habit is a type of non-conscious behavior, they are not unrelated to conscious behavior, such as goals--in other words, an individual's behavior can still be habitual even when there is an underlying motivation to accomplish a task.
For example, one may have the goal of driving to work; habit may cause the person to take the same route every day without giving it much thought.
At the same time, habits are not permanent: a different stimulus--such as a traffic accident--could take an individual out of the habit and pursue different behavior.
Thus, habits can act in parallel with conscious intentions and motivations as predictors of a behavior.
Habit is a routine that individuals engage in with little conscious knowledge, awareness, or intention .
For example, putting on one's seatbelt may have been something that first-time drivers pay much attention to, but veteran drivers will probably buckle their seatbelt without much thought.
Habits can also govern media use .
If you think about what you do when you first turn on the computer, you will probably realize that there is a pattern in terms of which websites you visit.
Early definitions of habit have described of the concept in terms of frequency of past behavior .
However, further research, concept, and measurement refinements have conceptualized habit as not necessarily defined in terms of frequency of past behavior, but in terms of the automaticity of behaviors triggered by specific cues , that can also be performed at the same time as other activities .
In this paper, we define habit as an automatic responses that is triggered by an environmental stimulus .
In other words, habits are "sequential, repetitive, motor, or cognitive behaviors elicited by triggers, that, once released, can go to completion without constant conscious oversight" .
So the inside of the car can be the environmental stimulus to trigger putting on the seatbelt, whereas a browser or computer screen can act as a stimulus to trigger habitual Internet surfing behavior.
These behaviors are almost reflexive in the sense that the individual isn't thinking about why he or she is doing it or how.
Behaviors that are considered habitual do not require continuous attention to be performed, as cognitive resources are freed to deal with other unrelated thoughts .
This idea of cognitive overload has been the underlying explanation of psychological theories of peripheral information processing .
Many studies of why people use media have been guided by social learning or uses and gratifications .
Uses and gratifications is the notion that people have certain needs and use media to fulfill those needs .
The majority of uses and gratifications studies identify motivations and look at the linear relationship between motivations and time spent using a particular medium--such studies include early research on television  to more recent research on social network sites .
These studies report a small but significant relationship between motivations and time spent on the site: an overview of several uses and gratifications studies shows that motivations explain less than 30% of the variance, with most studies reporting less than 10% .
The notion of habit as a construct to help understand media use runs in parallel to the uses and gratifications paradigm, but many of the studies on habitual media use have been qualitative in nature.
In one of the earliest studies, Greenberg  identified habit as one of the seven television viewing motivations of children and adolescents.
Krendl and Lasky  conducted a content analysis of adolescents' open-ended responses to television's influences on their lives and found that 52% of those who mentioned negative effects referred to television viewing as a "habitual dedication established by routine rather than by conscious choice."
Rosenstein and Grant  examined individuals' television viewing patterns between weekdays and weekends; the similarity in the patterns suggested that habit plays a significant role in viewing behavior.
Adams  reported data from focus groups, also supporting the role of habit in television viewing.
Despite this evidence, habitual media use has been a topic of controversy among mass communication scholars because of the general trend in the social sciences of focusing on behavior involving more complex cognitive processes .
Why is it important to consider habit in our studies of how people use media, including social media and online communities?
In many cases, habit accounts for 40-50% of the variance in time spent on the Internet  or playing social games .
Thus, for designers or administrators who are trying to create and maintain a system that is trying to keep users engaged in the long run, understanding how habits are formed and how habits affect future use may greatly supplement what can be learned just by looking at user motivation and even provide explanations for behavior that is less affected by motivation.
There is little literature in the CHI community about habitual behavior, but the few studies that do exist suggest that habit is an extremely important factor in usability.
For example, a large-scale study on password use reports that users' choice of passwords are strongly influenced by habit .
Habit can also pose difficulties for users switching mobile phone models .
Furthermore, conscious motivations and attitudes become less salient as habits form.
In addition, even if habit is able to explain future behavior, does it apply to all behavior?
It could be that habit predicts intention for certain behaviors but not others.
RQ3a: How do motivations predict general intention to visit the site in the future?
RQ3b: How does habit predict general intention to visit the site in the future?
RQ4a: How do motivations predict intention to use specific features?
RQ4b: How does habit predict intention to use specific features?
Many uses and gratifications studies have used motivations to explain how much time users spend using a particular media .
However, scholars who have added habit strength to their models have found that habit significantly adds to the variance explained by motivations in terms of how much time a user spends using a media .
The first question, therefore, is to see if habit indeed increases explanatory power in terms of users' time spent on the site.
RQ1: Does habit help explain the overall amount of time spent on the site?
Habit is reliant on the repetition of positive reinforcements; previous satisfactory experiences enhance the tendency to repeat a behavior and create habits.
The strength of the habit, however, depends on the persistence of environmental features .
Habit is strongly dependent on the stability of the context in which the behavior is performed.
In stable environments where performance times, locations and other contextual features are persistent; repeated behaviors tend to become habitual as these environmental cues trigger associated behaviors.
Our second research question is to see if use of specific features in an online community is associated with habit and if cue-dependent activities are more associated with habit than those that are not: RQ2: What is the relationship between past behaviors on Everything2 and habit strength?
Also of interest is if habit can be a predictor of how a user perceives they will use the site in the future--in other words, how habit affects individuals' intention in terms of how they want to use the specific features in the future-- and if there is any difference between what habit predicts and what current motivations predict.
Ouellete and Wood  suggest that once habits have been established, intentions become antecedents of habitual behavior.
The research questions outlined above were tested in the context of Everything2.
Founded in 1999, Everything2 is a wiki-style online community where members can interact with one another through many different modes of communication, centered around series of topical write-ups.
Everything2 has an active user base of about 3,000 contributing members, and receives approximately 590,000 unique visitors and 1.2 million page views in one month as of September, 2011.
Everything2 is structured as an encyclopedia, much like Wikipedia, so content is in the form of articles, even though on Everything2 these articles can include creative writing content and more personal diary-like entries.
Any one topic on Everything2 is called a "node" and individual user contributions to that topic are called "Write-ups".
Unlike other wikis, users maintain ownership of their contributions, and contributions may not be edited by other users.
Different social features on Everything2 allow users to give feedback through voting systems, reputation systems, as well as through private messaging.
Users can also use messaging to engage in personal conversations that are more social in nature.
Upvotes are positive evaluations that users can assign to the Write-ups of other users.
Downvotes are similar to Upvotes, but only differ in that they are negative evaluations.
All votes are +/- assignments, and users may only vote once on each Write-up.
Users are limited in the number of votes they may assign within a given timeframe.
This time frame, and size of a user's voting pool depends on many factors such as amount of contribution to the site and/or administrator status.
These features were made available to users to facilitate community building and management of site-content.
An online survey of registered users of the site Everything2.com was conducted in order to answer the research questions in this study.
The online survey was conducted on the website Survey Gizmo over a three-week period during the summer of 2011.
A banner inviting users to participate in a study was viewable on the top of the front page of Everything2 once users had logged-in.
The banner remained viewable on each page of the site until users had accepted to participate on the survey, or declined the invitation by clicking on a "No thanks" link.
To prevent duplicate survey entries from the same user, after clicking on either link the banner would no longer be shown on Everything2.com pages served to that user's IP address.
A total of 148 registered users answered the online survey.
Participants were from 18 different countries, 61.8% of which were from the United States, and 79.9% had English as their first language.
The survey questionnaire included items assessing participants' habit strength for using the site and their motivations.
The measurements of each of these variables were constructed using multi-item additive indices that assessed different aspects of each variable.
The questionnaire also asked users about their intentions to use specific features of the site during the next two months.
We examined six motivations incorporating constructs from existing uses and gratifications scales : social, status, enjoyment, self-reactive, novelty, and monetary.
The items were prefaced with "Using E2, how likely are you to..." which users answered on a 7-point Likert-type scale from "Very unlikely" to "Very likely."
Table 1 reports the reliability scores for the scales of each of the variables, as well as their means and standard deviations.
All scales showed a reliable score with a Cronbach's  above .70.
The definition of habit in terms of automaticity, as well as the characterization of this type of behavior in relation to its defining dimensions, has also derived on the development of operational definitions of the concept.
We used the SelfReport Habit Index , which measures the degree of habitual behavior perceived by an individual, which encompasses different dimensions of the construct .
We used eight items from the Self-Report Habit Index.
One item  was deleted because it lowered the reliability of the scale.
We also asked users to report their intention to use specific features in the next two months.
We asked, "Considering your usage of Everything2.com, how frequently do you intent to perform the following actions during the next two months?"
Users reported on their intention for visiting the website, contributing Write-ups, reading other users' Write-ups, using the private messaging feature, Upvoting others' Write-ups, and Downvoting others' Write-ups.
Means and standard deviations are reported in Table 2.
Other descriptive questions included Membership length , average time spent on the site, gender, age, country, English proficiency, primary username, and any additional account usernames.
We used the usernames to extract their behavioral data from the servers, but once the behavioral data was matched with their self-report, their user names were discarded.
First, we tried to replicate previous studies  that have reported a significant effect of habit in terms of increasing explanatory power of time spent on the site.
We ran three Ordinary Least Squares  regressions with a self reported measure of time spent on the site as the dependent variable in each model: the first model used motivations as the independent variables; the second model used habit only as the independent variables; the third combined both sets of independent variables.
It is important to note that habit, when it is activated, is more or less a non-conscious neurological process.
In other words, engaging in a habitual behavior does not mean that the individual is oblivious as to what is going on, only that the individual is not actively thinking about it.
Because habits are associated with goals, habits and motivations are not mutually exclusive, which is why we would want to ultimately include both in the same model.
As can be seen in Table 4, status and monetary outcomes are the two motivations that positively and significantly explain why people spend time on the site--people who seek status or want to avoid spending money are more likely to report higher habit.
On its own, habit was also a strong predictor: people who use the site in a habitual manner are more likely to spend more time on the site.
In addition, the second model with habit as the sole predictor of time spent on the site =8.63, p<.001 explained more variance of time spent on the site than model 1, which just had motivations.
This suggests that time spent on the site is more driven by habit than by conscious motivations.
Behavioral activity was measured using server-log data directly from Everything2.
Metrics for each respondent were calculated from the 30 days prior to their survey participation until the end of survey data collection.
Survey responses of usernames were then matched against the entire list of Everything2 usernames.
Usernames on Everything2 are unique to each account.
A long-standing member of the Everything2 community reviewed participant responses and corrected assumed typographical errors.
Accounts that could still not be matched after this processing were discarded.
We summed the total votes users gave to other Write-ups, including both positive and negative votes.
We had two measures of past behavior.
The first was a measure of quantity, based on behavioral data of the most recent month of activity obtained from the server logs.
We only looked at the most recent month of activity because habit builds gradually over time; thus activities from a long time ago may not reflect habitual behavior.
The server data included how many Write-ups users wrote in the past month, how many times they voted, and how many messages they sent.
The second measure was self-reported behavior of perceived frequency of use of specific features in the past month: we asked "How often did you use the following features in the past month?"
As can be seen in Table 5, use of different features on the site had different degrees of association with habit strength.
The self-report data and behavioral data from the servers were all significantly correlated at a moderate level, suggesting that an individual's perception of how often they are engaging in a behavior is related to how much they performed the behavior.
The correlation between self-report and behavioral was strongest for Write-ups, followed by message-sending.
In terms of relationships between different features, messaging was strongly correlated with giving Upvotes, implying that these two features may be linked with the same underlying motive of communication.
However, when examining the correlations between habit strength and features use, we found that the number of Write-ups recorded in the server did not have a significant association with habit strength  yet the selfreported frequency of Write-ups was significantly correlated.
Similarly, the correlation between habit strength and messages was also stronger for frequency than the actual number of messages sent.
OLS regressions explaining average time spent on the site with Motivations  and Habit The third model adding habit into the same model as motivations =5.27, p<.001 explained 22% of the variance in time spent on the site.
Although the change in adjusted R2 when adding habit to the model with motivations was not as large as those reported in the use of Internet  or social games , it was still significant .
This suggests that both motivations and habits should be considered when explaining how much time users are spending on online communities.
Results of RQ1 provided a cross-sectional glimpse of how motivations and habit strength can explain time spent on the site.
To see how use of past features is associated with habit , we ran a Pearson's product-moment correlation between use of three different activities  and the self-reported habit scale.
Motivations and habit predicting intent to use specific features write and habit .
This suggests that habits are more likely to inform behavior that is more passive, than behaviors that require more active participation and/or creativity.
The fact that habit informs intent to Upvote but not Downvote seems conflicting, but looking at the motivations, we see that Upvotes are strongly influenced by social motivations.
This could imply that users are more careful about giving a negative vote and that a positive vote is more of a social support signal than an evaluation of the quality of the content.
This could mean that positive evaluations that people make in social information systems may not reflect what they think about the content, but rather be more of an evaluation towards the person--for example, when people "like" others' content on Facebook, is it about the person or the content, or both?
Intent to write was only explained by social motivations.
This may partially explain as to why sites that do not support multiple channels of social interaction--such as Wikipedia--are waning in terms of contribution.
Social motivations predict intention to produce Write-ups, exchange private messages, and Upvote content--the coefficients were above .3, suggesting not only a significant, but fairly strong effect.
However, social motivations do not show up when looking at the more general dependent variable of visiting the website.
Similarly, enjoyment and novelty motivations only predicted intention to read.
The separate regressions for specific features unveiled patterns that were somewhat different from the regression predicting the more general act of visiting the website.
These results suggest that when we are measuring activity online, generic measurements may cancel out any significant or strong effects that certain variables may have and that it is important to take a more granular approach in segmenting different uses rather than looking at site activity as a whole.
This suggests that habit is less affected by how much an individual engages in the behavior and more associated with the individual's perception of how frequently he or she engages in the behavior.
These results were consistent with prior research looking at the relationship between frequency and habit .
For example, Person A and Person B may have each posted three of Write-ups during the past month, but A may perceive the posting to be frequent, whereas B posted all three posts on the same day and did not perceive it as being frequent.
Thus A's posting behavior may be more associated with habit than B's.
To see how current habit strength explains intention of future use, a series of OLS regression models were employed for general use of the site and specific features.
In these models, the independent variables included several control variables--gender, self-reported membership length, self-reported time spent on the site per week, and motivations.
Table 6 displays the results of the regression analyses.
The variables in the top row--intention to use that feature--are the dependent variables for all of the models, while the variables in the first column are the independent variables.
Addressing RQ3 regarding general activity, habit was the largest predictor for intention to visit the site in the future .
Individuals with stronger habit strength were more likely to report a greater frequency of future visits.
The novelty motivation  also positively predicted intention for future visits.
The monetary motivation is negatively associated with future visits, suggesting that people who use the site to save money are less likely to visit in the future.
None of the other motivations were statistically significant.
When we looked at the specific features instead of the broad concept of visiting the site , we found that habit played a role in predicting future intent to read, send messages, and make positive evaluations through Upvotes.
In this paper, we introduced the concept of habit in understanding the use of systems, and asked about the role this concept plays in explaining sustained use of information systems.
This concept may help explain why people continue use of these types of mediated interaction environments over time.
Although findings suggest that conscious motivations still play an important role in choosing which sites to use and how to use them, evidence supports that habit is also important when examining the different ways in which users continue participation in peerproduction communities.
We found that the average time that users perceive they spend on the site is not only associated with their conscious motivations, but also with their sense of the automaticity of their use.
This indicates that we should not see use of a system as being a wholly conscious decision based on motives for every instance of use.
Rather, cognitively efficient processes inherent in habit seem to play a role in spending time on a site, even when accounting for motivations.
Habit was more strongly related to perceptions of how frequently users contributed with specific features on the site than with the actual number of times they contributed.
This may be an artifact of how we measured behavior-- which only takes into account the end product, whereas user perception would account for all times the participant engaged in that type of use.
It could also be a typical instrument bias effect.
This suggests that habit strength may be better detected through frequency of log-ins and session durations rather than the sum of individual feature use.
Habit seems to play a different role in production vs. consumption uses.
Namely, consumption of content, in terms of reading on the site and anticipating future visits to the site, are both strongly related to the habit variable.
Previous work has shown that people have different motivations for using a site  and express those motivations as different types of uses .
For those users who engage in more passive uses in peer-production communities, it could be a more straightforward media consumption relationship.
In other words, habit plays a stronger role when there is less cognitive effort in making that behavioral choice, such as when users consume content rather than produce it.
Users may expend more effort when producing a Write-up on Everything2, given that it is a sole-authored work and may be deleted if it does not meet community standards.
Because authoring requires focused cognitive energy, this focus may not trigger the automaticity inherent in habit.
As described in the review of habit, it is activated when it is cognitively efficient to depend on a heuristic, rather than making a conscious choice for every task.
Messaging, a social type of use, is a form of content creation that is associated with both habit and social motivation.
While habit did not predict intention to write, we see in Table 3 that messaging is strongly correlated to producing Write-ups.
It could be that uses like Upvoting and messaging are socially oriented, thus moderating the relationship between habit and the more intensive Write-up behaviors.
Habit does play a role in producing content, but the content most likely to be produced out of habit is relatively lightweight contribution like ratings or messages.
For example, voting also requires some cognitive activity but is not necessary--theoretically, voting involves reading and evaluating, but technically, it only involves one click of the mouse.
The different patterns in Upvoting and Downvoting also suggest that voting--in particular, Upvoting--may not be an artifact of careful consideration.
It could be that the social cost of Downvoting, being higher than Upvoting, gives users pause because there are social consequences of the action, kicking them out of habit mode and into conscious thought.
It makes sense that reading--which is dependent on the environmental cue of an existing Writeup--is more susceptible to habit than writing.
Online communities depend on the sustained contributions of members to exist, which is why it is of key importance to understand not only what drives people to participate and contribute to these sites, but especially why they sustain their participation over time.
While some communities are purposefully designed for short-term contributions, most others intend to persist over time.
Wikipedia, for example, has existed for over ten years, and intends to maintain its activity into the foreseeable future.
Although such systems can try to rely on a continuous supply of new users, if any efforts are being made on trying to retain old users, our results suggest that creating various means of social interaction--such as private messaging and voting--may contribute to retention, as these features are strongly associated to habit strength, and also to future contribution of content.
Additional opportunities may include building faux-social interactions such as those induced by social bots, into the design of the system, although additional research is required to see whether or not users differentiate different types of computer-mediated interactions.
Extrapolating more generally on the construct of habit strength, another implication for design is the importance of context stability, which is required to build a habit.
System designers who are constantly changing their interface or site structure may be making it difficult for users to develop a habit.
When experimenting with new designs, it may be better to segment users and retain a more stable design for users who are logged in.
The primary limitation of our study is that our measure of habit was a self-report.
Although self-report has been shown in numerous studies to be strongly correlated to habitual behavior , there are individual differences in terms of how aware one is that one's behavior is a habit.
Especially since the Self Report Habit Index requires one to think about past behavior, there is always room for error in terms of how accurate people's recollection is.
We tried to triangulate results through self-report and behavioral data.
However, in terms of explaining how behavior is associated with habit, we realize that there are many other factors, such as frequency of the behaviors and types of feedback that users received regarding their behaviors that were not taken into account in this study.
Although our sample was normally distributed in terms of habit strength, it may be susceptible to seasonal effects in contribution, as those who visit and contribute to the community during summer may differ than those in other seasons.
It is also unclear how non-response bias affects our results.
For example, less attached users may be less likely to answer a survey about the site, and it is reasonable to expect this group would have different habits regarding Everything2.
We cannot make causal claims about whether time spent on the site and use of different features affect habit, or if habit affects use.
In this paper, we introduce the concept of habit as a form of online community use that is not driven by conscious mental processes, but rather as a cognitively efficient way of making use choices.
We find that people s self-reports of habitual use of a peer-production online community helps explain time people spend using an online community.
Habit and motivation were found to be co-present in association with many types of online behaviors.
Since online peer-production communities involve a rich, heterogeneous set of possible uses, different combinations of motivation and habit may help explain that ecology of behavior.
We found that habit explains passive use of the site such as reading, and social uses such as messaging and voting, but not active contribution of new content.
While writing can contribute to habit formation, habit does not necessarily predict writing.
Consequently, while habit may not explain all use choices in peer-production communities, it does seem to be importantly related to lower cognitive tasks that are essential for the sustainable operations of those systems.
