In this paper we present the results of a roleplay survey instrument administered to 1001 online survey respondents to study both the relationship between demographics and phishing susceptibility and the effectiveness of several antiphishing educational materials.
Our results suggest that women are more susceptible than men to phishing and participants between the ages of 18 and 25 are more susceptible to phishing than other age groups.
We explain these demographic factors through a mediation analysis.
Educational materials reduced users' tendency to enter information into phishing webpages by 40% percent; however, some of the educational materials we tested also slightly decreased participants' tendency to click on legitimate links.
By determining which groups are most susceptible to phishing, we can determine how best to focus anti-phishing education.
In this paper, we present the results of our roleplay phishing study, administered to 1001 online survey respondents in order to study demographics and phishing susceptibility.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows.
In the next section, we present background and related work on why people fall for phishing.
We then describe the design of our experiment and present the results of our study, identifying several important demographic factors that affect phishing susceptibility and describing the effects of education in bridging these gaps.
Finally, we discuss the limitations of our study and the implications of our findings.
Research has shown that people are vulnerable to phishing for several reasons.
First, people tend to judge a website's legitimacy by its "look and feel," which attackers can easily replicate .
Second, many users do not understand or trust the security indicators in web browsers .
Third, although some consumers are aware of phishing, this awareness does not reduce their vulnerability or provide useful strategies for identifying phishing attacks .
Fourth, the perceived severity of the consequences of phishing does not predict users' behavior .
Phishing attacks, in which scammers send emails and other messages to con victims into providing their login credentials and personal information, snare millions of victims each year .
A variety of efforts aim to combat phishing through law enforcement, automated detection, and end-user education.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
To the best of our knowledge, there has been no study dedicated to understanding what demographic factors correlate with falling for phishing and to what extent educational interventions have been effective in bridging the demographic divide.
We highlight here a few studies that have measured susceptibility to specific types of phishing attacks or have studied the effectiveness of antiphishing education while reporting at least some data on gender and other demographic factors.
In their study, they determined whether the 487 participants fell for the attack by observing whether participants provided their personal information to the phishing website.
Female students fell for 77% of the spear phishing attacks, while male students fell for 65% .
In a related study, Kumaraguru et al.
They did not find significant differences based on gender, but did find that participants in the 18-25 age group were consistently most vulnerable to phishing attacks.
They found that men were more likely to correctly distinguish phishing and legitimate websites than women .
They collected only coarse-grained participant age data, but found that people under the age of 18 performed worse than those above 18.
Although past studies have found differences in phishing susceptibility based on gender and age, they generally did not collect enough information about study participants to isolate these variables from other potentially confounding factors.
In addition, previous studies did not address why these demographic factors correlate with falling for phishing.
In our paper, we address these research questions.
A number of organizations have developed online training materials to educate users about phishing .
In a previous study, Kumaraguru et al.
Several studies have adopted a contextual training approach in which users are sent simulated phishing emails by the experimenters to test vulnerability to phishing attacks.
At the end of the study, users are given materials that inform them about phishing attacks.
This approach has been used in studies involving Indiana University students , West Point cadets , and New York State employees .
A related approach, called embedded training, teaches users about phishing during their regular use of email.
This trainer sends phishing email to users and, if users click on phishing links, immediately presents an intervention designed to train them to avoid falling for phishing attacks.
The researchers continued to refine the most successful intervention, a comic strip featuring a character named PhishGuru.
A follow-up study showed that people were able to retain what they learned from this training .
The researchers used learning science principles to design and iteratively refine the game.
Their evaluation showed that participants who played the game were better able to identify fraudulent websites compared to participants in other conditions .
We studied the effectiveness of several of these educational approaches in bridging the demographic divide, including a set of popular web-based training materials, Anti-Phishing Phil, a PhishGuru cartoon, and the combination of AntiPhishing Phil and a PhishGuru cartoon.
The risk literature has shown reliable demographic differences in risk perceptions on various topics: relatively oppressed groups  generally perceive the most risk in the world around them .
Such perceptions may be linked to these groups' experiences of a riskier world, perhaps due to lower degrees of control over risky processes.
Age has also been linked to risky behavior: on average, adolescents tend to engage in riskier behaviors, perhaps as a function of their ongoing learning about the world .
Because real-world risk behaviors are complex and subject to such varied predictors as knowledge, goals, and benefits associated with what is perceived to be risky behavior, there have been relatively few studies with the power to assess multiple mediators of demographic effects on risky behavior.
The current paper takes a specific, well-defined behavior as a context in which to identify specific factors that may explain these effects.
Despite claims by some security and usability experts that user education about security does not work , there is evidence that well-designed user security education can be effective in the real world .
Web-based training materials, contextual training, embedded training, and interactive games have all been shown to improve users' ability to avoid phishing attacks .
In this online study participants answered survey questions to determine their background and assess their knowledge about phishing, and completed a roleplay task to assess their behavioral susceptibility to phishing prior to receiving one of several forms of training.
Participants then completed a second roleplay task to assess reductions in phishing susceptibility as well as any changes in participants' tendencies to be suspicious of legitimate emails.
Participants were assigned randomly to a control condition  or one of four experimental conditions that varied based on the type of training to which participants were exposed.
Half the participants completed the roleplay and then the survey questions; the other half completed the survey questions prior to the roleplay.
Participants were recruited through Amazon.com's Mechanical Turk , a marketplace for work requiring human intelligence.
In this online environment, requesters post tasks known as HITs , and workers are paid for completing these HITs.
We offered to pay participants four dollars for those that qualified and twenty cents to those who did not.
In total, 1001 participants qualified and completed the entire study.
To disqualify people who were hoping to earn money for completing the study without actually paying attention to the study tasks, we asked all participants a series of questions about an email message that discussed an upcoming meeting.
We used two of these questions, both of which could be answered correctly by a careful reading of the email, to screen out those participants who were not paying attention to the email content.
We also asked basic demographic questions  so that participants would not be able to easily identify qualifying questions .
Participants were asked to indicate how they would handle the emails if they received them in their own email inbox.
Participants were asked to check boxes corresponding to all of the actions they would be likely to take from a list of responses generated through earlier qualitative work : * * * * * * * * * * Reply by email Contact the sender by phone or in person Forward the email to someone else Delete the email Keep, save or archive the email Click on the selected link in the email  Copy and paste the selected URL  from the email into a web browser, if a URL is selected in this email Type the selected URL into a web browser, if a URL is selected in this email Click on a different link in the email  you would click on Other 
Behavior was measured by performance in a roleplay task, with two equivalent exercises administered before and after training .
This task is based on an established roleplay exercise that has been shown to have good internal and external validity .
The benefit of the roleplay is that it enables researchers to study phishing without conducting an actual phishing attack.
Participants were told to assume the role of Pat Jones, who works at  Baton Rouge University and uses the email address patjones@bru.edu for both work and personal emails.
The first email was created to familiarize the participant with the procedure.
It was a short message from the same domain as Pat's email address.
This message from the BRU Information Security Office announced a scavenger hunt for National Cyber Security month.
Google search results using the search query `phishing' -- Microsoft Online safety , OnGuardOnline phishing tips , and National Consumer League Fraud tips .
In total, these materials have 3107 words, and would take roughly 15 minutes to complete reading with a scanning speed of 250 words per minute.
After participants read each of the first two web pages they had a choice of reading more information or moving to the next part of the study.
Participants in the popular training materials condition reviewed an average of 1.5 of the three websites and spent an average of 1.8 minutes on training.
In the Anti-Phishing Phil conditions, participants were taken through three levels of the game and allowed to exit at any point.
On average participants completed 2.7 rounds of Phil in a little over 8 minutes.
The PhishGuru conditions provided participants with one page of materials and then participants moved on to the next part of the study.
Participants in the PhishGuru condition spent an average of 0.5 minutes on training.
All participants who viewed any of the educational materials were asked how likely they would be to visit that specific educational tool again and how likely they would be to recommend it to someone else, on a scale ranging from 1  to 7 .
Table 1 lists a representative sample of the emails that Pat encounters in one of the roleplays.
Each set of 14 emails included 6 phishing emails, 5 legitimate emails, 2 spam messages, and 1 possible malware email that contained links.
Most of the links in these emails, including all bru.edu links and all of the phishing links, were fictitious links made up for this study.
As shown in the example email in Figure 1, each email contained a link to a web page shown with the mouse pointer positioned on the link and the actual URL destination displayed in the status bar as it would be if users prepared to click on the link on their own computer.
For individuals who indicated that they would click on the link or otherwise end up at the web page, an image of that web page was displayed.
Each web page requested information to be entered and participants were asked to indicate if they would click on a link on the page, enter the requested information, bookmark the page, visit another related web page, close the website, or take other action.
No matter what other actions the user indicated, those who said that they would enter the requested information were coded as having fallen for phishing or complied with a legitimate email, corresponding to the legitimacy of the email in question.
Along with asking participants extensive demographic questions, all participants were asked to complete a series of questions about their online experiences, including questions about their choice of websites for recent purchases, their use of online banking and their prior exposure to anti-phishing educational materials.
Participants also indicated relevant negative experiences such as having information stolen or compromised in some way by entering it into a website.
Table 2 presents basic demographics of the sample.
Knowledge questions prompted participants to choose the best definition for four terms related to computer security: `cookie,' `phishing,' `spyware,' and `virus.'
Participants were given the same list of eight possible definitions to choose from for each, as well as choices to indicate lack of familiarity with the word.
Each term had one correct answer on the list .
The options included: * Something that protects your computer from unauthorized communication outside the network * Something that watches your computer and send that information over the Internet  * Something websites put on your computer so you don't have to type in the same information the next time you visit  * Something put on your computer without your permission, that changes the way your computer works 
Participants were randomly assigned to the control condition or to one of the four experimental conditions in which they were shown educational materials on ways to avoid falling for phishing attacks: a PhishGuru cartoon, Anti-Phishing Phil, several popular web-based training materials, and a combination of Anti-Phishing Phil plus a PhishGuru cartoon.
To evaluate participants' risk perceptions, we presented them with a series of statements taken from the DomainSpecific Risk-Taking scale of adult populations  , drawing on the categories of financial risk and health and safety risk.
These questions prompted participants to rate the risk associated with activities such as betting a day's income at the horse races and riding a motorcycle without a helmet, on a scale ranging from 1  to 7 .
We measured participants' susceptibility to phishing by examining two kinds of errors in the roleplay scenarios before and after educational interventions: false positives and falling for phish.
A false positive is when a user mistakenly judges a legitimate email or website as a phish and refuses to take the desired actions.
Falling for phish occurs when a phishing email or website is incorrectly judged to be legitimate and users click on the email or submit information to the website.
In some studies, falling for phish is determined based on whether users click on links in phishing emails; in other studies it is determined based on whether they submit information to phishing websites.
In this study, similar to previous studies, we found that about 90% of participants who would click on a phishing link would go on to provide information to phishing websites .
In this paper we focus our analysis on the stricter measure -- giving information to phishing websites -- as falling for phish.
Overall, prior to training, participants indicated they would click on 52% of phishing links and provide information to 47% of phishing websites.
An analysis of variance  comparing age groups found a significant overall effect  = 9.65, p < 0.001 driven by participants aged 18 to 25 falling for phishing more than other age groups .
Participants' self-rated knowledge about technology also significantly predicts whether they will fall for phishing.
For each standard deviation increase in their technical knowledge score, participants fell for 3.6% fewer phish.
Finally, participants' risk aversion, as measured by reactions to risks of financial investments, also predicts whether they will fall for phishing.
The more risk-averse a participant is, the less likely he or she will fall for phish.
For each standard deviation increase in their risk perception score, participants fell for 2.8% fewer phish.
The similarity in our results suggested the validity of the roleplay survey instrument.
We found no significant differences in performance based on whether participants completed the survey before or after the first roleplay.
Therefore we have collapsed those conditions and analyzed them together.
To explore factors that predict phishing susceptibility, we performed a multivariate linear regression.
This section explains the steps we took to build the model and discusses the results from the linear regression.
We used factor analysis to reduce the dimensionality of our variables on participants' online experience , participants' technical knowledge and experience , and participants' risk perception .
The factor analysis, using principle component and varimax rotation, reduced our list of variables from 40 to 22.
We then ran the regression predicting falling for phish from the 22 variables.
In Table 3 we report variables that are statistically significant at p <= 0.01.
Participants' degree of prior exposure to anti-phishing education significantly predicts their phishing susceptibility .
Participants who had previous anti-phishing training  fell for 40% of the phish in the roleplay, whereas those who had no previous anti-phishing training fell for 60% of phishing websites  = -9.02, p < 0.001.
This factor had the most impact on phishing susceptibility, suggesting that exposure to education may play a larger role than other important factors.
In order to better understand why women appear to be more susceptible to phishing, we examined the effect of gender on clicking on phishing links, giving information to phishing websites, clicking on legitimate URLs, and giving information to legitimate websites.
We found that, before training, women were more likely than men to click on phishing links and enter information on phishing websites.
After clicking on a phishing link, women continued on to give information to the corresponding phishing website 97% of the time, compared to 84% for men  = 5.42, p < 0.001.
This further exacerbates the gender differences in clicking on links.
In an attempt to explain these gender effects, we did a mediation analysis using all the key predictors as potential mediators.
Mediation analysis explains "how" an effect occurred by hypothesizing a causal sequence.
The basic mediation model is a causal sequence in which the independent variable  causes the mediator  which in turn causes the dependent variable , therefore explaining how X had its effect on Y .
Mediational processes are common in basic and applied psychology.
We used the multiple mediator model developed by Preacher and Hayers  for our mediation analysis.
For gender, we used technical knowledge and technical training as mediators; our hypothesis is that women have less technical experience than men and therefore fall for phishing more.
Our results support this hypothesis.
We report the mediation statistics in Table 4 and illustrate the results of the analysis graphically in Figure 2.
Figure 3: Mediation analysis for gender.
Each path is quantified with unstandardized regression coefficients.
The direct effect of gender on phishing susceptibility  is calculated as total effect minus all the effect through each of the mediators, which is calculated as the product of coefficients in the paths.
Table 4: Total effect of gender on falling for phishing and effect of various mediators that are significant at p < 0.01.
The total effect is quantified with the unstandardized regression coefficient.
The effect of various mediators is quantified as the product of coefficients in the paths shown in Figure 2.
As shown in Figure 2, the effect of being female on falling for phishing drops from a total effect of 0.72, p < 0.01, down to a direct effect of just 0.43, p < 0.01.
The difference between these effects represents the total indirect effect through the two mediators, with a point estimate of 0.29, and a 95% CI of 0.18 to 0.42 .
Thus, women in our study have less technical training and have less technical knowledge than men, which appears to partially account for their greater susceptibility to phishing.
The mediation relationship is only partial, as the direct effect is still statistically significant.
This partiality suggests that there are other factors that are not captured by our survey instruments; these factors might be explored in future work.
We included several other predictors that did not mediate this relationship.
However, while women in our study had less technical training than men, more women than men claimed to have had prior exposure to anti-phishing education in particular.
Thus, prior exposure to anti-phishing education did not turn out to be a significant mediator.
Neither income nor education were significant mediators for the effect of gender on phishing susceptibility.
Other factors that we did not measure might potentially explain the remaining tendency for women in our study to be more susceptible to phishing than men.
As described above, people in the 18-25 age group were more likely to fall for phish than people of other ages.
We used the multiple mediator model to determine why younger people are more susceptible to phishing.
We report the mediation statistics in Table 5 and Figure 3.
Taken as a set, participants' prior exposure to phishing, number of years on the Internet, perception of financial risk, and education mediate the effect of age on falling for phishing.
As can be seen in Figure 3, the total effect of age on falling for phishing fell from 0.34, p < 0.01, down to 0.12 .
The difference between the total and direct effects is the total indirect effect through the four mediators, with a point estimate of 0.23, and a 95% CI of 0.16 to 0.29 .
Because younger people have a lower level of education, fewer years of experience with the Internet, less exposure to training material, and less of an aversion to financial risks, they tend to be more susceptible to phishing.
Before training, participants on average fell for 47% of phishing websites.
After the training, this number reduced to 28%, a 40% improvement.
Table 6 summarizes the roleplay results by condition, before and after training.
All training materials reduced participants' tendency to enter information into phishing webpages by about 34 to 44 percent, while there was no statistically significant improvement for the control group  = 2.22, p =0.84.
Anti-Phishing Phil, the Phishguru cartoon and AntiPhishing Phil with the Phishguru cartoon did not decrease participants' tendency to click on legitimate links and go to legitimate websites.
However, in the popular training condition, participants' tendency to click on legitimate links was slightly reduced,  = 2.01, p < 0.05, suggesting that the participants may learn an avoidance strategy from popular training materials rather than strategies for better detection.
Since the various education materials perform similarly in reducing the number of people who fall for phishing, we combined all the training conditions together in order to study the effect of education in bridging demographic gaps.
We found that women in the training conditions learned more than men about avoiding phishing links  = 5.63 p < 0.01; after training, women and men performed equally well in not clicking on phishing links in emails  = -0.05, p = 0.96.
Participants between the ages of 18 and 25 were the most susceptible group in the first roleplay, and they remained more susceptible to phishing in the second roleplay.
We found no significant effect for education or race.
There are several limitations to the current study.
First, the sample was drawn from mTurk users and is not expected to be representative of the larger population of email users.
Our sample of mTurk users tends to be younger, more educated, and more tech-savvy than the general public.
A second limitation of this study is the lack of direct consequences for user behavior.
Participants might be more willing to engage in risky behavior in this roleplay if they feel immune to any negative outcomes that may ensue.
Similarly, participants are not risking opportunity costs from being too conservative in their behavior.
However, there is no reason to believe that the predictors described here should differ in their relationship to roleplay behavior compared to real-world behavior.
Also, more risk-averse participants tended to fall for fewer phish.
Gender and age are two key demographics that predict phishing susceptibility.
Specifically, women click on links in phishing emails more often than men do, and also are much more likely than men to continue on to give information to phishing websites.
In part, this difference appears to be because women have less technical training and less technical knowledge than men.
There is also a significant effect for age: participants aged between ages 18 and 25 are much more likely than others to fall for phishing .
This group appears to be more susceptible because participants in this age group have a lower level of education, fewer years on the Internet, less exposure to training materials, and less of an aversion to risks.
Educators can bridge this gap by providing antiphishing education to high school and college students.
All of the education materials in our study reduce users' tendency to enter information into phishing webpages by 40%.
However, some education materials decreased participants' tendency to click on legitimate links; this finding suggests that educators need to do a better job of teaching people how to distinguish phish from non-phish so that they avoid false positives.
Demographics such as age, gender, race, and education do not affect the amount of learning, suggesting that good training materials can provide benefit for all groups.
However, while the 40% reduction in phishing susceptibility after training is substantial, even after training participants fell for 28% of the phishing messages in our roleplay.
This finding shows that education is effective and needed but is not a cure-all.
Kumaraguru, P. Cranshaw, J., Acquisti, A., Cranor, L., Hong, J., Blair, M. A., and Pham, T. School of Phish: A Real-World Evaluation of Anti-Phishing Training.
In the Proceedings On Usable Privacy and Security, 2009.
H. Estimating Mediated Effects in Prevention Studies.
Mackinnon D.P, Fairchild, A.J and Fritz, M. S. Mediation analysis.
Recognizing phishing scams and fraudulent emails.
National Consumer League, Internet fraud tips: phishing.
New York State Office of Cyber Security & Critical Infrastructure Coordination.
A Briefing on the Anti-Phishing Exercise Initiative for New York State Government.
Aggregate Exercise Results for public release.
OnGuardOnline, How Not To Get Hooked by a "Phishing" Scam.
Preacher K.J and Hayers A.F.
Asymptotic and resampling strategies for assessing and comparing indirect effects in multiple mediator models.
Risk and rationality in adolescent decision making: Implications for theory, practice, and public policy.
Psychological Science in the Public Interest, 7, 1-44.
AntiPhishing Phil: the design and evaluation of a game that teaches people not to fall for phish.
In Proceedings of the 3rd Symposium on Usable Privacy and Security .
The Perception of Risk, Sterling, VA: Earthscan Publications Ltd. 31.
Do security toolbars actually prevent phishing attacks?.
In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems .
