Persuasive technology to motivate healthy behavior is a growing area of research within HCI and ubiquitous computing.
The emergence of commercial wearable devices for tracking health- and fitness-related activities arguably represents the first widespread adoption of dedicated ubiquitous persuasive technology.
The recent ubiquity of commercial systems allows us to learn about their value and use in truly "in the wild" contexts and understand how practices evolve over long-term, naturalistic use.
We present a study with 30 participants who had adopted wearable activity-tracking devices of their own volition and had continued to use them for between 3 and 54 months.
The findings, which both support and contrast with those of previous research, paint a picture of the evolving benefits and practices surrounding these emerging technologies over long periods of use.
They also serve as the basis for design implications for personal informatics technologies for longterm health and fitness support.
We aim to learn what value these systems provide even after months or years of use, whether and how this value changes over time, and how persuasive personal informatics technologies might be better designed to provide long-term support.
We build upon and extend the findings of previous research in the area by contributing a study of in-the-wild use of activity monitoring devices by long-term users in a non-experimental context.
The recent emergence of commercial wearable devices designed to track and motivate physical activity, such as the Fitbit  and Nike+ FuelBand , provides a valuable opportunity to study the naturalistic use of these technologies, and the practices and perspectives that emerge over continued long-term use.
Although not everyone who tries a wearable activity monitor continues to use it in the long term, we focus on those who have done so and integrated it into their daily practices.
Investigating the experiences of people who have adopted these technologies "organically" and continued to use them over time offers the opportunity to study certain contexts and aspects of use not possible in shorter-term experimental deployments.
It also affords the opportunity to see how findings of previous shorter studies hold over longer-term use.
In particular, we visit such issues as the value of system-provided metrics as people's fitness goals and activities change, the challenges of data sharing and identifying relevant social networks, and the ways in which the design of self-monitoring systems influence people's activities and conceptualizations of healthy behavior.
This work offers several contributions to the body of knowledge on personal informatics and persuasive technology.
First, it provides a rich understanding of the influence and role of wearable persuasive technology for activity tracking.
Second, it reveals perspectives and practices of long-term use that add depth to the findings of previous experimental and shorter term deployments of related technologies.
Although in some cases our findings contrasted with those of previous work, the bulk of our findings confirm them, thereby adding richness to our understanding of such technologies as well as lending credence to the findings of shorter term studies.
Emerging persuasive technology and ubiquitous wearable sensors offer much promise for improving health and fitness practices.
Commercial and research personal informatics systems that employ these sensors enable the automated tracking of personal information and activities, such as sleep and physical activity.
Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Publication rights licensed to ACM.
Personal informatics systems to support health and fitness are a growing area of interest.
Research and commercial systems have been developed to track and monitor information such as weight, steps, sleep, and overall activity.
Munson proposes a spectrum of personal informatics applications ranging from reflective technologies intended to support insight into one's own behavior to persuasive technologies .
Persuasive technologies employ varied strategies for influencing behavior and activities, such as those described by Fogg, most notably selfmonitoring and conditioning .
Self-monitoring is one of the most prevalent persuasive technology strategies , but technologies often employ multiple strategies.
A variety of monitoring devices have been studied and analyzed for their persuasive influence on practices and behavior.
For example Tudor-Locke et al.
Based on a quantitative synthesis of literature, Bravata et al.
The average duration of the synthesized studies was 18 weeks and Bravata et al.
In recent years, HCI and ubiquitous computing research has produced more sophisticated devices that attempt to persuade using various representations of sensed activity data.
The most prominent example is UbiFit, which combined activity sensing with a glanceable visualization of activity .
In a field deployment of the system, the researchers found that the visualization helped participants maintain activity levels by providing positive feedback.
Other systems attempt to persuade through coaching and advising metaphors.
For example, Flowie, a persuasive virtual coach intended to motivate elderly people to walk more was deployed to two participants in an 11-day study and identified types of feedback that were most promising for motivation.
Laura, a system with a similar goal, used an animated relational agent as an exercise advisor .
Participants increased their walking by 215% during the trial period.
Li explored the use of contextual information as a supplement to performance data in the IMPACT system.
A multi-week evaluation of the system revealed that contextual information is useful for retrospective interpretation of activities .
Researchers have also considered social aspects of persuasive monitoring technologies.
Fish `n' Steps compared shared and individual use of a fish tank visualization of activity, and found no significant differences in activity levels between the conditions during the deployment .
Houston, which combined journaling with automated activity tracking was deployed and evaluated, leading to design implications regarding social pressure and support .
The findings suggested that people are less willing to share personal demographic information than information collected by the device.
Such concerns are consistent with the tension Newman et.
It should be noted that the various trials and deployments of previous technologies described here were short to moderate in length, ranging from 6 days  to 14 weeks  in duration.
Our study builds upon and generally confirms the findings of these previous deployments, considering similar issues of motivation, practices and social use, with a particular focus they change or persist over long-term use.
Monitoring devices are often limited in the activity that can be sensed, leading to the need for integrating data from multiple sources to get a broader view on health and fitness.
Systems that require more effort on the part of users for tracking activities are less likely to be successfully adopted.
For example, research by Ahtinen et al.
In general, persuasive technologies intended to spur behavior change are challenging to evaluate because change can only be proven if it persists over a long period of time.
As further motivation for our research, a recent survey of fifty-four people indicated a high value for long-term information that is often not considered by studies with limited timespan .
We therefore believe that studying the long-term use and influence of these devices is necessary for building a more complete understanding of the value of persuasive technology for motivating activity.
In addition to the research prototypes mentioned, several commercial wearable activity trackers have been released in recent years.
60s who had been using such a device for at least three months 
We chose three months as the minimum length of use as previous experimental wearable activity sensors for fitness had typically considered use periods of three months or less.
Most participants had been using their devices for substantially longer; our longest-use participant had been using activity tracking devices for 54 months at the time of interview, and the overall mean length of use across participants was 14.8 months.
Participants were recruited through a variety of approaches including snowball sampling, recruiting emails, and posts to online forums such as the Fitbit community.
Participants came from a variety of professions, including a business development expert, a teacher's aid, an attorney, and students, however, overall our interview population slanted towards people in technical professions, such as software developers, and software project managers .
This proportion may be partly attributable to the snowball sampling approach through which we recruited participants, but also to the fact that the early adopters of these types of devices are likely to be tech-interested individuals.
Twenty-four participants were using Fitbit at the time of interview, four participants used a FuelBand, one participant used a Jawbone and one participant used a Striiv.
Five participants had previously used other types of activity monitoring technologies 
It is important to note that our participants' experiences are not necessarily representative of experiences with wearable activity sensing in general, as we are focusing specifically on people who have continued to use the technology for long periods of time.
We did not include people who had stopped using these devices and this work is therefore limited in the insight it can offer about why these technologies might fail to be adopted.
In addition, as some of our participants were recruited from online forums focused on these technologies, it is likely that our population overall is more active and enthusiastic about their devices than the general population of wearers.
Interviews lasted between 25 and 45 minutes in duration, and were conducted in person when possible , and otherwise over the phone or Skype .
The general interview format commenced with basic questions about the participant's reasons for acquiring or using their device, and the length of time that they had had it.
This was followed by more open questions geared towards eliciting anecdotes and experiences.
We explored topics such as individuals' daily practices with the technologies, how they used the data the devices provided, their experiences with social aspects of the system, and how their activities and use of the devices had changed over time.
Interviews were audio recorded and transcribed.
To analyze the data, we used a combination of inductive open coding and closed coding with codes derived from concepts in related literature to identify important themes.
In this work, we present some of the most prominent emerging themes,
Although there are variations in what these devices sense, record, and display, they share certain commonalities.
Some have passive or interactive displays that can show limited representations of the wearer's data.
Several of the systems also provide support for other aspects of health and wellness, such as sleep tracking and food logging.
In this work, however, we focus solely on the activity tracking functions.
The devices make use of different sensing technologies, such as accelerometers and altimeters to track movement or activity.
They also provide ways of viewing the information through various visualizations on websites, mobile apps, or on the devices themselves.
Most systems provide multiple representations of the activity, including concrete measures such as step count, distance traveled, or flights of stairs climbed, as well as abstracted compound representations such as Nike's "fuel" points or FitBit's "activity score."
With respect to persuasion strategies identified by Fogg , all of these technologies can be classified primarily as self-monitoring technologies.
Nearly all of them also employ Fogg's notion of conditioning and Michie et al's notion of contingent rewards  to some extent in the form of rewards and motivational messages displayed to the user.
These features vary in their degree of explicit persuasion, ranging from badges that reflect achievements to fitness challenges and competitions offered to the wearer.
Most of them also allow the wearer to set explicit goals, an important strategy identified by Consolvo et al.
We unpack several phenomena that illustrate how people derive motivation and value from these systems, despite changes in practices and needs that arise over long-term use.
In particular we focus on the ways in which metrics, data, and social networking features provided by the system influence people's engagement with their personal fitness and the technologies.
I look at it all the time ...
I'm always curious, like where I am at what point of the day."
It's weird to have something that you have with you all the time and you're constantly sort of playing with disappear, like you've lost something significant."
You know it's like you've been married for a long time and... it's all right but the excitement has gone."
I don't really feel like an urgent impulse to meet my goals and have it validate my activity.
I do wear it and I do look at the numbers, but it doesn't necessarily affect my feelings day to day that much at this point."
I could get to 8000 really easily.
But that doesn't really happen; those are the days I don't do any work."
I manipulated it a litte bit so that I could say, okay if a regular day of skiing, let's say, is 4000 points, I'm going to set my goal to maybe 4,300.
Participants described the immediate impacts of the devices on their activities, such as seeing a low step count and then walking to a shop to pick up coffee rather than to a nearby kitchen .
It was clear that the numerical feedback for most participants could reinforce and motivate activities, as in one particularly extreme example:
I just started walking up and down the steps while I was reading my Kindle.
I hit 25 and I was just getting warmed up and I thought, well, maybe I'll see if I can't hit 50.
At 50 I was getting warm, but I wasn't tired ... so I kept going.
After I hit 100 floors, I decided okay I probably ought to cool down now because it was 11:00 at night ... and I just walked at a slower pace while I was reading for the next hour, and I ended up having my steps up over 20,000 and my stairs at 100 that day."
We cannot necessarily assume a causal relationship between device use and health and behavior effects, even though the participants often credited the devices with motivating these changes.
The fact that people were willing to acquire and use the devices suggests that some participants may already have been motivated to make changes to their practices.
What can be surmised, however, is that these devices and their associated services were able to influence and provide support for activity awareness and increased activity in general.
Aside from looking at immediate effects on activity, much persuasive technology research has focused on supporting and evaluating longer term behavior change and health effects, a challenge that has been identified as difficult to measure and assess in less than a year's time .
Although explicitly evaluating behavior change was not the goal of this research, we were able to gain some insight as to how long-term users viewed their own changes in practice.
Most participants reported that the use of the device had motivated or helped them make durable changes, such as walking more, taking the stairs, or standing while working rather than sitting.
Twenty-five participants explicitly mentioned changes in their routines or behavior that they felt were lasting and profound:
Your practice needs to change a little bit if you account to get this extra health benefit in.
I've figured out ways to do that, and now they're part of my daily practice."
I could not figure out how to lose weight.
I was just doing the same old thing, eating the same old crappy fast food.
And once I got this FitBit...it just really opened my eyes to a healthy lifestyle.
I've done like 180 degree turn to where I was before."
Munson draws a distinction within personal informatics between technologies that are intended to be persuasive and technologies that are intended to be reflective .
Either type can motivate behavior change, though the former explicitly promotes certain behaviors through its design.
The commercial technologies have been designed with some features geared towards persuasion in mind, such as the inclusion of goals, rewards for achievements, and challenges to engage the wearer in specific activities and behaviors.
Motivation and reflection were both clearly objectives in people's decisions to acquire the devices:
I had been in rehab since an auto accident... this was part of... trying to learn and get a better feel for just how much I was generally being active during the day."
We expected that initial motivational effects might eventually diminish in the longer term as the novelty of the devices wore off, and that people who continued to use them might do so primarily because they found value in their reflective benefits, or simply in having the data recorded.
This change was noted by some participants:
And maybe that's because by now, I sort of know my patterns.
I know that if I go to work and I walk from the train station and I have a normal day at work, and then I walk home from the train station, I know that I'm at about somewhere between like 8,000 and 9,000 steps or something like that."
I have not gained anything, and I've lost at least half a pound every week since I started doing this.
And that for me is pretty much almost a direct result of having the - it's not really accountability, but it is."
I added that because I started becoming more active because of the Fitbit...
I kind of built the confidence after - 'cause I had lost a significant amount of weight so I felt more confident to get into those types of activities."
I wasn't feeling well and was really fatigued and maybe I just didn't want to see the numbers.
So ... part of the reason I continue to wear it is it does motivate me to maintain a certain activity level.
So I know that if I'm gonna fall short of that...
I do work a little harder.
I'll run up and down the stairs in my house a few times.
So it just motivates me to reach that level.
The numerical feedback provided by the devices was generally motivating for participants, manifested in their desire to meet step goals, or their pride in achieving high numbers.
This appeared to be the case regardless of whether the numbers were concretely understandable, such as counts of steps or flights of stairs, or abstracted and not fully understood, such as the FuelBand's fuel points:
I don't really know what that means, but that's roughly what I try to reach.
I stay up and do some Xbox sports or something like that; just to do something until I can hit my goal...
I've never seen  - And people ask that a lot.
They're like, `What does that mean?'
I'm like, `Yeah it's some weird Nike proprietary thing that takes the other activity, not just the steps that you take.'
But no, I don't know what it means.
So I'm working in ignorance on that point."
And she's like, she doesn't get it, `cause she's like, `It's not wasted.
Your body still knows that you're moving.'
But for me, if it's not on I might as well just be sitting down."
So I have to rush home.
I'm actually gonna go home and get my Fitbit and put it on ."
This discrepancy between activity and representation often became greater in the long term as people's fitness practices evolved.
Ironically, devices that initially helped foster engagement in fitness sometimes became too naive to support increasingly sophisticated fitness priorities.
For example, P21 found that her Fitbit better served her needs early in her use, stating that, "It's very much something that's very good for people who don't do any exercise to get them moving."
After adding new activities as her fitness increased, however, it failed to measure the activities that had become important to her:
It's all focused on walking.
So what I think it's really good is for people who aren't very fit to get them moving, but I think actually it had a negative impact on somebody like me who's going to the gym doing serious weights five days a week."
Participants described instances in which they forgot their devices as "annoying" or "irritating" because they felt they were not getting proper credit for their activities.
In some cases, the fact that their activities were not being accounted for substantially affected their enjoyment of their activities, despite the fact that they were still getting exercise:
Damn it, I wish I had my Fitbit.'
My daughter is like, `Who cares?
We're having a good day' and I'm like, `I don't have my Fitbit.'
You know, it's like awful.
And my nine-year-old is like, `Hello, it's still fun.'
But I don't feel rewarded for all the work I'm doing, which is kind of - it's kind of a negative in that respect, is that I let it impact my day too much if I forget it."
Goals and rewards within the context of technologies to motivate physical activity are highly complex .
Our findings illustrate this complexity how system rewards become part of an ecosystem of rewards over use.
The devices used by our participants all offered some form of explicit rewards or goals to be met, which we refer to as "system rewards."
For example, in addition to the customizable goals, the Fitbit website incorporates a system of achievement badges, such as one for walking a "lifetime distance" of 500 miles , or for climbing 200 flights of stairs on a single day.
Eighteen participants explicitly stated that system goals and rewards influenced on their personal activity and fitness goals.
Goals could provide a benchmark that allowed people to contextualize their own activity or they could serve as a target level of activity, and most said they did not edit the systems' default goals:
Although the numerical feedback is intended to provide a representation of the wearer's physical activity, participants did not treat it purely as such, and the discrepancy between overall activity and what the systems could account for often had an influence on people's activities.
System-based rewards also exerted a strong influence on people's personal goals, often to such an extent that the system goals seemed to supplant underlying goals of improved health or increased fitness.
In particular we uncovered a game-like phenomenon which we termed "number fishing," in which participants reportedly engaged in activities explicitly for the system rewards:
I just literally walked in circles around the house picking up things and moving things around."
So you get free stuff.
Activity monitoring technologies often support various ways of sharing data and viewing others' shared data.
The study of widely adopted commercial technologies allows us to examine how these practices play out among organically occurring social networks in which people opt in or out of sharing based on their needs or motivations.
Not all participants made use of the social features of the system or shared their data.
Some simply lacked interest in sharing data with others, and a few participants expressed concerns the personal nature of their data, although this was not common.
There were two general concerns about privacy, the first about having personal data uploaded to a server, and the second that health data, and in particular weight, would be visible to others:
The quote from P4 above indicates a perspective that rewards such as badges are a somewhat trivial, albeit effective, manifestation of the fundamental health-oriented benefits of the system.
This acknowledgement that achieving numbers or badges was an artificial goal was common among our participants, even though nearly all of them indicated that they perceived the system goals or rewards as valuable.
In many cases, system rewards such as badges and numerical goals were desirable enough that people wanted them even when they knew they were not accurate representations of what they had accomplished, such as in the case of false positives or system gaming.
One participant described an incident in which he discovered that construction in his building was registering as steps on his Fitbit, and how the resulting incorrectly high step count and potential to achieve a reward still served as motivation:
I'm like, `I left it at home.
And I went home, and it was at like 32,000 because of this nailing into the wall.
Now I will tell you that that caused me to go put it in my pocket and then go walk out and do 3,000 more steps so I would get the 35,000 badge, so I admit to that, okay?"
Now, as we move on, I think the greater motivation is competition with friends in terms of how many steps or how many active minutes in the FitBit world, that kind of thing."
I'll make an extra push to take it a little bit further every day so that I can try to get my average up and beat them."
Over time, participants also developed "reward ecologies" for themselves that went beyond the explicit system goals and rewards by incorporating real-world rewards or other tools.
For example, one participant used her Fitbit in conjunction with an app for tracking and managing calorie intake information to give herself rewards that were entirely external to the system:
One issue that arose in the long-term use of these devices and their associated social features was that of finding the right community to motivate oneself or otherwise enhance the experience.
Previous systems have proposed on leveraging a person's existing social network for motivation  Among our participants, however, it was rare that sharing data with a person's real-life friends and family proved to be highly motivating over time.
Some participants had one or a few friends with whom they regularly shared data but this was generally only motivating when the friends had similar patterns of activity.
It was more common that people described the attrition of their friends or colleagues over time, or ways in which they failed to motivate as a community:
People who made extensive use of social and sharing features of the system to compare data were more likely to do so with people they had met through the online communities.
Interactions with friends made through the online social networks often proved more motivating or engaging because participants perceived them as better "peers" for comparing activity data, a finding that relates to Peng and Hsieh's studies of online gaming friends :
So it's competition among FitBit friends from all over the world that I will never meet in real life."
But, you know, having even the ones we've never talked on there... it's like seeing somebody at the gym working out.
And they're over there working hard.
So, just seeing that, you know, `Hey, if they can do it, and maybe I can do it a little bit better.'"
Our findings contribute new knowledge about the use of wearable activity sensing technologies and evolution of practices surrounding them among long-term users in naturalistic contexts.
In this section, we further contribute a set of considerations for the design of such technologies for long-term support, and situate our conclusions within the landscape of previous findings.
I mean, there's some sort of ridiculous people on there, and they're like they're walking ... 50,000 steps by the time they get to work... And then there's people who are ... trying to lose 50 pounds or more, which is pretty dramatic as well...
So, I don't know how it can filter better so that you can find your peer group in a more meaningful way."
As persuasive technologies become increasingly common some key questions remain: What constitutes the success of a persuasive technology?
Does a successful persuasive technology continue to offer value by supporting and scaffolding the behavior over time?
Or does it serve as a `gateway' technology , training and routinizing new practices to the point that the technology itself is no longer necessary?
We believe that both approaches have merit as design goals.
Technologies can be intentionally designed such that their success obviates them, or designed to provide continued support and persuasion.
Although many people who use wearable activity monitors eventually stop using them, our findings suggest that some segment of the population continue to derive value and motivation from them even after many months or years of use.
Participants reported achieving goals such as weight loss or increased fitness, and talked about changes to their routine and activity levels that they believed were long term and durable, but still relied upon recording and viewing their activity data, and sharing data with social networks.
These findings yield several implications for the design of persuasive technologies intended to provide long-term support in addition to prompting behavior change: Motivating maintenance as well as change: Persuasive technologies often focus on prompts or cues to introduce changes or improvements in behavior.
Although these aspects have proven to be valuable, tools should also offer explicit motivation for the maintenance of practices or achievements, as maintenance is critical for durable behavior change .
As our findings indicate, long-term users of wearable sensing technologies often rely upon their devices to motivate a consistent level of activity or provide awareness of a baseline, although the system's rewards for doing so are less explicit.
Participants found the continued awareness of their data valuable and motivating.
However, it is worthwhile to consider how designs can provide more explicit support for behavior maintenance.
For example, a system might reward the wearer not only on how many steps she has achieved in a given day, but also on how many days in a row she has managed to reach that goal.
Although real-life friends and family were often less motivating than online contacts in terms of comparing or competing, connecting with them through the systems' social networking features proved to be valuable in other ways.
Participants described making use of shared data to provide support or maintain awareness, much as they might with general purpose social networking sites.
For example, one participant talked about the awareness and peace of mind he gained from sharing data with his elderly mother:
P10 described calling to check on his mother when he saw that she had not uploaded data, and discovering that she had hurt her knee.
They subsequently used her data to make sure she did not go over 5,000 steps per day while healing.
P18 talked about being able to use other people's data to know when to offer encouragement and support:
However, finding the right people or communities with whom to share data often proved a challenge.
Relying on real-life friends and family alone may be too naive an approach when people's goals are as individual and dynamic as those of our participants.
Existing systems support the formation of groups with specific interests, attributes or goals, which offers a step in the right direction.
Future designs should consider adding more support for finding relevant and motivating communities, and for transitioning between communities or dynamically evolving communities as people's needs and practices change.
For example, a system might analyze the activity of a person and find and suggest groups that have proven to be motivating  for people with similar patterns.
Supporting changes in activity and metrics: The type of tracking and measurement provided by the tools influenced how people thought about their activity, apparent in their fluent translation of activity to metrics such as steps or points.
Even so, people's practices sometimes veered away from system metrics as they became more engaged in fitness.
Metrics and data that had been valuable early in use could become insufficient over time; activities that became important to people as their practices changed, such as weightlifting and yoga, were no longer reflected by the system's metrics.
This resulted in a mismatch between the wearer's priorities and the system's support.
Designers of systems should consider ways in which measurements and tracked activities can be augmented or evolved over time, or ways in which different sensing technologies can be integrated into the overall ecosystem of support tools.
For example, systems might be designed to collect and track more general data, such as steps, early in use.
Subsequently they might adapt to track more specific types of activities, perhaps even integrating dynamically with sensors in the environment or technology-augmented fitness equipment.
Supporting the evolution of rewards: The commercial technologies used by our participants all included a built-in system of rewards.
It was, however, interesting to see how these system rewards fit into a larger ecosystem of rewards that people created for themselves, including "real world" rewards.
Although system rewards support reflection and offer motivation particularly early in usage, providing a variety of rewards and changing rewards over time seem to be valuable in motivation.
It may be worthwhile to consider a greater scope of reward types, and ways of adding concrete `real world' rewards in addition to system-specific symbolic rewards, including dynamic or evolving approaches to rewards to maintain engagement.
For example, a system might allow a person to specify a desired future gift to himself, and then integrate with personal budgeting software that would allow for savings to be put aside towards the gift based on the person's fitness activity.
The general value that people attributed to these devices confirmed the most fundamental findings of several previous deployments, such as those of Fish `n' Steps , UbiFit , and Chick Clique , as well as research by Fogg , about how providing data about people's physical activity raises consciousness of increases activity at least in the short term.
Most of these studies do not make claims about long-term behavioral changes as trials generally lasted from a few days to a few months.
Their findings held true for our participants, and many of them also attributed what they believed to be long-term behavior changes to the devices.
This should not be taken, however, as an indicator of their potential for prompting such changes for the general population as we did not study use by people for whom the technology failed to motivate activity.
Additionally, some of the shorter durations of use represented in our study  may be too short to inspect for real behavior change .
Our study also revealed participants' extreme focus on numerical goals and numerical data.
These findings echo Li's claim that people focus on numbers rather than the activities the numbers represent , as well as Albaina et al.
Our findings regarding the importance of numbers, accounting, and accuracy lend credence to Consolvo et al.
Our work extends this knowledge by illustrating how important and embedded these representations can become in daily practice, even after very long use.
Although our findings regarding the practices of long-term wearers generally confirmed those found in previous shorter-term studies, some of our findings contrasted with them, for example in how wearers responded to system goals and rewards.
Although we did see some customization of system goals, our participants overwhelmingly left the default goals unchanged, and many used them as personal daily targets.
This contrast may be due to the fact that the proposed goals in the survey were formulated in terms of workout activities, whereas the system goals offered by the devices in our study are achievements expressed in terms of data collected by the system and therefore seem a natural fit.
The system rewards, such as achievement badges, also proved to be motivating and satisfying for many participants.
In contrast, Munson et al.
Regarding the social features of these technologies, our study uncovered varied practices and benefits.
Previous experimental deployments have also touched upon aspects of data sharing, such as with whom people would want to share data , and the social interaction that arises from sharing among friends .
In our examination of long-term users of these technologies, we found evidence that early practices of sharing data with friends and family are likely to change over time, and that people go through a process of identifying relevant people with whom to share data.
People's evolving goals and practices further complicate this challenge.
From a motivational standpoint, finding peers with similar activities or goals, whether in one's real world or online social network, is more valuable than simply having a personal connection.
We believe that aspects of social use can be more fully addressed going forward by looking at how practices emerge within populations of in-the-wild adopters and their naturally evolving social networks.
The recent widespread use of commercial technologies for activity sensing and monitoring provides a valuable opportunity to gain insight into the naturalistic use and effects of these ubiquitous computing systems.
In this work, we examine the impact and influence of tracking devices on long term wearers' activities and attitudes.
Our findings reveal that despite changing goals and practices over time, some population of wearers continue to derive value and motivation from the technologies.
This suggests that it is worthwhile for designers of personal informatics and persuasive technologies to consider how to provide long term support for healthy behaviors, in addition to offering initial motivation for change.
We believe that long-term wearers have needs and practices that are different from those in the initial weeks of use.
By looking at the changing use of metrics, data sharing, and rewards, we provide grounded insights about how systems can evolve alongside wearers and provide continued benefits.
Ahtinen A., Mattila, E., Vaatanen, A., Hynninen, L., Salminen, J., Koskinen, E., Laine, K. User experiences of mobile wellness applications in health promotion.
A persuasive virtual coach to motivate elderly individuals to walk.
Barua, D., Kay, J. and Paris, C. Viewing and controlling personal sensor data: what do users want?
Bickmore, T., Caruso, L., Clough-Gorr, K. Acceptance and usability of a relational agent interface by urban older adults.
Using pedometers to increase physical activity and improve health.
Design requirements for technologies that encourage physical activity.
Flowers or a robot army?
Encouraging awareness & activity with personal, mobile displays.
Goal considerations for persuasive technologies that encourage physical activity.
Activity sensing in the wild: a field trial of UbiFit garden.
Persuasive Technology: Using computers to change what we think and do.
Klasnja, P., Consolvo, S., Pratt, W. How to evaluate technologies for health behavior change in HCI research.
Beyond counting steps: using context to improving monitoring of physical activity.
Fish'n'Steps: encouraging physical activity with an interactive computer game.
Michie, S., Ashford, S., Sniehotta, F. F., Dombrowski, S. U., Bishop, A., French, D. P. A refined taxonomy of behaviour change techniques to help people change their physical activity and healthy eating behaviours: The CALO-RE taxonomy.
Munson, S. Mindfulness, reflection, and persuasion in personal informatics.
Munson, S., Consolvo, S. Exploring goal-setting, rewards, selfmonitoring, and sharing to motivate physical activity.
It's not that I don't have problems, I'm just not putting them on Facebook: Challenges and opportunities in using online social networks for health.
Peng, W., Hsieh, G. The influence of competition, cooperation, and player relationship in a motor performance centered computer game.
Prasad, A., Sorber, J., Stablein, T., Anthony, D., Kotz, D. Understanding sharing preferences and behavior for mHealth devices.
Prochaska, J., Johnson, S., and Lee, P. The transtheoretical model of behavior change.
The handbook of health behavior change.
Schwanda, V., Ibara, S., Reynolds, S., Cosley, D. Side Effects and `Gateway' Tools: Advocating a Broader Look at Evaluating Persuasive Systems.
Tollmar, K., Bentley, F., Viedma, C. Mobile health mashups.
Toscos, T., Faber, A., An, S., Gandhi, M. Chick Clique: persuasive technology to motivate teenage girls to exercise.
Tudor-Locke, C. Taking steps toward increased physical activity: using pedometers to measure and motivate.
President's Council on Physical Fitness and Sports: Research Digest, Series 3, No.
