A central tenet of HCI is that technology should be usercentric, with designs being based around social science findings about users.
Nevertheless a repeated but critical challenge in design is translating empirical findings into actionable ideas that inform design, or generating implications for design.
Despite various design methods aiming to bridge this gap, knowledge informing design is still seen as problematic.
However there has been little empirical exploration into what design researchers understand by such design knowledge, the functions and principles behind their creation.
We report on interviews with twelve expert HCI design researchers probing the roles and types of design implications, and the process of generating and evaluating them.
We synthesize different types of design implications into a framework to guide their generation.
Our findings identify a broader range than previously described, additional sources and heuristics supporting their development as well some important evaluation criteria.
We discuss the value of these findings for interaction design research.
This is reflected in a surprising lack of empirical studies investigating implications, although there are critiques of their perceived abstract quality .
This gap between fieldwork and design is a paradox given the wealth of practical design methods developed to mine empirical findings to generate actionable design suggestions.
Examples include contextual design , activity-based prototyping  or design sketches .
This paper presents interviews with design researchers who employ user-centric design methods.
These researchers have evolved practices to bridge the gap because their research products involve building research prototypes that are motivated by fieldwork.
We explore these researchers' understanding of implications for design and the principles behind the practice of generating them.
One goal is to help other design researchers bridge the gap through a better understanding of different types of implications commonly employed, the sources for generating them and criteria used for evaluating them.
We also provide theoretical and practical implications of such knowledge for HCI researchers designing and building prototypes.
While previous work has focused on the theoretical debate about the relationship between ethnography and design , our work takes a more pragmatic approach to bridging the gap from qualitative fieldwork studies to design.
Increased understanding of the largely tacit and challenging process of generating implications should enable design researchers to refine design methods and improve resulting technologies.
We analyze interview data to address the following questions:  What types of design implications are generated through fieldwork?
Are they predominantly communicating devices or are there new types such as abstract functionalities of classes of systems?
What sources of information are used in generating design implications?
Are implications predominantly informed by fieldwork data, human science theories and design practice, or are there other sources yet to be discovered?
How are implications for design generated?
What heuristics do people employ?
Are implications generated after the analysis of fieldwork data, or during it?
What are the main characteristics of design implications and how are they evaluated?
Do they meet the validity criteria of scientific knowledge, or more specific criteria related to design practice?
A central tenet of HCI is that technology should be usercentric, with designs being based around social science findings about users.
Nevertheless an outstanding challenge in interaction design is translating empirical findings into ideas or knowledge that inform design, aka generating implications for design .
In the HCI field, design researchers often attempt to bridge that gap by describing how empirical findings might influence system explorations.
Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Implications for design are a specific type of design knowledge for which prior work has referenced three contrasting sources such as fieldwork-, design-, and human science-informed design knowledge.
These three different approaches and their specific types of design knowledge are reviewed below including a mixture of fundamental HCItextbook knowledge, with more detailed accounts of the lesser known ones.
While we acknowledge the distinct value of each of these three approaches, this paper focuses mostly on the design implications derived from qualitative fieldwork as it is more commonly employed in user-centered design.
Additional hermeneutical  and aesthetic  approaches to design are beyond the scope of this paper.
Cooper's  personas represent archetypal users who manifest critical concrete behaviors, abstracted from multiple users along with engaging personal details to bring the character to life.
Their value is partly derived from people's ability to engage meaningfully with fictional characters .
Beside provoking and inspiring, personas emphasize situated rather than generalized users, increasing designers' understanding and empathy.
Requirements gathering is a common HCI method for generating design knowledge, but it has been critiqued for its failure to capture the richness of social settings .
Requirements are highly specific design knowledge derived from fieldwork to support a situated design for that setting.
They are intended to capture system goals and functionalities that lead to incremental improvements to existing systems in well-understood contexts.
Requirements are highly prescriptive and implementable but are difficult to generalize beyond the settings where they have been explored.
Ethnographic methods emerged to address the limitations of requirements gathering methods and are typically used in settings where complex social factors are at play.
The explicit aim of ethnographic methods is the understanding of socialities, and more elusively to explore how technology may address their key social issues .
They typically use analytic methods that generate rich descriptions of social settings, while the process of deriving technical implications from these descriptions is complex and controversial .
Controversies concern whether ethnographies should be strictly descriptive or should speak to technology implications .
There is limited consensus about how ethnographic work should be expressed as design knowledge, or how that knowledge might be evaluated.
Sensitizing concepts highlight relevant social aspects concerning technology use.
The term is borrowed from the social sciences , to describe new, intriguing, and underdeveloped observations about significant social problems that new technologies should address .
They serve as interpretative devices for the exploration of empirical instances and for abstracting their common features.
More specifically, such concepts provide rich descriptions of socialities that capture key situational features and social interactions , which potentially orient designers towards key problems .
Sensitizing concepts also challenge assumptions about design , and provide new design research agendas .
The abstract nature of sensitizing concepts promotes generalizability but this is counterbalanced by a lack of clarity and limited specification of technologically implementable knowledge .
Despite their valuable contributions, ethnographers have repeatedly documented how sensitizing concepts are notoriously difficult to translate into specific or prescriptive design implications .
Finally, proponents of sensitizing concepts do not discuss explicitly their evaluation.
In the design context, an implicit criterion is generativity, i.e.
Conceptual models introduced by Norman , capture users' understanding of a computer system.
They are gene rated at the ideation stage of design to translate requirements into abstract user-centric descriptions of the system .
They tend to be generalizable, as alternative conceptual designs allow for a wider exploration of the design space.
Conceptual models can also be generated through reflection on developed systems to extract the core features of their success, as further described.
Design knowledge also serves to communicating succinctly to designers the essential fieldwork findings, i.e.
Scenarios capture narratives describing users' activities in terms of system goals, and users' context of activity .
They are described in user-language and tend to be highly situated.
Scenarios are versatile concepts which characterize various points on the continuum from fieldwork to design.
A different approach to generating design concepts is to critically analyze successful systems to try to replicate their successes using related design concepts .
Early examples of successful designs included WYSIWYG desktop metaphor and document editors where important digital objects were rendered on the screen, behaving approximately like real world objects allowing direct manipulation of those objects .
More recent design concept approaches include Hook's strong concepts , which are general properties that multiple systems might possess.
A different approach has been taken by Gaver , who suggests that designs be motivated by their ambiguity, as they are deliberately underspecified.
Because of their focus, the relation between design concepts and prior empirical fieldwork is unspecified.
Although the goal of design concepts is clearly to devise systems that are intended to motivate rich interaction experiences, neither Gaver nor Hook provide motivating fieldwork that maps concepts or principles to originating user behaviors.
In the same way, no explicit criteria are developed for evaluating design concepts, although the implicit criterion seems to be whether concepts are generative: leading to multiple new instances of the design concept.
However the mapping between principles and their application to system design can be indirect, making their exact utility difficult to determine.
A classic example of human science inspired design principles is the application of Fitts' law concerning perception and action, which has been successfully used in the design of many different types of pointing and input devices.
Social sciences have also been used in the design of community systems, exploiting concepts of social capital, self-presentation, and social loafing.
METHOD We examined the different types of design implications by employing a common HCI method of interviewing experts, in this case design researchers.
For example, Zimmerman and colleagues  also interviewed researchers to explore the sources and outcomes of design research.
We interviewed twelve experienced design researchers working in HCI, 9 with at least 10 years of experience, and 6 over 20 years, including 2 ACM SigCHI Academy members.
Two non-random sampling techniques were employed.
Through purposive sampling, invitations were sent to 25 design researchers, with recognized positions in the field, i.e.
A subsequent snowball sampling emerged, with 4 researchers being referred by the initially invited ones.
The sample consists of 8 researchers working in academia and 4 in industry research labs, with 8 having experience of working in both sectors .
Eight participants work in the UK, 3 in the US, 1 in The Netherlands, and the sample was gender balanced, with research interests in memory technologies, interaction design, UX and CSCW.
Each study participant was rewarded with a gift voucher worth 40.
Heuristics are simple design-oriented rules of thumb to guide practical system design.
Although their exact provenance is unspecified they seem to be derived from designers' expertise and reflections on successful prior practice of system building .
Unlike design concepts, their goal is to incrementally improve the design of specific systems, rather than to generate new systems.
While less abstract than design concepts and usually depicted in terms of technology properties, heuristics can still vary in their level of abstraction but maintain their generalizability for a class of technologies.
They serve as general orienting principles for system design: e.g.
Nielsen's first principle of visibility of system status, or Schneiderman's reversibility principle.
There have been various critiques of usability heuristics and their application, from being unreplicable or conflating important with more trivial types of system faults .
Nevertheless these techniques are commonly used in practical contexts when developing interfaces or interactive experiences and there is a specific system to be evaluated.
Other approaches to design, informed by practice consist of critical design , research-through-design , or material-driven design .
Additional types of knowledge derived from practice include design deliberations around issues arising during the design process consisting of responses proposed and their rationale , or patterns capturing proven solution to a specific design problem which together allow for the development of a pattern language .
A rather different approach to generating design knowledge is to derive design principles from prior social science theory.
Carroll  identified claims about users' needs that could be informed by social and behavioral theories.
Design principles provide high level technology goals  and tend to be abstract and general, i.e.
Design principles also tend to be described in people- rather than technology-language, and need to be interpreted by designers to either develop new system types or incrementally improve existing systems.
Participants' profiles All participants have experiences in designing and building HCI prototypes, so that their own definitions of design implications are derived through years of practice.
All participants have strong expertise in qualitative research methods including ethnography, interviews, diary studies, contextual inquiry as well as evaluation of deployed systems.
The interviews lasted from 45 to 120 min , and were semi-structured around a set of core questions.
We also asked: Are there different types of design implications?
Are there any specific information sources you use?
Are there fieldwork findings that are more useful to generating implications than others and why?
We also explored the main characteristics and criteria used for evaluating design implications.
The interviews were completely transcribed, and over 1300 quotes capturing implications were thematically coded and analyzed.
The analysis was intensely iterative and collaborative.
A conceptual framework developed from prior literature provided initial categories of types of design knowledge and their information sources.
This was further refined as new codes emerged to capture specific abstract types of implications, and additional sources, heuristics and evaluation criteria.
The authors met at least weekly for over two months to discuss and revise the coding scheme and ensure its validity and reliability.
Metaabstractions offer "a conceptual framework of reference for a new class of technologies  it's not about the design of the specific technology but about the whole space like a narrower field within HCI" .
Usually, products of a large body of work, meta-abstractions are particularly visionary, enabling shifts in HCI research areas.
They aim of transforming thinking about current technologies , by challenging design assumptions and helping designers gain new perspectives: "it's about challenging people's assumptions and  critical of some of the more conventional approaches to building these kinds of systems" .
For this, they need to be inspiring and motivating: "they not just teach how to think about a class of technology but inspire building new concepts" .
An important finding is a broader set of design knowledge capturing design implications beyond descriptions, requirements, principles and sensitizing concepts, to include more innovative ones such as meta-abstractions and instantiations.
In contrast with ethnographic research emphasizing "thick descriptions" and HCI textbooks highlighting co mmunicating devices, i.e.
Our findings reveal a taxonomy of implications for design consisting of short descriptions , prescriptions , abstractions and meta-abstractions , sensitizing concepts , and instantiations  and their weights in the overall data .
While descriptions are linked to the design problem explored through the fieldwork, and prescriptions are linked to the design solution, the last four types capture design concepts developed to specifically bridge the gap between the fieldwork and design.
Instantiations take the form of possible design concepts embodying an abstract property or feature .
Their main aim is to support the understanding of the related abstraction: "We've collected all this data  and here are three ideas about systems that might allow people to socially network in several ways; and you would actually describe prototypes that could be implemented" .
Instantiations or design exemplars should also stimulate designers to think about the abstract principles they embody to further explore the design space: "you could take those principles and generate a whole bunch of different types of systems that adhere to those principles but are innovative and make other people think" .
Such exemplars are described predominantly verbally, and are not actual design solutions, but may act as placeholders within the design space.
However they can be realised in working exemplar prototypes.
Working exemplars are inspirational as they can be directly understood and used by technologists: "We built systems based on early papers, and system builders have come up to me and said: "I love the xxx system, it was a big inspiration" or "I thought this was really interesting.
I wanted to do something like this" .
These systems could then serve as design concepts for others who are interested in building similar systems.
Both abstractions and instantiations express underlying design principles derived from fieldwork data, but manifest these differently: as guiding principles or as concrete examples.
Abstractions of functionality use fieldwork to derive general principles that systems should possess, without specifying actual instances of systems.
In contrast, instantiations specify concrete exemplar systems that could be or have been built.
They are intended to be generative of designs that actually get built.
Abstractions of technology functionalities capture general functionalities of an existing class of technologies .
They are shaped as suggestions for interpreting more abstract technology goals captured by sensitizing concepts.
For example, abstractions capture more technologically-oriented information such as interaction modes or system components: "looking at how people read from paper, you can come up with a set of guidelines like "to support the reading of multiple documents when you are building systems for electronic reading".
Another general one would be "to support note ta king or the ability to annotate as people read" .
A particular type of abstraction is meta-abstractions focusing on the key aspects of a new class of technologies.
They tend to state technology goals generated to meet specific social needs.
For this, sensitizing concepts focus on the key aspects of social behaviors identifying key features of the design space, such as: "high level things in terms of a social arrangements impacting design, configurations of families for example and their interrelationships and power structures; and try to articulate them as features of a design space to orient towards" .
These social aspects relate to technologies by suggesting a range of social values, such as "different types of moral and ethical sensibility, value constructs to take into account" .
Sensitizing concepts often capture intriguing, underdeveloped social concepts which lack clear definition.
Thus, they are more open and inspirational than abstract functionalities but less technologically actionable.
Therefore, they require additional work from designer to interpret and apply them to specific settings: "I often worry that some implications are too general to give any good guidance from a practical perspective" .
Sensitizing concepts are also intended to challenge designers to reflect on how to implement them, and to support the advance of design thinking as they: "might inspire designers or make them think more broadly about a better technology" .
Abstractions can be employed to explore aspects of the sensitizing concepts that could become technologically actionable.
The following example suggests that the sensitizing concept of privacy can be operationalized into abstract functionalities of a specific system: "if you're building a system concerned with health, then privacy of data is a key consideration so you might state some abstract functions relating to privacy that that class of system should have" .
The above roles are enabled by the short descriptions' properties of being succinct and highly situated.
These strengths are counterbalanced by their limited amount of knowledge that can be technologically implemented or generalizable across settings.
Another common type of design knowledge is concrete suggestions for simple implementations.
Similar to user requirements, prescriptions capture key system properties suggesting how they could be implemented in a particular design: "very specific design features that would be very easy to address" .
Not surprising, they are highly situated and actionable: "something very specific that people can take on board and implement right away" , and have limited power to generalize to settings different that the one investigated.
Design implication Example An influential example is social awareness , capturing understanding of the activities of others in the context of groupwork, i.e.
This spawned a huge amount of subsequent research that sought to further empirically characterize social awareness and to build technologies that would support it .
An abstract functionality of social awareness is extending awareness of remote objects to gestures at, and around them .
An example of meta-abstraction related to social awareness is extending the collaborative tasks from desktop and shared displays to a different class of technologies, i.e.
An instantiation of the abstract property of seamless mediated interaction and sharing of documents was the Agora system itself , as one possible design solution.
A specific requirement of Agora system was the need for a high resolution shared screen used in conjunction with desk cameras for capturing users' gestures at remote locations .
The most frequent type of design implications derived from fieldwork data consists of short descriptions as summaries of key empirical findings capturing constraints characterizing the problem space that can be used to inform the design space.
Often the initial step in the development of the other types of design knowledge, short descriptions are derived through synthesis and abstraction of rich interview- or ethnography-based data: " you need to be able to communicate the most salient parts of it" .
They can be user values, context, tasks or concerns expressed through a couple of paragraphs or visual aids.
Short descriptions have several roles such as communicating the most relevant findings to allow designers' understanding of the problem context, and inspire them to explore new solutions.
More specifically, they serve as communication devices, offering: "a language for communicating ideas" .
Communication focuses on the key fieldwork findings for understanding the design setting, as "their main goal is the understanding of a particular phenomenon" .
Such short descriptions also provide explanations for the saliency of the findings and their potential relevance to design: "it's useful to illustrate why a certain finding is important and implications of design is sort of one way of concretizing those" .
By promoting such understanding, short descriptions may inspire design-
A new, important source for generating design implications consists of the technology context .
Participants repeatedly pointed out that such context is critical for framing the fieldwork and observed social phenomena : "my sense of the technology is already determining what kind of stuff I would be looking at and human situations I am interested in" .
This also includes an awareness of the technological space in terms of shortcomings and possibilities: "being aware of the technology landscape is very important" , with technology affordances being implicitly used as a lens for analyzing the data: "there is an understanding of the basic technological capabilities beforehand" .
In an attempt to overcome lack of technical expertise, social scientists may engage in generating design implications with deliberate disregard for technological constraints: "without having the technology in mind but rather thinking about what experience should be facilitated" .
This is a critical finding suggesting that even when lacking awareness of the technological context, technology is a significant lens for observing and interpreting data.
Such technology context may play different roles from framing ideas to narrowing the scope of the fieldwork : " a specific techno arena that you are exploring through fieldwork, otherwise that is very ungrounded and you have a difficult time in making implications" .
Technology as a source for generating implications is an important finding suggesting a critical factor in evaluating what are important observations in the emerging technology context.
This is different from other technology oriented approaches such as those based on design concepts .
Our participants were not focusing on successful prior designs but on the general context of emerging technologies.
These observations are interesting because the process of generating design knowledge can be seen here as being run backwards, so that technology context is used to frame interpretations of the fieldwork data which are then expressed as technology-oriented design implications.
Less surprising is that relevant fieldwork findings are the most common source of design implications.
This aligns with the standard view on fieldwork-informed design knowledge.
What is interesting, is the specific findings acting as sources, such as people's behaviors and preferences , challenges that people face ; consistent themes throughout the data ; emotionally charged themes ; unexpected findings  or expected things that did not show up .
Design implications can also capture lessons learned after the evaluation of technologically implemented design solutions : "We developed a system and then we evaluated it and within that work the implications for design really got better" .
This source for generating design knowledge is arguably the most difficult to tap into, because of the challenges of building the designed systems in the first place, and the difficulties of evaluating them in real settings: "making the argument that this tool will work in real situations is extremely difficult to show " .
Such evaluation builds on actionable knowledge embedded in the designed technologies.
Apart from design concepts, another specific type of design knowledge tapping into this source is meta-abstractions.
They tend to be the result of a sustained research effort within a domain, consisting of a substantial body of work.
This could include iterative fieldwork, development and evaluation of prototypes which facilitates a continual revision of the design knowledge and increases confidence in their validity and generalizability: "We have done a lot of work in our group about different types of xxx technologies, and therefore if you think about these as a class then you can start to sketch out a conceptual framework which will take people thinking about it much more broadly and diversely" .
Another source of information for generating design implications includes aspects of the socialities, such as social values: "focused on different audiences, types of ethical sensibility or value constructs" .
These may be data driven, or solely informed by general aspects of social science.
They could also include the broader context with reference to social locality and time: "if you are in a park  is portable so that is a finding  to imagine possibilities" , like "what would you say about time in relation of your project that other designers should know about?
Consistent with other theory-based approaches to HCI, some participants focused on human science theory when developing design knowledge.
These kernel theories are usually outside the HCI area and include social science theories of human behavior or "biological underpinning" : "you have a sort of an inkling that is interesting and you need to go to some kind of social or human theory to figure out what is the literacy of these specific examples" .
Awareness of cutting edge technologies helps to frame thinking while opening up new possibilities for design: "the designer in our group regularly sends a newsletter where he kind of scours the web looking for new ideas, technologies, wacky things people are working on  having that as another set of inputs into the process is really helpful because it gets you out of the rut of thinking of the same old technologies and ideas" .
It is an important point that design implications involve more than collecting rich user data.
They involve characterizing the technology space, then combining that with the user data.
This is critical in order to move beyond `the same old technologies'.
Participants also identified various mapping tactics that help bridge the gap from fieldwork data to design practice.
A common form of mapping is from observed behavior to sensitizing concepts , from observed behavior to abstract functionalities and instantiations , and from technology affordances to sensitizing concepts .
Throughout the process of generating design knowledge, design researchers employ two contrasting approaches to the order of fieldwork data analysis and generation of implications for design.
One approach favors the traditional process of generating design knowledge following analysis of the fieldwork data.
Participants gave numerous accounts of this classical "fieldwork first" approach emphasizing the importance of first completing the data analysis before thinking about design implications : "it follows on from having done full analytical work" .
For example, people may start from specific technology ideas for which they would like to explore relevant social settings: "The study was motivated by the idea of a graphical user interface that would allow to look at your digital mementos  In the end, a design implication was that the screen was not the right thing to do but I was aware what I wanted to find in the end."
However, despite having prior technological framings, participants stressed the importance of staying open to counterintuitive fieldwork data.
Various research methods contribute differently to the generation of design implications.
Therefore, this approach of considering implications before planning the fieldwork allows for an explicit selection of the study methodology which could offer the most relevant fieldwork data: "if you get to the end of your study and think about implications, you have probably left it too late  I think about it right throughout the whole process as I set up experiments or observations" .
A rather different approach argues for exploring design implications during data analysis : "it goes hand in hand because while I analyze my data and I see these themes emerging, that automatically triggers an idea of what is the implication for design" .
In this respect, this may influence the data reporting and analysis process, as considering design implications during analysis offers an additional lens for identifying the salient findings: " is done with an eye towards design and technology  something is interesting because it has some technological implication in which case I might draw that out" .
This second approach however, does not abandon the first "fieldwork first" approach, because participants acknowledged that design implications can be further improved once the findings are properly summarized: " might be informed by an understanding of the kinds of implications that you want  but it becomes easy to think about implications after articulating a clear set of findings" .
This quote stresses the iterative nature of the process of generating implications for design.
A particularly interesting finding is that implications for design must address quality criteria pertaining to both scientific and design practice.
These criteria consist of validity, generalizability and originality, as well as generativity, inspirability and actionability.
Such criteria are particularly important but seldom met satisfactory by the generated implications for design.
Although some people employ implicit criteria , the importance of evaluating design knowledge is strongly acknowledged and the value of explicit criteria particularly emphasized .
An important characteristic of design knowledge is empirical validity, supported through explicit accounts of how such knowledge is grounded in fieldwork data, or acquired through reflection on the evaluation of developed technologies.
Being grounded in fieldwork data legitimates and provides rationale for design knowledge : "You should be able to trace back from implications and see how that's grounded" .
This requires articulating the explicit connection to the data: "those implications are self apparent  you need to be appropriate in terms and not making overly bold claims" .
Testing design knowledge after implementation is perceived by some participants as the most important evaluation criterion, offering the strongest form of empirical validity : "We developed a system and evaluated it and within that work the design implications really got better  the ability to build on implications is definitely a benchmark for evaluation; that's where one might find their value: in the extent someone could build on" , as it provides the ultimate test: "building the system and evaluating it; that's the way that you can tell whether or not you've got the principles right" .
It also builds on the idea that design implications are hypotheses whose value can be best evaluated through empirical tests: "implications are like hypotheses and the next thing in that process is to build a system that tests those hypotheses" .
A few participants also mentioned comparing their design implications against previous ones within an area, to ensure their consistency: "you are looking at different sources of literatures to see what kind of implications other people came up with" .
This also supports further critique, revision and extension of the existing body of design implications within a given area.
So exactly where those abstract principles came from?"
Such generalizations are the basis of meta-abstractions, and the aggregation is implicit.
If such input from the previous body of work is made explicit, then the external validity of the generated implications could be strengthened.
Theoretical validity is supported through explanatory theories from human and social sciences.
However, these sources for grounding design knowledge are seldom made explicit in the writings documenting their generation process.
This criterion explicitly positions design implications as scientific knowledge that can be argued for, critiqued and revised: "check back to literature to see if you have support for your implications or not" ; as well as built on: "how the implications support the theories and concepts which are already out there"  so that design researchers could "take the most salient findings and compare them to the spaces within the literature to point out how the implications that you are devising are relevant within the larger research space" .
Participants felt strongly that an important aspect of design implications is their generality when applied to settings beyond the fieldwork .
The challenge here resides in the differences between the settings which can reduce the applicability of implications .
The issue of generalization from a single case study in qualitative research has been well studied and weaker forms have been accepted such as naturalistic generalization to similar settings  and generalization through aggregation of findings from multiple studies .
We found that participants employ both these forms with the former being the more frequent choice.
In this case, abstractions are the preferred type of design implications as they promote generalization of findings from the situated fieldwork to other similar settings: "findings are very specific to your research question and then the implications are perhaps extrapolated slightly further from that to a more generalizable design space" , "across a range of different " .
This suggests that an important property of abstractions is that they need to speak to multiple contexts, looking for example to "cut across different people, different households" .
In our data, there was however limited evidence regarding the exploration of the similarities of these settings.
Participants also emphasized the importance of originality, or developing implications that inform the design of novel technologies: "they describe a phenomenon that people didn't know about and could say: "You could build systems in this area, I hadn't thought about before" .
Ensuring originality is challenging, as generating design implications is difficult and supporting their novelty even harder .
Participants identified differences in the ability to generate original design implications relating to the maturity of the research area , with newly emerging areas being better suited .
It also helps if there is general interest so that design implications can be built on by others: "you want multiple people to act on implications for design and sociologically, you need to have a bunch of people who are interested in something" .
People identified three sources of originality such as developing design implications that address a gap within the existing body of work: "identifying the salient findings and marking them against the gaps in the research" ; those which offer new perspectives on technology design: "tell a story that hasn't really been told so far" ; or those which explore new research areas: "At the time when we started doing that work it really wasn't a topic within HCI and we were able to start talking about those issues where other people haven't before" .
However, originality must also be tempered by usefulness, particularly when implications aim to inform the design of novel technologies: "Novelty is also a bogus criterion because we could think of any number of bad novel systems" .
The exploration of new research areas for developing original design implications, points to another important criteria to evaluate design implications, namely their generativity.
We defined this as the ability of design implications to create and open up new design spaces: "when implications for design appear really open and visionary, then I think that designers feel more freedom to become creative" , and make them think differently: "when it comes to implications I'm looking for things that can inspire people to think in a different way" .
The generativity of design implications also relates to their ability to inform and inspire multiple instances of designs: "there are five or ten systems I could build from the abstract principles" .
Being stimulating, interesting, provocative and engaging are all qualities that could contribute to the inspirational value.
The right level of abstraction and ambiguity is also expected to open the design space: "something at a high enough level that can be inspiring  giving people room to apply it to their own systems" .
This implies that abstractions and sensitizing concepts are more inspirational than prescriptions, as they allow space for designers' creativity.
Actionability Technological actionability implies that design implications are described in terms of technology properties, so that they can be implemented or: "acted upon by technologists" .
Some participants expressed strong views on the importance of this quality; "I think that is fundamental that implications can be implemented: at least for part of them, there is something that you can act upon  implications for design means something that is practical, something that you can really operate on and I don't mean writing ideas for designs or design concepts but things that you can use in practical terms and it will give directions in that sense" .
For this, they need to be technologically feasible today or in the nearby future: "they should be implementable and they shouldn't be too futuristic" .
If design knowledge is not technologically actionable, it should be at least socially actionable by addressing the larger social setting where technologies are, could, or should  be employed.
Such implications can be linked to technology by addressing aspects which may support or hinder technology adoption , or specific technology goals: "You can imagine some sort of design intervention, which would be about awareness raising or about starting a political campaign to increase resources" .
This is particularly important as design concepts are the only type of design knowledge that can be found on both sides of the gap, i.e.
Subsequently, the more effort goes into generating these types of design implications, the greater the chances of better bridging the gap from fieldwork to design practice.
In terms of generating design implications, our findings extend previously identified sources such as fieldwork data, design practice and human science theories.
A striking finding is the emphasis on the value of technology context, described as the awareness of affordances and limitations of existing and in particular cutting-edge technologies.
Another novel source for generating design implications is existing HCI work and in particular the corpus of design implications developed in a specific HCI area.
We found limited reference to human science theories as a source of generating implications, but strong evidence for the use of specific social categories such as social values, norms, time and place.
While our findings show limited references to the practice-informed design implications, this has been emphasized as a particularly relevant source for generating or revising meta-abstractions.
The process of generating implications extends the traditional approach of developing implications after concluding fieldwork analysis .
In contrast, novel ways of generating design implications occur during the fieldwork analysis, or even by considering implications while planning the fieldwork study.
This latter approach captures the importance of technology context not only as a source of design implications but also in preparing and selecting social settings to be explored, if they are to more successfully inform the generation of design implications.
We now discuss the main findings and contributions of this work, highlighting several issues that design researchers may orient to while generating design implications.
We suggest that researchers might benefit from understanding the different types of design implications, what constitutes support for generating them, how that knowledge needs to be actionable, general and inspirational.
We also believe that the field can benefit from having a common language to characterize different types of design implications.
Not least, the same criteria might be used to evaluate publications.
Our findings reveal the prevalence of fieldwork-informed design concepts and a more nuanced understanding of this.
Such design concepts are captured through four distinct types of design implications, i.e.
Another important outcome is that design implications aim to meet the validity criteria of scientific knowledge.
However, current practice provides limited evidence for validity.
Our findings reveal a large range of sources of design implications which can not only support the generation process but also its scrutiny and critique.
Sensitivity to these sources of information and researchers' efforts for making them explicit are much needed to strengthen the validity of design implications.
For example, empirical validity could be substantiated by grounding design knowledge in the fieldwork data or even better by building and evaluating previously designed technologies.
Theoretical validity is supported by grounding the design knowledge in social sciences theories.
External validity could be claimed by exploring the similarities between multiple settings or making explicit the findings from multiple studies employed as design resources.
But requirements lack both abstraction and ability to generalize.
A specific useful combination of two types of design implications supporting design practice, is abstract functionalities combined with their instantiations.
This combination is actionable because it provides concrete design concepts through instantiations.
Moreover, it is also generalizable because the abstraction can be applied across multiple situations.
Together, this combination provides a powerful device for bridging situated and general settings.
A specific new value of design implications is that they should call for action, motivating designers to engage in their exploration.
We need to generate implications that are engaging, compelling designers to explore them further by fostering broad divergent thinking.
Future work should explore the characteristics of compelling implications and how they could support creative thinking or designers' emotions and values .
The main contribution of this work is a participant derived taxonomy to describe design implications.
The taxonomy offers a framework for reflecting, debating and conversing within this challenging area, as well as documenting values that different types of design implications might serve.
Various heuristics supporting the process of generating implications and a set of criteria for evaluating such knowledge offer much needed insight into a current and relevant research topic.
Agency for Innovation Systems to the Mobile Life VinnExcellence Centre, in partnership with Ericsson, Microsoft, Nokia, IKEA and the City of Stockholm .
