A mobile computing environment imposes various restrictions on users.
For example, most mobile devices have a liited screensize, and it may be di&ult to watch the screenclosely-While the user is walking or standingin a bus or train, he or she may have only one hand free to manipulate the device.
Therefore, some new operation method must be developed for comfortable information browsing in the mobile environment.In this paper,several existing methodsare first introduced and comparedfrom the viewpoint of their applicability in a mobile environment.A new input device for such an environment,named WaviPoint," is then introduced NaviPoint is a specialized device for mobile information browsing.
By using this device,a user cauperform three types of input - "analog input," "digital input.," and "click input?
Example of mobile information browsing course indispensable for inputting characters, requires both handsevenfor simple browsing.
This paperreports a new input device-named `WaviPoint?
The next section first introducesseveralexisting operationmethodsfor infonnation browsing and describes the problems involved in applying them to a mobile environment.
A new input device cahed NaviPoint that solves the problems is then introduced,andits basicmechanism is described.Next, the structureof a prototype is explainedand its performanceis evaluated.
After a discussion of related work, the last sectionoffers someconclusionsand outlines future work.
With the evolution of compactizationtechnology and the consolidation of the wireless communication infiastructore, it hasbecomepossibleto access information through a network even while one is in transit from one place to another.
In such an environment, it is considered that simple "information browsing" with no input of characters will becomeone of the major uses of mobile information devices.
One typical example is accessto hypermedia information such as the WWW.
However, a mobile computing enviromnent imposes various restrictions on users,and somenew method of operationmust be developed for comfortable information browsing.
One of the most general types of accessedinformation is `hypermedia information," which contains "clickable  points" that link it to other information.
Figure 1 shows an example of such hypermedia browsing in a mobile environment.Part of a largemapcontaining several clickable points is displayed.When one of thesepoints is clicked, correspondingnew information is displayed.
In recent years, as a result of the spread of the WWW, hypermedia browsing has become very popular in a desktopenvironment.However in a mobile environment, there are several restrictions.
For example, most mobile deviceshavea limited screensize,andit may be difficult to watch the screenclosely.
The usermay have only onehand free to manipulate the device.
The scrolling operation is necessaryto browse information that lies outside the screen,and the pointing operation is necessaryto select a clickable point on the screen.In most information browsing, the following two operationsare performedrepeatedly: 1.
Browse the document by using the "scrolling' operation.
Select a clickable point by using the "pointing operation.
Menu-basedoperations on PDAs can also be classified into the samecategory as scrolling and pointing if they require no input operation.
For thesetwo basic operations,the following list summarizes severalwidely usedexisting methods2 Method A.
Mouse t- scroll bars This is a standard operation method in the desktop environment.An arrow-shapedpointer  is displayed on the screen.
A scrolling operation is performedby dragging the slider of a scroll bar at the side of the screen.
A pointing operationis performedby moving the pointer to a clickable point and clicking.
Trackball i scroll bars This operation method is generally used on notebook PCs.
The basic scrollmg and pointing methodsare the sameas in method A, except that a trackball  is used insteadof a mouseas an input device.
There is another variation in which an analog input stick at the centerof a keyboardis usedinsteadof a trackball.
Method B. Pen+ sheet-picking This operation method is used with most PDAs.
A scrolling operation is perfbrmedby "picking" the document itself with a penanddragging.A pointing operation is performedby directly pointing to  a clickable point in the screen.
Method C. Cursor keys + highlighting Thii operation method is mainly used with smaller mobile devicesthat are not equippedwith a pen.
One of the clickable points in the screen is `highlighted."
2 The four listed operationmethodsare typical examples.
In addition, there are some combined methods and completelydifferent methods.
Compared with a desktopenvironment,a mobile environment imposes various restrictions on user operations.
Therefore, a specially designed operation method is necessary for comfortable information browsing.
The following requirements should be satisfied: Requirement1.
Arbitrary scrolling The scrolling operation is particularly important in a mobile environment,becausethe screensize is limited.
For efficient operation,it should be possibleto scroll in an arbitrary direction at an arbitrary speed.
Quick pointing In a mobile environment,it may be difficult to watch the screenclosely or continuously.
Therefore, the pointing operationshould move directly to a clickable point and selectit.
One-handed operation It should be possibleto browse information even while walking or standingin a bus or train.
It should therefore be possibleto perform the abovetwo types of operation with onehand.
Now let us evaluatethe four operationmethodsdescribed in the previous subsectionon the basis of these requirements.
In methodsA  and A' , the pointer itself can be moved in any direction.
However,scrolling at an angle is impossiblebecause thesemethodsuse scroll bars.
In methodsthat display a pointer on the screen,continuousfeedbackfrom the screen is neededto move the pointer to a target item.
Therefore, the pointing operation becomesvery hard in an environment wherethe screencannotbe watchedclosely.
First of all, an ordinary mousecannotbe usedwithout a surfaceto presson, andis not suitableasan input device in a mobile environment.A trackball canbe usedin a mobile environment, but one-handed operation is somewhat difficult because it requiresa separate switch.
In methodB ,the sheet-pickscrolling method allows scrolling in any direction.
However, the length of one scrolling operation is limited by the screen s'ke.The methodallows the userto point to an item on the screen directly, but it always require two hands for operationin a mobile environment.
In method C , comfortable scrolling is diflicult, becauseit is performed implicitly.
Even if somespecializedoperationmode is provided, it is still limited to at most eight directions and a fixed speed.
On the other hand,pointing canbe performedquickly and accurately because one clickable point is always highlighted However, one-handed operation is difficult without special care,because the methodrequiresmultiple keys.
As we have seen, existing operation methods do not completely satisfy the three requirements for mobile information browsing.
Table 1 summarizes the results of our analysis.
Taking account of these requirementsand problems, we have developeda new input devicethat allows comfortable one-handedmobile information browsing .
It is named `%aviPoint," because information navigation is f&cWWated by this pointing device?
NaviPoint is based on the `cTrackPoint?analog input device  fitted to the center of the keyboard in IBM Think&&.
A TrackPoint device can be used as a substitute for a mouse, and consists of a stick for twodimensional analog input and several switches that correspondto mousebuttons.
The stick senses horizontal forcesbut doesnot move physicallyAs mentioned in the previous section, it is better for onehanded operation if the stick and switchesare integrated However, simply adding a switch at the bottom ofthe stick often causes unintentional pointer movement upon clicking.
In NaviPoint, a physical "insensitive zone" is provided arcmm3 the stick, allowbg click input operation without any sensingof unintentional horizontal forces.
Figure 2 shows the conceptual structure of NaviPoint.
NaviPoint consists of a stick with a micro-switch and a ring-shaped two-dimensional stresssensoraroundthe stick .
The stick can be depressed by applying a certain pressure, and can also be tilted in an arbitrary direction inside the ring- When the stick is tilted andpresses againstthering, the direction andmagnitudeof the pressureare detectedby the stresssensor.The hardware of this sensoris similar to that of the TrackPoint.
Therefore,the userknows when the stick touchesthe ring from the physical feedback of "contact feeling."
At the 3 The name has been changedfrom "ScrollPoint," which wasusedin .
The software classifiesthe input into several directions 
On the other hand, when the stick is tilted and pushesthe ring continuously or firmly, an analog input operation correspondingto the force is performed,as in the original TrackPoint.
In a word, by using NaviPoint a user can perform three typesof input - "analog input," "digital input," and"click input" - with just one finger.
Becauseof the physical feedbackfrom the micro-switch or the feeling of contact with the ring, a user can perform these input operations accuratelywithout looking at the device or screen.
The basic method is similar to method C  in the previous section, and one of the clickable points in the screen is highlighted.
When the highlighted item goes off the screen as a result of a scrolling operation,the highlight is automaticallymovedto a clickable point on the screen.
A typical information browsing procedureusing NaviPoint is as follows: 1.
Tilt the stick continuously  to scroll the document.
Tilt and return the stick several times to move the highlight to the target item.
Structureof the prototypehardware A central stick and a suspensionmechanism4that movesthe stick back to its neutral position 2.
A micro-switch, locatedunder the central stick, that is usedfor the click operation 3.
Force sensorsthat detect a two-dimensional force exertedin the horizontal plane by the central stick For this prototype, we usedthe force-sensingmechanism of the TrackPoint, which is composedof a stick and a specialprocessingcircuit.
At the bottom end of the TrackPoint stick, there are four strain gauges to detecta two-dimensionalforce exertedon the stick The values of the force are amplified and converted into digital signals by A/D.
They are then translatedinto corresponding velocity valuesandoutput as a standard mouseinterfacesignal by the specialprocessing circuit.
We usetwo TrackPoint sticks and one special processing circuit, as shown in the left part of Figure 3.
The central stick goesthroughthe centerof a horizontal plate, andtwo TrackPoint sticksparallel to the central stick are tixed to the plate at their top endsso that the lines connectingeach of themto the centralstick are orthogonalto eachother in the plate.
This horizontal plate corresponds to the ring in Figure2.
Whenthe centralstick is tilted andpushesagainst the horizontal plate, the exertedforce is transferredto the TrackPointsticks.Eachofthe sticksdetectsoneelementof a 2D orthogonalforce.For example,whenthe central stick is tilted alongthe X-axis, a bendingmomentis generated at the bottom of one TrackPoint stick, while a torsional momentis generated at the bottom of the otherstick.
In this prototype, only the bending moment is used for force detection.
The central stick and the horizontal plate are loosely coupledwith a considerablearea of slack.
This createsa force-insensitivezone around the neutral position of the stick, which avoidsundesireddetectionof force when the stick is depressed for click input.
It also provides the user with a sense of contactwhenthe centralstick is tilted from the neutral position and pressesagainst the horizontal plate.
The results show that NaviPoint is suitable for mobile information browsing.
Especially as regardsrequirement 3, it has a big advantagein that it can be controlled with just onefinger.
To showthe efficiency of NaviPoint asan input devicein a mobile environment, we made a prototype using TrackPoint parts.Figure 3 showsthe structureof the prototype.
The first prototype was developedto verify the feasibility of the NaviPoint concept.
Therefore, the hardware was developedas a stand-alonedevice end is not compactized or built into an actual mobile device.
Figure 4 shows external and internal photographsof the prototype hardware.
The internal photographis viewed from the lowerright comer of the hardwarepart of Figure 3.
The prototype hardware consists of the following three components, asshownin Figure 5:
Softwarestatemachine In the prototype, the software discriminates digital and analogparts of the mouse-signalinput from the hardware.
Expressions shown along the transition arrows are conditions for the correspondingtransitions, and statements after * * " indicate the handled  inputs .
Figure S.Parameters for discriminating a digital input of the mouse"translatedfrom the force information by the TrackPoint circuit.
Therefore,the unit of the vertical axis of this graph is "number of mouse-pointer movements normalizedto the value in 1 second."
P, is a parameterfor cancelingminute noises containedin the input Pin.
In Figure 7, noises that are not intentional inputs by the subject exist at around 0, 0.8, and 6.3 seconds,etc.
In the prototype, PI is set to 30 dotslsecto cancelthesenoises.In the figure, the horizontal dotted line representsthe threshold, and inputs smaller than this are ignored by the software.
Ph and Td are central parametersfor discriminating the digital input.
A sequenceof input that is smaller than Pt, and continues no longer than Td is handled as a digital input.
In other words, Ph and Tdmust be large enoughto include all input sequences for which the user intends to perform digital inputs, as shown in Figure 8.
From the resultsshownin Figure 7, Ph mustbe larger than about500 dots/setand Tdmustbe larger than about200 msecfor this subject.Theseparameters should essentiallybe adjustable accordingto the user.However, in the current implementation, fixed valuesPh = 800 dotslsecand Td= 300 msecare set as maximum-commonvalues, on the basis of experimentswith multiple subjects.
T, is a parameterto avoid chattering just after a digital input hasbeenprocessed, and inputs during this period are ignored.
T, is a parameterto prevent analog input from being cut into piecesby a momentarynon-input status,and the analog-inputstatecontinuesduring this period even if the input is zero.
Thesetwo parameters are introduced-for comfortable operation.
If they are too large, however, a user'sintentional series of operationswill be ignored.
In the current implementation,both T, and T, are set to 100 msec.
As explained in de previous subsection,the prototype software uses five constants, PI, Ph, Td, T, and T,, as thresholdparameters for statetransition.
Theseparameters canbe calibratedby simple experiments.
The first experiment decides PI, Ph and Td which are parametersfor discriminating the digital input.
In this experiment,a user tilts the central stick until it touchesthe horizontal plate and returns the stick repeatedly.
This operation correspondsto digital input Figure 7 gives the resultsfor onesubject,K, andshowsthe temporalvariation of the input Pin with 19 digital-input operationsat intervals of about0.5 seconds.
Actual input pattern for hypermediabrowsing Figure 9 showsthe variation of the input Pinwhile a user performshypermediabrowsingusingNavPoint according to the method descriied in the previous section.5This graph illmtrates very well the situation in which a user roughly scrolls a documentby meansof au analog input andthen changes the highlighted item by meansof several digital inputs.
In this result, the intervals between input operationsare at least 200 msec.Therefore,the value of 100msecfor T, and T, is consideredto be reasonable.
EVALUATIONEXPERIMENTS Next, to veriQ the efficiency of NaviPoint in mobile information browsing, we carried out evaluation experiments.
As a basis for comparison,we chosethe "mouse and scroll bar" method  which is the most widely used operation method.
The time taken with NaviPo.intwas comparedwith the "mousetime" in several cases whereboth scrolling andpointing areused Experimental Procedure The experimental procedure was as follows.
Figure 10 shows an imaginary hypermedia document used in the experiments.
Rectangles in the document represent clickable points .
The documentis larger than the screen, and a user cannot view the whole of the documentat one time.
In such an environment,the following operation: Exp.
2: Click point 0 4 Scroll + Click point 2 was performed repeatedly by subjectswith a mouse or NaviPoint, and the elapsedtimeswere measure&6 When a mouse was used, the scrolling operation was performedby dragging the slider of a scroll bar with the mousepointer.
Becausescrolling at an angleis impossible 5 More preciselyspeaking,an evalmtion programthat will be describedin the next sectionis used.
6 The main object of the experimentswas to measure the performance of scrolling andpointing.
Therefore,whena clickable point was selected, only a beep sound was processed, and the documentwasnot replaced.
Screenof the evaluationprogram with a scroll bar, two scroll barsmust be operatedsuccessively in Exp.
WhenNaviPoint wasused,the userhadto first roughly scroll to the neighbor of the target item by meansof an analoginput, then adjust the highlight to the target item with severaldigital inputs, and selectthe item with a click input.
The subjectsin the experimentswere nine computerusers who had mastered mouseoperation.They received about 10 to 20 minutes advance explanation and training in operatingNavipoint.
The NaviPoint prototype is held with two handsand its stick is manipulatedwith the left thumb.
The operatingsystem was Windows 95, and the speedof the mousepointer was setto medium.Figure 11 showsthe display of the evaluation program.
The screen size of the imitated mobile device is 320 x 240 dots  andthe size of eachclickable item is 64 x 16 dots .
Results and Discussion Figure 12 shows the results of the experiments.
These graphs show the elapsedtimes for nine subjectswith a mouseandNaviPoint.
Eachbar showsthe averageelapsed time of ten examinations,and the supplementaryvertical limeshowsthe 95% confidenceinterval.
The number over the initial of each subject representsthe ratio of the Navipoint time to the mousetime.
Evaluation result  From the result of Exp.
1, it canbe said that NaviPoint can be manipulatedwith an overheadof lessthan 50% on the usual mouse operation.'
Considering the advantagesof NaviPoint in a mobile environment, this overhead is acceptablefor practical use.
However, the deviation with NaviPoint tends to become larger than with a mouse.
Possiblereasonsfor this phenomenonare as follows: 0 0 The number of digital inputs affectsthe elapsedtime.
Faulty execution of digital and analog input causes unintentional movementand increases the elapsedtime.
The latter is thought to be the major reason, since the difference is very smaI1 for subjects K and Si, who mastered NaviPoint very well.
In this regard, several improvements are being planned for more accurate operation,such as calibrating the parametersdynamically for each user, as explained in the previous section, and redesigningtie physical hardware.
2, many subjects achieved better results with NaviPoint, becauseof its advantageof allowing the userto scroll in any direction.
The numberat the bottom of Figure 12 showsthe ratio of the result in Exp.
1 for each subject and operation method Comparedto the 1.4-2 times increase in mouse operation, NaviPoint shows an increaseof lessthan 1.4times for all subjects.Considering the larger scrolling distancein Exp.
2, it can be said that with NaviPoint a user can operatewith the sameperformanceand feeling in any direction.
To summarize the results, NaviPoint is suitable for browsing hypermedia documentswith arbitrary scrollmg on a small screenin a mobile environment.
As a result of the spreadof the WWW, the importanceof the scrolling operation has received greater attention recently.
For example,Microsoft's Intelliiouse  can perform scrolling  by rotating a wheel installed between two mouse buttons.
These devices and ideasare mainly concernedwith the desktopenvironment, and try to add a direct scrolling operation by adding new parts without losing the feel of the original operation.
As input devicesfor mobile information devices,pensand keypads are currently popular.
The problems associatedwith these devices in imormation browsing have already been discussedin the early section of this paper.
The functions of this device are almostthe sameas those of cursor keys, but it has the advantageof being manipulatablewith one hand.
However, arbitrary scrolling is difficult, becauseit allows input in only one dimension.
Among the new scrolling methodsfor mobile information devicesis the "Scroll Display" proposedby Siio .
This is a display device, with a built-in mouse on the back, in which the movement of the display itself is treated as a scrolling operation.
This idea may be effective as a metaphorfor intuitive scrolling operation,but the deviceis difficult to usewhile moving.
As a method for improving scrolling efficiency, "Alphaslider" has been proposedby Ahlberg et al.
It is effective for selectingan item from a text-basedlist or menu, but its performancein scrolling of generalgraphicsis considered to be the sameasthat of a normal scroll bar.
Other interesting input devices include "Rockin'Mouse"  and Rekimoto's tilting display .
These devices utilize "tilting" operation as an additional input method, andarevery useful for controlling 3D objectsinteractively.
The mostnotable characteristicof NaviPoint in relation to the above devices and methodsis that it is a specialized devicefor mobile information browsing.
By sacrificing the generality of mousepointer display and character input, NaviPoint gains an important advantage for mobile information browsing in that it can be manipulated with just one finger without watching.
PAPERS CONCLUSION This paperhasreportedanew input device,NaviPoint, that allows hypermediainformation to be browsedcomfortably on mobile information devices such as PDAs.
With this device, three types of input - "analog input," "digital input," and"click inpuV'- canbe performedby usingjust one finger.
Experimentsusing the prototype have shown that user's performance in hypermedia browsing with NaviPoint was comparablewith their performancewhen they usedmisting operationmethods.
However, NaviPoint is a specialized device for information browsing, and is not suited for inputting information such ascharacters.
Therefore,to build up a real mobile information device,it mustbe combinedwith anotherinput device suchas a pen Onefuture taskwill be to build and evaluatesucha mobile information device that incorporatesNaviPoint.
Another theme at the software level is the construction of an operation schemesuitable for information browsing that incorporates menu handling.
As another idea, we are currently planning to apply a softwarepart that implements input discrimination in existing hardware such as TrackPoint.
Investigation of the microstructureof the movement  and evaluation on the basis of Fitts' law  are also planned REFERENCES 1.
Ahlberg, C. and Shneiderman, B.
The Information Capacity of the Human Motor Systemin Controlling the Amplitude of Movement.
Fukumoto, M. and Tonomura, Y.
Kawachiya, K. and Siio, I.
A Frameworkfor Mobile Information Cache, in Proceedings of 53rd Annual Convention IPS Japan, lB-9, 1-17-l-18, in Japanese, 1996.
Application and Network Supportfor InfoPad.IEEE Personal Communications 3,2,4-17,1996.
Tuplinkz A System Structure for Mobile Micro Clients.IBM Research Report,RT5123, 1997.
2O.Sony Electronics Inc. Sony Simplifies Wireless Communications With Unique Jog Dial Control.
