The appearance of yet another rating scale for measuring symptoms of mental disorder may seem unnecessary, since there are so many already in existence and many of them have been extensively used.
Unfortunately, it cannot be said that perfection has been achieved, and indeed, there is considerable room for improvement.
Other symptoms are difficult to define, except in terms of their settings, e.g., mild agitation and derealization.
A more serious difficulty lies in the fallacy of naming.
For example, the term "delusions" covers schizophrenic, depressive, hypochrondriacal, and paranoid delusions.
They are all quite different and should be clearly distinguished.
Another difficulty may be summarized by saying that the weights given to Types of Rating Scale The value of this one, and its limitations, can best symptoms should not be linear.
Thus, in schizobe considered against its background, so it is useful phrenia, the amount of anxiety is of no importance, to consider the limitations of the various rating whereas in anxiety states it is fundamental.
They can be classified into four a schizophrenic patient who has delusions is not groups, the first of which has been devised for use necessarily worse than one who has not, but a on normal subjects.
Patients suffering from mental depressive patient who has, is much worse.
Finally, disorders score very highly on some of the variables although rating scales are not used for making a and these high scores serve as a measure of their diagnosis, they should have some relation to it.
Such scales can be very useful, but have Thus the schizophrenic patients should have a high two defects: many symptoms are not found in score on schizophrenia and comparatively small normal persons; and less obviously, but more scores on other syndromes.
In practice, this does important, there is a qualitative difference between not occur.
The present scale has been devised for use only on symptoms of mental illness and normal variations of behaviour.
The difference between the two is not patients already diagnosed as suffering from a philosophical problem but a biological one.
There affective disorder of depressive type.
It is used for is always a loss of function in illness, with impaired quantifying the results of an interview, and its value depends entirely on the skill of the interviewer in efficiency.
Self-rating scales are popular because they are eliciting the necessary information.
The interviewer easy to administer.
Aside from the notorious un- may, and should, use all information available to reliability of self-assessment, such scales are of little help him with his interview and in making the final use for semiliterate patients and are no use for assessment.
The scale has undergone a number of seriously ill patients who are unable to deal with changes since it was first tried out, and although there is room for further improvement, it will be them.
Many rating scales for behaviour have been found efficient and simple in use.
It has been found devised for assessing the social adjustment of to be of great practical value in assessing results of patients and their behaviour in the hospital ward.
They are very useful for their purpose but give little Description of the Rating Scale or no information about symptoms.
The scale contains 17 variables .
Finally, a number of scales have been devised specifically for rating symptoms of mental illness.
Some are defined in terms of a series of categories They cover the whole range of symptoms, but such of increasing intensity, while others are defined by a all-inclusiveness has its disadvantages.
In the first number of equal-valued terms .
These four additional variables: Diurnal variation, dethree look alike, but they are quite different and realization, paranoid symptoms, obsessional symp-
These are excluded from the scale because the extremely difficult to get a satisfactory description of first is not a measure of depression or of its intensity, them from the patient.
The other three Hypochondriasis.-This is easy to rate when it is occur so infrequently that there is no point in obviously present, but difficulties arise with mild including them.
Phobias of speThe variables are measured either on five-point cific disease can cause difficulties.
A phobia of or three-point scales, the latter being used where venereal disease or of cancer will sometimes be quantification of the variable is either difficult or rated under "guilt" by the nature of the symptom, impossible.
No distinction is made between in- but other cases may give rise to much doubt and tensity and frequency of symptom, the rater having judgment requires care.
Fortunately, phobias are to give due weight to both of them in making his not common, but the whole subject of hypochonjudgment.
Various problems are to be found with specific Insight.-This must always be considered in symptoms.
Thus considerable difficulty is found with the depressive triad: depressive mood, guilt, relation to the patient's thinking and background and suicidal tendencies.
These are so closely linked of knowledge.
It is important to distinguish bein description and judgment as to be very difficult to tween a patient who has no insight and one who is separate.
It is very important to avoid the halo effect reluctant to admit that he is "mental".
It was therefore necessary to use a three-point scale.
The most useful indicator for depressed mood is the tendency to sometimes show a brief hypomanic reaction, during which the exuberantly cheerful patient will deny that weep, but it must always be considered against the cultural background, and patients may also "go he has any symptoms whatever, though he is obviously not to be regarded as normal.
In such cases, beyond weeping".
Suicide.-An attempt at suicide scores 4, but such the rating scale is inapplicable and should be delayed until the patient has fully recovered.
There will be great It is particularly useful to have two raters indifficulty sometimes in differentiating between a real attempt at suicide and a demonstrative attempt; dependently scoring a patient at the same interview, the rater must use his judgment.
The score for the patient is and loss of interest in hobbies and social activities obtained by summing the scores of the two physicians.
This is, of course, the best way of are both included.
The patient who has given up learning how to use the scale, Where only one rater work solely because of his illness is rated 4. uses the scale, the scores should be doubled so as Retardation.-A grade 4 patient is completely to make them comparable.
With sufficient exmute, and is therefore unsuitable for rating on the perience, a skilled rater can learn to give half-points.
Grade 3 patients need much care and patience to rate, but it can be done.
Results Agitation.-This is defined as restlessness assotwo the For correlation between summed raters, ciated with anxiety.
Unfortunately, a five-point first 10 patients was 0-84.
Adding scale was found impracticable, and therefore this scores for the 10 patients at a time, the correlation variable is rated on a three-point scale.
The degrees of agitation cause considerable difficulty.
Gastro-intestinal Symptoms.-These occur in conProduct-moment correlations were calculated for nexion with both anxiety and depression.
Con- the 17 variables on the first 49 male patients siderable clinical experience is required to evaluate .
The correlation matrix was then factorthem satisfactorily.
The definitions given have been analysed by extracting the latent roots and vectors found very useful in practice.
The first four factors were used for calculating factor measurements for the patients, in the form of T-scores.
For the interest of those factorists who have a taste for factors rotated to give simple structure, the first three factors were rotated by an orthogonal rotation matrix  to give the results shown in Table IV.
The fourth factor was left as it is, as it already has a fair number of near-zero saturations.
The final saturations give a good approximation to simple structure and still retain the advantage of orthogonality.
Factor Saturations.-It is customary to examine the factor saturations in order to give an appropriate name to the factors.
When all the variables are positively correlated, the general factor may be regarded as an overall average of the items; but when, as in this case, a group of the variables is negatively correlated with the rest, this notion of an average becomes a little tenuous.
Be that as it may, there would be little objection to the proposal to call the first factor "retarded depression" on the basis of its factor saturations.
The correspondence with the classical descriptions is remarkably close.
The saturations in the second factor are: Somatic symptoms  0-67, insomnia  0 61,
It might be said to be vaguely like agitated depression, which clinically shows anxiety and agitation, together with disturbed sleep , but the factor is deficient in depression, the first factor having taken out most of the depressive variance.
The third factor might be called some sort of anxiety reaction, with saturations of anxiety  0 56, agitation 0 50, anxiety  0 50, genital  symptoms 0 40, gastrointestinal symptoms - 0-39, general somatic symptoms - 036, guilt 0-34, and insomnia  - 0 30.
It is difficult to attach any label to the third and fourth factors, as they do not bring any clinical pattern to mind.
The situation is no better with the rotated factors.
Factor I is still very much like retarded depression, but the negative saturation for gastrointestinal symptoms strikes a most incongruous note.
Factor 1t shows many somatic symptoms and disturbed sleep, but the presence in the factor of agitation without anxiety is disturbing.
It cannot be regarded as a factor of objective symptoms, as opposed to subjective, since it includes loss of interest and insight.
Factor III could be named "anxiety reaction", but the negative saturations of depression and loss of insight must disqualify any attempt to relate it to clinical syndromes.
The fourth factor has been left unrotated.
It is not surprising that the classical clinical syndromes have not appeared from the factor analysis, since this technique is incapable of demonstrating them.
It would appear from the literature that psychologists have hoped that factor analysis would elicit the classical syndromes, and perhaps even additional ones, but in practice this does not occur.
The clinical syndromes are mutually exclusive, i.e., a patient can be ill with endogenous depression, or reactive depression, or schizophrenia, etc., but not from two or more.
Of course, there are always patients who diagnostically are doubtful in-betweens.
On the other hand, factors are orthogonal, and any individual patient can have high scores in two or more factors, or conversely, low scores.
The discrepancy between clinical syndromes and factors is even greater when correlated factors are obtained by non-orthogonal rotations, for with such factors, patients will tend to score high or low in all factors simultaneously.
These divide the multidimensional space into regions, the centres of which characterize the typical case, and the meeting of the regions, the "interfaces", are the sites where are located the atypical, anomalous, or half-way cases.
Since this procedure requires the initial establishment of criterion groups, already diagnosed, it cannot therefore be used to find syndromes.
This patient was admitted to hospital after two attempts at suicide, first by electrocution, and, when this failed, by an overdose of phenobarbitone.
No psychological precipitating factors were found.
On admission he was severely depressed and still actively suicidal.
He had strong feelings of guilt, and feared that he had acquired venereal disease and was infecting others with it.
He was markedly retarded and showed loss of insight.
His sle_p was disturbed in all three phases, he had no interest in anything and had complete loss of libido since the onset of his illness four months previously.
His symptoms cleared with six courses of electroshock treatment .
Two weeks later he suddenly relapsed and attempted to cut his wrists with a broken tumbler.
He again recovered with a further course of E.C.T.
This case was one of classical endogenous depression.
This patient developed symptoms of anxiety two years ago, accompanied by impotence.
As a result of physical illness, he had to change his job to one much less satisfactory and with less pay.
He worried excessively over this and over his health, and became very depressed.
He was twice admitted to hospital, refused E.C.T., and discharged himself.
Eventually he agreed to accept E.C.T.
When in hospital he was deeply depressed, had some guilt feelings, suicidal thoughts, and moderate retardation.
He had difficulty in falling asleep and woke in the early hours.
He showed loss of interest and of libido.
He lacked insight, had lost weight, and complained of vague bodily symptoms.
He showed little anxiety but was preoccupied with his health and his future prospects.
Psychological precipitating factors cannot be excluded, but the overall picture is that of endogenous depression.
In the first, the symptoms were of the endogenous  type, and in the second of the reactive  type.
Clinically, these patients are very unlike, but the factor scores pick them out on account of their resemblance; what this is, is not clear.
Since the factors are derived from a limited number of cases, the fourth factor is of very doubtful stability.
Nevertheless, it is of considerable interest.
Both of the following patients showed depression with much anxiety, disturbance of sleep and many somatic symptoms, but it is the background to the illness that is noteworthy.
This patient was a hard worker, but could not restrain his heavy drinking and gambled heavily.
These caused considerable marital discord.
When temporarily out of work after an accident, he stole money from his daughter to continue his "hobbies".
He went off to London, stayed in a hotel and decamped without paying.
When he eventually returned home, he heard that the theft had been reported to the police.
He became desperate, and after a few days attempted to gas himself and was admitted to hospital.
His condition cleared after E.C.T.
This patient came from a disturbed parental home where he had been rejected and deprived.
He has always been an odd personality with marked neurotic traits and paranoid attitudes.
He served in the Royal Air Force for nine years, during which he was repeatedly delinquent and resistant to authority.
Eventually he was discharged for "psychoneurosis".
His subsequent occupational history is irregular, with frequent loss of jobs because of quarrelling.
He always feels that others are against him.
He has not worked for years, has shown much anxiety and in the last six months became depressed, being finally admitted to hospital.
He improved a little after E.C.T.
This patient had been off work for 11 years for "bad nerves" following an accident at work.
He had many hypochondriacal complaints and had undergone many fruitless investigations.
Four years ago, he was admitted to hospital for severe depression with delusions and hallucinations.
He was readmitted a year ago, diagnosed as a case of reactive depression, and improved slowly under general treatment.
He was discharged after three months.
His condition fluctuated and eventually he was readmitted, given six courses of E.C.T.
He was discharged and remained well.
His symptoms were of moderate depression, without feelings of guilt or suicidal ideas.
He had difficulty in falling asleep and awoke early.
He showed moderate loss of interest, anxiety, both psychic and somatic, and suffered from poor appetite and constipation.
He was diagnosed as a case of reactive depression, but the relation of the illness to psychological precipitating factors is not certain.
There was a long history of abdominal complaints, but investigations found nothing to account for them.
A year ago the patient became obviously depressed and was admitted to hospital.
He showed moderate depression, guilt, and some suicidal preoccupations.
His sleep was disturbed in all three phases.
He showed loss of interest, some agitation, severe hypochondriasis, and considerable anxiety.
His appetite was poor, his bowels were constipated, and he had lost weight.
Because of the poor state of his heart, he was not given E.C.T.
He improved slowly, finally discharging himself against advice.
Eventually he was admitted to a general hospital and died from cancer of the lung.
The clinical picture is that of reactive depression, but the psychological precipitating factors are doubtful.
The patient had a history of several attacks of depression, the last one precipitated by the deaths of his ife and daughter.
The course of the illness was fluctuating, and the patient showed a poor response to E.C.T.
He showed marked depression, guilt, suicidal thinking, retardation, loss of interest, and grossly disturbed sleep.
Eventually he recovered and has remained well.
The patient had had one previous attack of depression four years before.
Two years ago, the patient again fell ill, and his symptoms have fluctuated considerably.
In hospital he showed much depression, guilt, and loss of interest, much anxiety and agitation, loss of libido and loss of insight.
He is a rather inadequate personality and his present illness began when he was offered a post which involved greater responsibility.
Both of these patients have obviously abnormal personalities, although it would be an exaggeration to describe them as psychopathic personalities.
It has long been recognized that abnormal personalities, particularly of the hysterical type, are liable to attacks of depression, and it is of great interest that such patients should be picked out by reason of the pattern of symptoms of their depression.
Nevertheless, the present findings should not be regarded as more than suggestive and worthy of further investigation.
Since this is purely a clinical problem and involves other matters, it is reported elsewhere .
Tests of significance have not been applied to these factors.
It seems likely that even the smallest factor would become statistically significant if a sufficient number of patients were tested, and the ratings were repeated often enough to make the individual variables highly reliable.
The value of factors lies in their use.
In this connexion, although the data for the factor analysis were derived from 49 patients, the regression equations were used on the ratings obtained from 64 patients investigated for other purposes.
Of these 64 patients, 49 were followed up after treatment .
Although F3 has no obvious clinical or psychological meaning, it is the only one of the factors to be correlated with outcome after treatment at a significance level of just over 5 %.
This is not much, but a large correlation with outcome is not to be expected in such a highly selected group of patients .
Furthermore, 16 out of the 49 cases followed up are new cases, so that some of the shrinkage to be expected in a cross-validation group has already occurred.
Summary A rating scale is described for use in assessing the symptoms of patients diagnosed as suffering from depressive states.
The first four latent vectors of the intercorrelation matrix obtained from 49 male patients are of interest, as shown by  the factor saturations,  the case histories of patients scoring highly in the factors, and  the correlation between factor scores and outcome after treatment.
The general problem of the relationship between clinical syndromes and factors extracted from the intercorrelations of symptoms is discussed.
Thanks are due to Dr. P. F. Fletcher, PhysicianSuperintendent of Stanley Royd Hospital, Wakefield,
I have to thank Dr. J.
White, not only for providing the patients, but also for collaborating in the assessments to give data on reliability.
I am indebted to Miss W. Ashton, B.A., B.Sc., of the Computing Laboratory of Leeds University, for the programming of the correlation matrix, latent roots and vectors, and factor measurements.
The research fellowship is in part supported by the Mental Health Research Fund.
Depressed Mood Gloomy attitude, pessimism about the future Feeling of sadness Tendency to weep Sadness, etc.
Retardation Slowness of thought, speech, and activity Apathy Stupor Slight retardation at interview ..
Obvious retardation at interview 2 3 Interview difficult.
Self-absorption  Preoccupation with health Querulous attitude A Hypochondriacal delusions Loss of Weight Insight ...... 2 ...... Loss of insight Partial or doubtful loss ........ 1 ........... 0 No loss ......... 
Diurnal Variation Symptoms worse in morning or evening.
