Retaining customer loyalty is crucial in electronic commerce because the value of an Internet store is largely determined by the number of its loyal customers.
This paper proposes a multi-phased model of customer loyalty for Internet shopping, which fully takes the characteristics of the Internet and cyber shopping into consideration.
In order to validate the model, we conducted a web-based survey of the customers of various Internet stores, and the data was processed using structural equation analysis.
The results indicate that several factors can effectively increase customer loyalty towards an Internet store and that the relative importance of the identified factors varies according to the level of involvement with the product purchased through the store.
We suggest several managerial implications in developing Internet stores for higher customer loyalty based on these results.
The proliferation of the Internet and WWW has impacted various aspects of our daily lives, not the least of which is Electronic Commerce .
Electronic commerce has been defined most commonly as the transactions between two or more parties through an electronic medium .
One of the critical requirements for the success of electronic commerce is the appropriate customer interface that is defined as the user interface of e-commerce systems .
The main difference between ordinary user interfaces and customer interfaces is the shift of the perspective from the user of a computer system to the customer of commercial transactions.
In real world commerce, the emotions and impressions evoked by the sales agent or commercial institution as a whole influence the overall satisfaction of the customer, which is usually implemented by the customer interface in cyber world commerce.
In order for the Internet stores to be successful, the customer interface should be able to not only entice customers into visiting their stores for the first time, but also make the customers visit their stores again in the future .
Ensuring that customers visit their stores repeatedly is especially important for Internet stores because the stores' value is determined mostly by the number of loyal customers in the context of the web.
If none of the customers are willing to visit the site again, its business value becomes zero regardless of its technical or managerial assets.
