Enabled by artificial intelligence techniques, we are witnessing the rise of a new paradigm of computational creativity support: mixed-initiative creative interfaces put human and computer in a tight interactive loop where each suggests, produces, evaluates, modifies, and selects creative outputs in response to the other.
This paradigm could broaden and amplify creative capacity for all, but has so far remained mostly confined to artificial intelligence for game content generation, and faces many unsolved interaction design challenges.
This workshop therefore convenes CHI and game researchers to advance mixed-initiative approaches to creativity support.
Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the Owner/Author.
Copyright is held by the owner/author.
Here, the human is the initiating and deciding agent and the computer a mediating tool.
On the opposite end sits computational creativity : the computer is a OheroicO  artificial intelligence  agent that autonomously produces creative work, and the human its audience.
Recent years have seen the emergence of a third paradigm between the two: mixed-initiative creative interfaces  where human and computer interact as collaborators in a tight feedback loop .
As in human-human creative dialogue, both sides take turns constraining, suggesting, producing, evaluating, modifying, or selecting creative outputs in response to the other, such that creative agency and initiative cannot be easily ascribed to one side alone.
While all creative practice is to some extent a OdialogueO between creator and material , MICI literalize this metaphor by giving the computer the status of creative agency and initiative thanks to AI.
The vision of augmenting human problem-solving by sharing initiative within a larger human-computer OsymbiontO reaches back through the history of HCI and AI to pioneers like Licklider, including early work on dialogue-based interaction with conversational agents and intelligent tutors .
Figure 2: Tanagra, a MICI 2D game level generator: the designer adds, removes or modifies high-level ObeatsO of gameplay and their length , the AI executes level geometry in detail, generates beats undefined by the designer, and continually tests whether the level remains playable .
Here, a lively community of researchers and practitioners is currently exploring AI techniques such as evolutionary computation, heuristic search, or machine learning to automatically create and evaluate art assets, game levels, or even entire games .
Current mixed-initiative, human-AI cocreativity in PCG covers a fraction of possible MICI scenarios.
Yet although MICI and their advantages easily generalize across creative practice, they have so far remained largely disconnected from creative interface researchers in HCI.
Examples of MICIs outside games demonstrate the relevance of the approach to a broad range of creative contexts under active consideration by HCI researchers, including: urban design , sketching , interface design , prototyping musical instruments , or data visualization .
Indeed, with the current rise of AI, autonomous systems, and conversational agents , human-AI mixed-initiative presents a generally valuable and underexplored interface paradigm.
While HCI could richly benefit from current MICI work in game AI, MICIs in turn present a number of formidable interface and interaction design challenges: enabling creators with little computational literacy to readily express ideas, constraints, or criteria in a formal and thus, computable manner; avoiding user fatigue and making interaction with the machine engaging; rendering computer design decisions legible and transparent to users; identifying visualization patterns for computational design evaluations and modification and selection suggestions .
Since MICIs in games have been chiefly designed by AI researchers for similarly computationally literate user groups, they would greatly benefit from the design expertise of HCI researchers.
In summary, mixed-initiative creative interfaces, as currently developed in PCG for games, hold rich opportunities for creative and autonomous interfaces far beyond games.
At the same time, they present unsolved interface and interaction design challenges that would immediately benefit from HCI and interaction design.
This workshop therefore brings together game AI and CHI communities to advance the MICI paradigm by exploring its opportunities for HCI beyond game design and address its unsolved interface design challenges.
How do people experience and interact with MICIs?
How can we evaluate the quality of human-AI cocreativity?
How do MICIs challenge and advance creativity support tools, computational creativity, and human-human creative collaboration?
What interaction and interface design challenges do MICIs hold?
What established design methods, principles, and patterns can address these?
What AI challenges of MICIs have HCI solutions, what HCI challenges have AI solutions?
How can MICIs up-skill not de-skill end users?
What new kinds of human-AI co-creativity can we envision across and beyond creative practice?
What opportunities and challenges do different genres and forms of creativity hold for MICIs?
How might MICIs further accessibility, inclusion, and participation?
Figure 3: The Wekinator, an interactive machine learning MICI that allows designers to create new controllers, instruments and the like: Designers demonstrate desired input-output pairings to the AI, which learns to translate them into a controller scheme, which the designer can then interactively adapt with new sample demonstrations.
Sebastian Deterding  is a senior research fellow at the Digital Creativity Labs at the University of York.
His work explores the use of game design methods and principles beyond games, more recently in intelligent, data/AI-driven interfaces.
He has chaired workshops on gamification at CHIO11, O13, and O15, and on embarrassing interactions at CHIO15.
Memo Akten is an artist and researcher at Goldsmiths, University of London exploring collaborative cocreativity between humans and machines for artistic expression.
His collaboration with Quayola, OFormsO, received the Prix Ars Electronic Golden Nica in 2013.
Past exhibitions and performances include the Victoria & Albert Museum, London; Royal Opera House, London; Garage Center for Contemporary Culture, Moscow; La Ga"tZ lyrique, Paris; Holon Design Museum, Israel and the EYE Film Institute, Amsterdam.
Rebecca Fiebrink is a Lecturer in Computing at Goldsmiths, University of London.
Her research focuses on using machine learning as a tool for designing interactive systems, especially systems for musical expression and embodied interaction.
She co-organised the CHIO16 workshop on human-centered machine learning and co-chaired the 2014 conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression.
Marco Gillies is a Senior Lecturer in Computing at Goldsmiths, University of London.
His work concerns tools for designing movement based and body language based interaction, particularly for virtual reality.
He coorganized the CHIO16 workshop on human-centered machine learning and will be conference co-chair of the Movement & Computing conference  in 2017.
Jeremy Gow is a Lecturer in Computing at Goldsmiths, University of London.
His research explores computational creativity and game design: how can artificial agents understand play and participate in making games, collaboratively or autonomously?
He co-organised the CHIO10 workshop on video games as research instruments, and AISB symposia on game AI  and computational creativity .
Jonathan Hook is a Lecturer in the Department of Theatre, Film and Television at the University of York.
His research draws on human-centered design methods to develop novel interactive technologies for creative practitioners.
He has chaired workshops on interaction design for creativity at CHIO12, CHIO13 and DISO14.
Antonios Liapis is a Lecturer at the Institute of Digital Games, University of Malta.
Kate Compton is a game designer, artist, and PhD Studio.
Her work focuses on the development of AI tools to augment user creativity, especially in casual or playful audiences.
She specializes in designing and implementing systems that assist users in quickly moving through the possibility space of a creative problem, a genre she calls Casual Creators.
More specifically, he explores the limits of computational input to the human-driven design process in computer-aided design tools such as Sentient Sketchbook.
He has chaired workshops on game aesthetics , PCG , experimental AI  and computational creativity in games .
Gillian Smith is an Assistant Professor in Art+Design and Computer Science at Northeastern University.
Her research sits at the intersection of HCI and AI, with a focus on computer creativity, computational craft, and how humans interact with generative systems.
Recently, she has also been studying the history of procedural content generation and mixed-initiative creativity.
Acceptance to the workshop will be based on a juried review of short 
We aim for a total of 15-25 participants; in shared papers, we expect only one author to participate.
Participants are expressly invited to bring interactive demos, and are required to read all accepted papers ahead of the workshop.
Workshop Structure Based on past workshop experiences, we aim to avoid fatigue and maximize productive discussion and work with decent breaks and a shorter workshop.
Depending on turnout, participants will present their work as a 10 min.
To prime fruitful debate, the first part of the workshop will alternate thematic panels of 3-4 presentations each and a break with thematic poster/demo islands.
Each will be followed by a discussion teasing out particular challenges and opportunities that will be collected and clustered in parallel by the organizers on shared boards.
In the second part, we will break up into small groups.
Each group will be facilitated by two designated leads  and develop  approaches to an identified cluster of design challenges or  uses to a cluster of opportunities, captured in a shared online document and illustrated with one-page mockups.
A final plenum session will share group results, discuss emergent issues, and identify follow-up plans facilitated with gamestorming methods.
Post-Workshop Plans Accepted papers will be published online as CEUR workshop proceedings  and linked on the website ahead of the workshop.
Website We will advertise the workshop and host its papers and videos at http://mici2017.org.
Pre-Workshop Plans We expect to draw interest from researchers working on creative interfaces, procedural content generation, interactive machine learning, and games across the CHI, game AI, Intelligent User Interfaces and Creativity and Cognition communities.
To ensure a fruitful mix of participants, we will distribute the CFP through our extensive personal networks spanning said communities, social media, as well as relevant mailing lists such as CHI Announcements or Gamesnetwork.
Results will be written up as an article for ACM Interactions or Communications of the ACM.
We expressly invite participants to bring system demos to the event.
Enabled by artificial intelligence techniques, we are witnessing the rise of a new paradigm of computational creativity support: mixed-initiative creative interfaces  put human and computer in a tight interactive loop where both take turns suggesting, producing, evaluating, modifying, selecting creative outputs.
This paradigm could broaden and amplify creative capacity for all, but is today mostly developed and studied in game AI.
This workshop therefore convenes CHI and game researchers to advance mixed-initiative approaches to creativity support.
MICIs and models of creativity and collaboration We invite participants to submit 2-6pp.
We will review submissions and select 15-25 based on relevance, quality, and diversity of inputs.
At least one author of each accepted paper needs to register for the workshop and for one or more days of the conference.
Support Interface Development Through Workshops with Disabled People.
Hugo Scurto and Rebecca Fiebrink.
Graband-Play Mapping: Creative machine Learning Approaches for musical Inclusion and Exploration.
In International Computer Music Conference.
Nicholas Davis, Chih-pin Hsiao, Kunwar Yashraj Singh, Lisa Li, Sanat Moningi, and Brian Magerko.
Drawing Apprentice: An Enactive Co-Creative Agent for Artistic Collaboration.
In Proceedings of the 2015 ACM SIGCHI Conference on Creativity and Cognition, 185186.
Artem M. Chirkin and Reinhard Koenig.
Concept of Interactive Machine Learning in Urban Design Problems.
In Proceedings of the SEACHI 2016 on Smart Cities for Better Living with HCI and UX, 1013.
Saleema Amershi, Maya Cakmak, William Bradley Knox, and Todd Kulesza.
Power to the People: The Role of Humans in Interactive Machine Learning.
Stephen Makonin, Daniel Mcveigh, Wolfgang Stuerzlinger, Khoa Tran, and Fred Popowich.
Mixed-Initiative for Big Data: The Intersection of Human + Visual Analytics + Prediction.
In Proceedings of the 49th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, 14271436.
Jelena Stajic, Richard Stone, Gilbert Chin, and Brad Wible.
Ewa Luger and Abigail Sellen.
OLike Having a Really Bad PAO: The Gulf between User Expectation and Experience of Conversational Agents.
Rebecca Fiebrink, Dan Trueman, and Perry R. Cook.
A metainstrument for interactive, onthe-fly machine learning.
In Proceedings of the 9th New Interfaces for Musical Expression Conference.
Gillian Smith, Jim Whitehead, Michael Mateas.
Tanagra: Reactive planning and constraint solving for mixed-initiative level design.
IEEE Transactions on Computational Intelligence and AI in Games 3, 3: 201215.
Antonios Liapis, Georgios N. Yannakakis, Julian Togelius.
Sentient Sketchbook: ComputerAided Game Level Authoring.
In Proceedings of the 8th Conference on the Foundations of Digital Games , 213220.
