People strive to obtain self-knowledge.
A class of systems called personal informatics is appearing that help people collect and reflect on personal information.
However, there is no comprehensive list of problems that users experience using these systems, and no guidance for making these systems more effective.
We conducted surveys and interviews with people who collect and reflect on personal information.
We derived a stage-based model of personal informatics systems composed of five stages  and identified barriers in each of the stages.
Preparation Barriers can occur when users choose the wrong information to track or when users select an inappropriate tool that does not satisfy their information needs.
These incorrect selections can lead to data loss and wasted time.
Because I am often not at my personal computer."
Much of that information is very emotional and innocent."
I mean, I walk a lot.
What else do I really want to know?"
Action Barriers can occur among the different ways that systems support this stage.
Some may tailor their behaviors to match their goals.
Some systems alert users when particular thresholds are met.
Some systems provide incentives to motivate users to take action.
Most systems do not have specific suggestions on what to do next, which is a barrier to applying understanding of personal information.
Stages are iterative; users will incorporate new data, tools, and processes as they progress through the stages.
For example, a user may change the types of exercises she performs.
These changes may require new tools, new types of data, and different visualizations.
Often times, the user cannot bring their old data along with them.
This causes problems because it makes comparing between different types of exercise more difficult.
Each stage can be classified as user-driven, systemdriven, or a combination of both.
In a user-driven stage, the user is responsible for the activity in the stage, while in a system-driven stage, the system is.
For example, a user-driven Collection stage may require users to record information into a spreadsheet, while a system-driven stage may use sensors to track personal information.
This property concerns facets of a person's life.
Most systems are uni-faceted, collecting only one facet of a person's life .
Some systems are multi-faceted, collecting multiple facets of a person's life .
However, such systems usually present multiple facets in separate visualizations.
Many participants expressed their desire to see associations between different facets of their lives.
This property suggests that the development of personal informatics systems should be approached holistically.
Of course, we should take inspiration from different fields to resolve problems within each stage , but development should not focus only on one stage, but consider the whole experience of the user throughout the different stages.
