In this paper, we describe an implementation of a circling selection method on a handheld device, and we evaluate both its properties and its performance, in comparison with a tapping style of selection.
New selection methods for handheld devices are needed as ever more complex tasks are carried out using those devices.
These tasks include traditional PDA functionality 
In addition, gaming has been identified as an important driver for usage of handheld devices, as the power of such devices 
In this paper we address a particular input problem, namely the selection of items laid out in a two-dimensional grid.
This type of selection might be appropriate in choosing small icons from a handheld version of the computer desktop, or in certain types of games.
An additional motivation for carrying out research on handheld selection methods using two-dimensional grids is to construct evaluation methodologies in a mathematically tractable context where well-defined predictive models can be developed.
This paper will report on an experimental comparison of circling and tapping styles of selection over twodimensional grids that varied in terms of the sizes of the regions  to be selected, and in terms of the distances between the selection regions .
Figure 1 shows the different combinations of grid layout that were used in the experiment.
Tapping-based selection methods for handheld devices may need to be supplemented with other approaches as increasingly complex tasks are carried out using those devices.
Circling selection methods  allow users to select objects on a touch screen by circling with a pen.
An experimental comparison of the selection time and accuracy between a circling method and a traditional tapping style of selection was carried out.
The experiment used a two dimensional grid .
Analysis of variance showed that tapping selection time differed significantly depending on the size and spacing of the targets.
In contrast, circling selection times differed significantly for different levels of target cohesiveness and shape complexity.
The results are discussed in terms of implications for design of new pen-based selection methods for handheld devices, and also in terms of evaluation methodology for input selection methods.
Increasingly, computing tasks are being carried out on small handheld devices.
This has created a set of challenges for user interface designers ranging from design of visual feedback on a small screen to difficulties concerning selection and input using pen interactions.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
In most current pen user interfaces users are required to interact with items on the screen by tapping them.
However, step-by-step interaction limits the amount of bandwidth of the input channel.
Empirical research is needed to assess the effectiveness of different devices and approaches for particular types of task.
In the remainder of this section we will focus on area selection tasks in particular.
With this method, the diagonal extent of the drag operation specifies the size  of the  selection region.
This method is implemented in most current graphical user interfaces.
It provides efficient object selection, but has the limitation that users can only select multiple objects when they are arranged within a rectangular region.
When users want to select multiple objects in a scattered layout, they are required to press another key  to select subgroups of objects.
Krishnan and Moriya  proposed a rubber-banding selection with a pen in a editor application.
It enables users to select a contiguous set of objects that form an arbitrary shape.
Wills  discussed a taxonomy for selection mechanisms, and contrasted brush and lasso styles of area selection.
Other area selection methods also provide alternatives to step-by-step tapping.
Ren and Moriya  studied entering and leaving a graphical object as alternatives to pointing selections.
Acott and Zhai  called this process of moving a cursor across the boundary of a targeted graphical object a goal-crossing task, and compared subjects' selection performance when pointing versus goal-crossing.
Discrete tapping selections have been successfully modeled using Fitt's law .
Both Fitt's law and the HickHyman law  represent an information-theoretic view of complexity and processing.
While Fitts' law is typically used as a model of acquisition and selection, the Hick-Hyman law has often been used to explain perceptual  complexity.
In the case of circling selection, it seems possible that selection time may be influenced not only by the input complexity  but also by the visual complexity of the shape around which a circle is to be drawn.
There are extensive research literatures on the visual complexity of two-dimensional patterns .
Measures that have been found to be related to visual complexity include "jaggedness"  and the perimeter of a figure divided by its number of sides.
The use of handheld devices with pen-based input increases the desirability of marking interfaces as a means of overcoming the limitations of input on a small screen using gestures and conversational  styles of interaction .
Denoue, Chui and Fuse  provide an example of a markup interface explicitly designed for a handheld device.
Detailed models of the efficiency of these gestural types of interaction have yet to be developed.
However, analysis of particular attributes  that are implicated in particular gestural tasks  may be a useful starting point for development of those models.
Circling is a natural way to select visual material.
In this study, we developed the circling selection method as follows.
In the case of squares on a grid different strategies can be used to make selections when groups of adjacent squares are highlighted.
Figure 2 illustrates a case where a single outline  has been drawn around a group  of highlighted squares.
Multiple discrete circling operations may also be used to select a group of adjacent squares .
Each of the three circling operations on the left side of Figure 3 selects the target, since the circles all enclose the critical center point of the square.
In contrast, the circling operation at the right of Figure 3 does not select the square, because the circle does not enclose the center point of the square.
For selection tasks where the targets are grouped together, circling selection time will be longer for groups that form a more complex visual pattern, whereas tapping selection time will be unaffected by shape complexity.
It seems likely that the relative difficulty of selection for different patterns will vary between tapping and circling styles of selection.
For instance, where there are a number of squares that are adjacent to each other, it may be relatively easier to circle the entire group in either one or two circling motions.
In contrast, tapping will require each of the circles in the group to be selected separately.
Where none of the highlighted squares are adjacent, there is no benefit to circling, and tapping would likely be a more efficient method of selection.
Thus, in comparing circling and tapping for different selection tasks, we would expect an interaction between the type of selection method  and the amount of grouping of the highlighted squares.
If circling can be shown to lead to faster selection time in some contexts, then it may be a useful supplement to tapping styles of selection.
Analysis of circling response times may also lead to new models of selection performance which could in turn facilitate the design of new styles of selection for handheld devices.
The corresponding null hypotheses to be tested were that none of the differences predicted in the experimental hypotheses would in fact exist.
The first two hypotheses were based on the expectation that circling is generally more efficient than tapping.
The third hypothesis is based on the expectation that circling will be less affected by differences in target size and separation between targets.
In the circling algorithm used in this study, target selection is based on circling a critical region within each target, and the size of this region did not change across the experimental conditions.
In contrast, the different experimental conditions change the indices of difficulty for the tapping task .
The fourth hypothesis reflects the expectation that circling should be more advantageous when the targets are grouped together.
In the case where targets are selected one at a time, tapping should always be faster, since the movement to the target is the same in both cases, but tapping is a simpler movement than circling, once the target is reached.
The fifth hypothesis was generated from the consideration that while grouping confers no benefit for tapping selections, the benefit of grouping for circling will depend on how difficult it is to "draw around" the group .
Thus more complex  shapes should lead to longer circling selection times .
The following experimental hypotheses were developed.
For each trial, thirty-six squares were shown on a 6x6 grid.
Six target squares within the 6x6 grid were shown in each of thirty experimental trials per subject.
In the low cohesiveness  condition all six targets were shown separately, in medium cohesiveness  there were three pairs of targets, and in the high cohesiveness  condition all six targets were shown in one cluster.
Figure 5 shows examples of stimulus patterns used for each of the three levels of cohesiveness.
Each condition consisted of 10 practice trials followed by a block of 30 experimental trials.
The three size-distance conditions were nested within selection method so that half the participants used circling for all three experimental conditions, followed by tapping, while the remaining participants did tapping first.
The order of the three experimental conditions was also counterbalanced so that each possible order was seen equally often within the experiment.
Each participant carried out a total of 60 practice trials and 180 experimental trials .
Time and accuracy data, plus detailed logs of pen taps and circling motions were captured on the handheld device.
Video data was captured using a mini-camera attached to the device.
The patterns used were automatically generated by the test program, and shown to the subjects in random order, with the constraint that each of the three cohesiveness levels appeared equally often .
Subjects were instructed to select the 6 targets on each trial as quickly and as accurately as possible.
They were instructed to press the "Start" button on the screen to start the selection task, and to press the "Stop" button when they had finished making the selection .
There was no significant effect involving presentation order of the experimental conditions.
Thus presentation order is not considered in the analyses reported below.
The results were analyzed with respect to each of the experimental hypotheses.
Hypotheses concerning response time were tested using repeated measures analysis of variance .
For effects illustrated by line charts, the error bars indicate the range of two standard errors of the mean .
Hypothesis 1: Circling will be more accurate than tapping overall.
There were no significant differences in the error rates between the experimental conditions.
However, there was a significant difference  between circling and tapping accuracy, as assessed using a binomial test.
30 of the errors occurred using the circling method  versus only 14 errors  when using the tapping method.
Thus circling was less, rather than more accurate than tapping, which contradicted the first experimental hypothesis.
Hypothesis 2: Circling will be faster than tapping overall.
The selection time was calculated as the latency between the first touch after the pen left "Start" button, and the last touch before the pen touched the "Stop" button.
The response times thus calculated were subjected to a log transformation prior to carrying out the analyses of variance reported below .
Log transformation of the data was also used for the other ANOVA analyses of selection time reported below.
There was a significant main effect of selection method , that is, selection times for tapping were generally faster than selection times for circling.
Average selection time for circling was 2.4 seconds, and the average selection time for tapping was 2.0 seconds.
Thus Hypothesis Two  was not confirmed.
Instead, tapping selection times were significantly faster overall .
Hypothesis 3: Tapping Selection times will differ between the experimental conditions, whereas Circling Selection times will not differ significantly.
Figure 7 shows mean selection times and standard errors by selection method and experimental condition.
For the log transformed selection time, there was a significant interaction between selection method and experimental condition .
For tapping, selection times differed significantly between the three experimental conditions, whereas selection time for circling did not differ significantly between the experimental conditions .
This finding was in agreement with Hypothesis Three.
Separate paired samples t-tests  were then run for each of the three conditions, comparing mean selections times for tapping and circling.
Hypothesis 4: There will be an interaction between selection method and target cohesiveness, with circling being faster than tapping when the targets are grouped together, but slower than tapping when the targets are spatially separated.
As predicted by this hypothesis, there was a significant interaction  between selection method and target cohesiveness .
As can be seen in Figure 8, the benefit of target cohesiveness was greater for the circling method than it was for the tapping method.
Separate paired samples t-tests  were then run for each of the three cohesiveness levels, comparing selections times for tapping and circling.
For low cohesiveness there was a significant difference , with selection time being significantly longer for the circling method .
For moderate cohesiveness the size of the difference was reduced, although circling selection time was also significantly longer ,  In contrast, circling selection times tended to be slightly  shorter for the high cohesiveness condition, but this effect was not statistically significant .
Thus the general intent of Hypothesis 4  was supported, but the benefit of higher cohesiveness to circling did not overcome the overall performance advantage of tapping.
Hypothesis 5: For selection tasks where the targets are grouped together, circling selection time will be greater for groups that form a more complex visual pattern, whereas tapping selection time will be unaffected by shape complexity.
Figure 9 shows 35 different visual patterns  used in the high cohesiveness condition.
The complexity of these patterns was assessed by a separate sample of 12 participants.
The participants were asked to rate each shape in terms of how difficult they thought it would be to draw around it, using the following five-point rating scale  Prior to making the judgments, the participants were shown all 35 patterns, so that they could internally calibrate the scale they were using according to the range of drawing difficulty actually present in the sample of 35 patterns.
Participants viewed the patterns one at a time, rating each pattern before the next one was shown.
The order of presentation of the patterns was randomized, with each participant being exposed to a unique random order.
The ratings across the 12 participants were then averaged to create a scale of drawing complexity on which each pattern was located.
The resulting scale of complexity was then categorized into 3 levels  to create a complexity pseudo-factor.
A complete factorial ANOVA was then carried out on the high cohesiveness data only .
Selection method, experimental condition, and complexity were the three factors in this analysis.
The three-way interaction between complexity, experimental condition, and selection method was not significant .
The two-way interaction between complexity and experimental condition was also not significant .
As can be seen in Figure 10 , tapping selection time was relatively unaffected by shape complexity, whereas circling selection time increased with increasing shape complexity.
Separate paired samples t-tests  were then run for each of the three levels of shape complexity, comparing selections times for tapping and circling.
For low shape complexity there was a significant difference , with mean selection time being significantly shorter for the circling method .
The next portion of the analysis examined whether objective properties of the patterns could be used to predict shape complexity, for those trials where the targets were grouped into a single pattern .
Based on a review of the prior literature  a number of measures were examined.
A measure based on the number of sides in the pattern divided by the perimeter of the pattern  was found to have the strongest relationship with the subjectively rated complexity measure .
While tapping selection times differed across the three experimental conditions , circling selection times differed by level of target cohesiveness, and by shape complexity .
Circling appears to be a viable alternative to tapping as a pen input selection method only in certain situations.
In the present study, circling was faster than tapping only for highly cohesive targets with low shape complexity.
In tasks that have this property, or perhaps tasks that require selection followed by movement , circling may be a useful supplement to tapping .
One feature of circling selection time in this study was that it was relatively insensitive to changes in the size of the individual target squares and in the distances between the squares .
Instead, circling speed was sensitive to cohesiveness and shape complexity .
While more research needs to be done with different types of target and experimental condition, based on the present findings it should be possible to develop predictive models of circling selection time on a two-dimensional grid, using some combination of target cohesiveness, shape complexity, and Fitts' law considerations based on the positions  target patterns.
These predictive models might eventually influence the design of new input and interaction methods, for particular types of handheld selection task.
With respect to shape complexity, the results of this study were consistent with earlier research on judged shape complexity, with the perimeter divided by the number of sides being a good predictor.
Seventy-five percent of the variance in rated complexity judgments was accounted for by a measure based on the ratio between the perimeter and the number of sides of the figure.
Tapping is a relatively popular method for pen-based selection on a small screen.
The present results do not support the replacement of tapping with circling, although they do highlight some interesting differences in the performance-shaping factors that affect selection speed for circling and tapping.
In view of these differences it seems likely that gestural interfaces that combine a variety of operations  may allow users to carry out selection tasks more efficiently, particularly when they are more complex than the simple selection tasks executed on a two-dimensional grid, as in this study.
Separate paired samples t-tests  were then run for each of the three levels of NS/P, comparing mean selections times for tapping and circling.
For the Low condition there was a significant difference , with selection time being significantly shorter for the circling method .
For the Medium condition there was no significant difference between the two methods .
For the High condition selection time was significantly longer  for the circling method .
The hypotheses that circling would be faster and more accurate  than tapping selection was not supported.
However, circling selection times did not differ between the experimental conditions , whereas tapping selection times did.
In contrast, target cohesiveness had little effect on tapping selection time, but a large effect on circling selection time.
Circling selection times were particularly long for targets with low cohesiveness .
Only for high cohesiveness targets did circling selections tend to be slightly faster, but this difference was not statistically significant.
Shape complexity was shown to have a significant impact on circling  selection time for targets that were highly cohesive.
In contrast to the general tendency for tapping selections to be faster, circling selections were found to be significantly faster in the special case of high cohesiveness targets that had low shape complexity.
Shape complexity was found to be related to the perimeter of the shape divided by the number of sides .
However, shape complexity was better at discriminating between the two selection methods .
It represents a starting point for the development of methodologies needed to evaluate gestural interactions on handheld devices.
It may not be possible for such methodologies to achieve a level of precision comparable to Fitt's law analysis of tapping selections.
However, predictive linear models using quantifiable constructs such as shape complexity and target cohesiveness may nevertheless be sufficient to provide useful guidance to designers of handheld interactions.
The main experiment reported in this paper was carried out at Nokia Research Center and Keio University in Japan.
This paper was written while the author was a visiting scientist at the Interactive Media Lab .
The authors would like to thank the members of that lab for their insight and encouragement, and would particularly like to thank Mark Chignell, David Ha, Jacek Gwizdka, and Vyacheslav Morozov for their assistance with the data analyses and with collection of the subjective complexity data.
The first author would like to thank Scott MacKenzie and Michael McGuffin for their insightful discussion.
