Computer Science Department Carnegie Mellon University {jpierce, pausch}@cs.cmu.edu ABSTRACT When creating techniques for manipulating objects at a distance in immersive virtual environments, researchers have primarily focused on increasing selection range, placement range, and placement accuracy.
This focus has led researchers to create and formally study a series of "armextension" techniques, which dynamically scale the user's arm to allow him to manipulate distant objects.
Researchers have also developed representation-based techniques, which allow users to manipulate a distant object by manipulating a copy of it in a handheld representation.
However, researchers have not yet formally established the relative value of these techniques.
In this paper we present a formal study comparing Voodoo Dolls, a best-practice representationbased technique, with HOMER, a best-practice armextension technique.
We found that the Voodoo Dolls technique, which provides better feedback by allowing users to view a manipulated object both up close and at a distance, allowed users to both position and orient objects more accurately.
Our results suggest that researchers should focus on improving feedback for 3D manipulation techniques.
Keywords Virtual reality, 3D interaction, object manipulation INTRODUCTION When creating techniques for manipulating objects at a distance in immersive virtual environments, researchers have primarily focused on increasing selection range, placement range, and placement accuracy.
This focus has led researchers to create a series of "arm-extension" techniques, which dynamically scale the user's arm to allow him to manipulate distant objects.
The HOMER , Go-Go , and World-scaling  techniques are best-practice examples of this type of technique.
The World-In-Miniature  and Voodoo Dolls  techniques take a different approach: they provide users with handheld representations of distant locations.
Users manipulate a distant object by manipulating a copy of it in a handheld representation.
In addition to allowing users to work at a distance, a representation allows users to get a better view of the manipulated object by viewing it both up close and at a distance.
These techniques thus provide users with better feedback than arm-extension techniques, which only allow users to view manipulated objects at a distance.
Despite this potential advantage, researchers have yet to formally compare representation-based and arm-extension techniques.
To determine the value of the representation-based approach relative to the armextension approach, we decided to formally compare the Voodoo Dolls technique with a best-practice arm-extension technique.
We chose the Voodoo Dolls technique because it overcomes a problem with the World-In-Miniature  technique.
While a WIM provides better feedback, it does not always provide sufficient accuracy.
A WIM is typically a handheld representation of the entire world.
The larger the area represented by the WIM, the larger the ratio between "real" space and WIM space.
With a large ratio small motions in the WIM will result in large motions in the "real" world, making accurate placement difficult.
The Voodoo Dolls technique overcomes this problem by allowing users to create contexts on the fly.
A context is a handheld representation of a small section of the world centered on a particular object.
The user specifies the center of the context, the focus, by image plane selecting  an object with his non-dominant hand.
In response, the system creates a handheld, miniature copy  of the selected object and arranges copies of nearby objects to provide the context.
The size of the context depends on the size of the selected object.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
The Voodoo Dolls technique works for a broad range of object sizes, allows users to manipulate both nearby and distant objects, and allows users to accurately position objects when the target position is nearby or far away.
IMPROVING VOODOO DOLLS We made one improvement to the Voodoo Dolls technique for this study.
In order to place an object in a particular location the original implementation of the Voodoo Dolls technique requires that users select a nearby object to provide the focus of the context.
This requirement causes problems when there is no object near the target location.
To overcome this drawback we modified the technique to allow a user to simultaneously create a temporary object and its doll by selecting a point on the ground  where he wants the object to appear .
The temporary object appears as a colored cube half a meter long on each side, and disappears as soon as the user drops the doll representing it.
We provide a context for the doll whose volume depends on the distance from the user to the temporary object; the farther the object, the larger the context.
In practice we found creating a context with a radius equal to 3/5 of the distance to the created object effective.
This variant thus allows users to select any visible object and place it at an arbitrary distance.
We decided against the Go-Go technique because, even with the non-linear mapping between physical and virtual hand positions, the range at which users can manipulate objects is restricted by how far users can extend their arms.
We similarly decided against the World-scaling technique because the scaled world also restricts placement: the system sets the scale factor when the user selects an object, and users cannot place the selected object any farther than they can reach in the scaled world.
RELATED WORK Researchers have developed a number of testbeds for evaluating VR interaction techniques .
This approach allows researchers to determine with some confidence the effect of a particular factor on task performance.
However, stripping a task of extraneous variables can reduce the generality of the results.
In testbed tasks users typically only manipulate a single type of object, rather than a variety of objects with different shapes.
We preferred to make the opposite trade-off , accepting less certainty about the effects of individual factors on task performance in exchange for more confidence about the generality of the results.
Toward this end we chose to have users manipulate objects with a variety of different sizes and shapes.
We chose the objects by considering two sample manipulation tasks: arranging the furniture in a room and arranging an outdoor scene.
We designed the experiment tasks to emulate these sample tasks.
TASKS We created a practice world and two experimental worlds, one indoors and one outdoors.
We grouped the tasks based on the world and the size of the manipulated objects in order to allow us to draw loose conclusions about the effects of size and distance.
In the indoor world users manipulated small and medium objects , while in the outdoor world users manipulated small, medium, and large objects , for a total of 15 tasks.
Table 1 contains the dimensions of the manipulated objects and the placement distances, and Figure 2 shows the objects.
We designed some of these tasks so that there was no nearby object to serve as the focus of a context for the Voodoo Dolls technique.
Figure 1: A user can image plane select the ground  to create a temporary reference object, doll, and context .
CHOOSING AN ARM-EXTENSION TECHNIQUE We wanted to compare the Voodoo Dolls technique with an equally versatile arm-extension technique.
We chose HOMER, specifically Indirect HOMER, as the technique for comparison.
With HOMER a user ray-casts to select the object to manipulate, and the user's virtual arm essentially lengthens instantaneously so that his virtual hand touches the object.
The user can then rotate the object as if holding it in his hand.
The vector from the user's torso through his physical hand determines the orientation of his virtual arm.
With the Indirect HOMER variant the user moves his physical hand closer to or further from his torso to move the object an equal distance closer or further at the end of his virtual arm.
Figure 2: The manipulated objects .
Practice The practice world initially contained only a ground plane.
Within this world users completed five practice tasks.
When the user started a practice task the system displayed the object to move, the target position , and any reference objects for that task.
METHOD Twelve undergraduate and graduate students, ten male and two female, participated in this experiment.
All of the users had some experience with virtual reality.
Half of the users used the Voodoo Dolls technique, while the other half used the HOMER technique.
We chose a between-subjects design rather than a within-subjects design primarily to reduce the amount of time users had to spend in the head-mounted display .
We balanced the world order  and the task group order within a world between users, and randomized the task order within a task group for each user.
Figure 4: A bird's-eye-view of the amusement park.
Task Composition Before the start of each task we presented the target object and target position, indicated by a translucent copy of the target object, to users.
We verbally directed users until they visually located both the target object and the translucent copy in the world.
Guiding users until they located both the target object and the copy allowed us to locate the object and copy so that they were not necessarily simultaneously visible.
Once users had located both the target object and the copy for a task we told them to begin.
We demonstrated the relevant interaction technique for each user by performing two example placement tasks in the practice world.
For the HOMER technique we demonstrated how to use ray-casting to select an object, how to position the object around its initial position, and how to reel an object in or out.
For the Voodoo Dolls technique we demonstrated how to create a doll, how to grab a doll from the reference doll's context, and how to create a reference doll if there was no useful reference object near the target position.
Each user then completed all five practice tasks.
We instructed users to focus on placing the objects as accurately as possible, and after each practice task we provided users with both numerical and visual feedback on their accuracy for that task.
While we read off the distance error  and orientation error , the system shrank the target object and the translucent copy, moved them in front of the user , and slowly rotated them over three seconds.
The system then moved the target object to the copy over one second, rotated the target object to match the correct orientation over another second, and then scaled the target object and copy back up and returned them to their initial positions.
Before each experimental task group we explained in general terms what the tasks entailed and reminded the user to concentrate on accuracy.
We did not provide any feedback during the experiment tasks.
Between each task we reset the objects back to their original positions.
In order to protect users from prolonged exposure to the virtual environments, we allowed users to remove the HMD and take a short break between the practice and actual tasks, and between the indoor and outdoor worlds.
These breaks meant that users were exposed to a virtual world for at most twenty minutes at a time.
We also allowed users to take a break at any time if they started to feel dizzy or nauseous.
One user did briefly feel dizzy, but recovered after a short break.
Figure 5: A Voodoo Dolls user holds a doll for the Ferris Wheel in his dominant hand, while in the background the translucent copy of the Ferris Wheel indicates the target position.
For each task users had to manipulate the target object to match the translucent copy's position and orientation as closely as possible.
To avoid discriminating against the HOMER technique we did not allow users to directly create a doll for the translucent copy with the Voodoo Dolls technique.
Users could create a doll for the target copy indirectly by creating a reference doll that contained the translucent copy in its context.
Users completed each task by letting go of the manipulated object  and announcing "Done" when they were satisfied with the placement of the target object.
After completing all the task groups users completed a short questionnaire to determine what was easy and what was hard with the interaction technique they used, and whether they had experienced any discernible arm fatigue, dizziness, or nausea.
Apparatus We implemented the virtual worlds in Alice 99 .
For the experiment we ran the worlds on a Pentium III PC.
Users viewed the world in a Virtuality Visette Pro HMD .
Users did not view the world in stereo; this decision allowed us to double the frame rate, and should have handicapped Voodoo Dolls users more than HOMER users .
The input device users employed depended on the interaction technique: for the Voodoo Dolls technique users wore FakeSpace PinchGloves, while for the HOMER technique users held a three button joystick.
The system tracked the HMD and input devices using an Ascension SpacePad.
All of the worlds ran at a minimum of 30 frames per second.
Performance measures For each interaction technique we measured the position error and the orientation error for each placement task.
We defined the position error as the distance between the target object's insertion point and its copy's insertion point.
To measure the orientation error we calculated the axis of rotation and the amount of rotation between the target and copy orientations, and used the amount of rotation as the orientation error.
While this approach did not allow us to draw any conclusions about the direction of orientation error, it did allow us to compare the magnitude of the orientation error between tasks using a single value.
RESULTS We conducted a multivariate repeated measures analysis of variance on the results with the interaction technique as the between-subjects variable and the five task groups as the within-subject variables.
For the task groups, the difference in accuracy for Voodoo Dolls and HOMER users was not statistically significant for either distance or orientation for the indoor, medium group.
A likely explanation for this fact is that one of the tasks in this group involved placing a mediumsized object nearby, reducing the disparity in task performance between the techniques.
DISCUSSION Our results demonstrate that Voodoo Dolls, a best-practice representation-based technique, allowed users to place objects more accurately than HOMER, a best-practice armextension technique.
We believe that the primary explanation for the difference in performance is the additional feedback provided by the Voodoo Dolls technique, which allows users to view manipulated objects both up close and at a distance.
Overall the measurements of position and orientation error support this hypothesis.
There was no significant difference in task performance when users manipulated large, nearby objects, but as the manipulated objects got smaller and the placement distances increased the disparity in task performance between the two techniques generally increased.
An exception to this trend, the fact that HOMER users were more accurate when positioning the small, outdoor objects than the medium, outdoor objects, might appear to contradict the importance of feedback, but in fact HOMER users had better feedback when positioning the small, outdoor objects than when positioning the medium, outdoor objects.
Most HOMER users adopted a "silk cursor"  strategy when placing objects: they would move the object away until the translucent copy appeared in front of it, and would then pull the object closer until it once again appeared in front.
When placing the small, outdoor objects users could use the booth they were placing the objects on for additional feedback: if the object disappeared behind the booth, it was too far away.
We did consider alternate explanations for the overall performance disparity.
One alternate explanation is that the input device affected task performance.
Because Voodoo Dolls users wore PinchGloves, while HOMER users held a joystick, the difference in performance could be due to differences with the input devices.
Another possible explanation is that HOMER users could never manipulate distant objects as accurately as Voodoo Dolls users, even with equivalent feedback.
However, this explanation is unable to account for the disparity in orientation accuracy.
The Voodoo Dolls and HOMER techniques theoretically allow users to orient objects with equal accuracy: both techniques allow users to rotate objects as if holding them.
The disparity in orientation accuracy in practice, particularly the fact that the disparity increases as the manipulated objects shrink and the placement distances increase, suggests that the difference in available feedback is a more likely explanation.
User comments about the techniques also supported the importance of feedback.
Five out of six HOMER users mentioned the lack of feedback as one of the "hardest three things" about using the technique.
By contrast, four out of six Voodoo Dolls users mentioned feedback as one of the "easiest three things" about using the technique.
The other most frequently mentioned "hardest three things" about the HOMER technique were the difficulty selecting distant objects  and the time required to reel objects in or out .
The most frequently mentioned "easiest three things" were selecting large, nearby objects  and moving objects at a constant distance .
The most frequently mentioned "hardest three things" about the Voodoo Dolls technique were selecting the correct context for distant objects  and rotating the context in the non-dominant hand .
The other most frequently mentioned "easiest three things" were fast, rough placement , selecting objects in general , and selecting small objects by retrieving them from the context .
We also made a number of qualitative observations during the user study.
While we had been concerned about the learnability of Voodoo Dolls, no users had any trouble learning either the HOMER or Voodoo Dolls techniques.
Indeed, we had initially provided 15 practice tasks, but during an initial pilot study discovered that users learned the assigned technique after performing one or two placements.
As a result, in the study reported here we reduced the number of practice tasks to 5.
The primary difficulty we observed with the Voodoo Dolls technique was that some users seemed to expect that looking very closely at one corner or side of a doll and manipulating it would make the opposite corner or side act as the doll's pivot.
In other words, they wanted to make a minor adjustment to the visible corner or side without changing the doll's position at the other end.
In practice this did not work; the point where the user grasps the doll acts as the pivot, so the user often completed a small adjustment only to discover that they had altered the placement on the other side.
If the user moves his head so that he can only see one corner or side of an object, the system could actually make the opposite side or corner act as the pivot.
This would allow users to make incremental adjustments to a doll's position  that could slowly converge to an exact placement.
Another difficulty we observed with the Voodoo Dolls technique is that on two occasions users temporarily got confused as to which of the objects in their view were the dolls, and which were the original objects.
Simply waving their hands did not necessarily help, because the original manipulated object would usually move as well.
Both times users were able to quickly overcome the problem by rotating their body so that only the hand-held dolls were in view and then rotating back.
We saw no evidence that the Voodoo Dolls technique caused more fatigue than the HOMER technique.
While the Voodoo Dolls technique requires users to raise their arms when creating dolls, it also allows them to move their arms to a comfortable working area after creating dolls.
In the postsurvey questionnaires, user self-reports of fatigue on a scale from 1  to 4  were actually slightly higher for the HOMER technique than for the Voodoo Dolls technique .
This result does not contradict Bowman's work , which suggests that image plane selection may cause more arm fatigue than ray-casting.
Image plane selection may indeed cause more arm fatigue than ray-casting, but because users spent more time manipulating objects than selecting them the overall reports of arm fatigue were not affected.
TABLE 3: Responses to the Question "Did your arms get tired during the study?"
Alice: Lessons Learned from Building a 3D System for Novices.
The Virtual Environment Performance Assessment Battery : Development and Evaluation.
CONCLUSION In this paper we experimentally compared two techniques for manipulating objects at distance in immersive virtual environments.
Our goal was to demonstrate the value of a best-practice representation-based technique, Voodoo Dolls, relative to a best-practice arm-extension technique, HOMER.
The results of our experiment show that the Voodoo Dolls technique allows users to both position and orient objects more accurately than the HOMER technique.
The results from our experiment also suggest that improving the feedback for 3D manipulation techniques may be a valuable direction for future research.
REFERENCES  Bowman, D., and Hodges, L. An Evaluation of Techniques for Grabbing and Manipulating Remote Objects in Immersive Virtual Environments.
Journal of Visual Languages and Computing, vol.
