For decades, Fitts' law  has been used to model pointing time in user interfaces.
As with any rapid motor act, faster pointing movements result in increased errors.
But although prior work has examined accuracy as the "spread of hits," no work has formulated a predictive model for error rates  based on Fitts' law parameters.
We show that Fitts' law mathematically implies a predictive error rate model, which we derive.
We then describe an experiment in which target size, target distance, and movement time are manipulated.
Our results show a strong model fit: a regression analysis of observed vs. predicted error rates yields a correlation of R2 = .959 for N = 90 points.
Furthermore, we show that the effect on error rate of target size  is greater than that of target distance , indicating a departure from Fitts' law, which maintains that W and A contribute proportionally to index of difficulty .
Our error model can be used with Fitts' law to estimate and predict error rates along with speeds, providing a framework for unifying this dichotomy.
ACM Categories & Subject Descriptors: H.5.2 : User interfaces - theory and methods; H.1.2 : User/machine systems - human factors.
General Terms: Experimentation, Human Factors, Theory.
Perhaps the most influential of these is Fitts' law .
This is no surprise given the law's robustness, ease of use, and the prevalence of pointing in graphical user interfaces.
However, although Fitts' law supports the prediction of speeds, it does not readily support the prediction of errors.
In fact, to date, there is no equivalent "error law" that predicts the probability of a user hitting or missing a target using Fitts' law parameters.
Although speed-accuracy tradeoffs have been studied , this work almost universally regards accuracy as the "spread of hits," which is of limited use in predicting error rates in user interfaces.
Post hoc corrections can be used to normalize differences in speed-accuracy performance among a pool of human subjects , but these adjustments lack the predictive power of an error model.
Error prediction should be as useful as time prediction given the diametric relationship of these two entities: where one increases, the other decreases.
Thus, "rounding out" the theory requires a predictive model for errors.
Also, if a Fitts-based error model is shown to hold, it contributes to the soundness of the law itself.
If it is shown not to hold, it motivates a deeper investigation into the assumptions underlying Fitts' law, since, as we show, a Fitts-based error model is mathematically implied.
An error model also has practical applications.
For example, it allows us to estimate text entry error rates given different tapping speeds on a stylus keyboard, or to ensure that buttons are big enough in a safety-critical system where speed is crucial.
In computer games, as another example, designers may want to predict how many targets a player can hit in a given amount of time.
As we demonstrate, Fitts' law mathematically implies an equation for pointing errors.
To our knowledge, this equation has not been derived in the literature.
Instead, prior work focuses on motor-control theories accounting for endpoint variability in human movement .
Even before Newell and Card advocated for a "hardening of the science" of human-computer interaction  , researchers sought quantitative models of human action to explain behavior and inform design.
Although there are relatively few such models in HCI, those we do have are highly influential.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Here, we do not seek a motor-control theory.
Instead, we acknowledge the influence of Fitts' law and the potential utility of an error model.
Accordingly, we derive the Fittsbased error model for pointing and test it in an experiment that manipulates target size, target distance, and movement time.
Our results show a strong model fit.
We also show that the effect of target size  on error rate is greater than that of target distance , indicating a departure from Fitts' law in which W and A contribute equally but inversely to the index of difficulty .
5, the target size We is proportional to A / 2MTe.
Thus, as A increases, We increases; as MTe increases, We exponentially decreases.
This is the logarithmic speedaccuracy tradeoff captured by Fitts' law.
Prior work shows that the spread of hits in rapid aimed movements forms a Gaussian distribution about the target center , and many articles graphically illustrate this .
Accordingly, we use the area beneath the standard normal distribution to calculate the probability that a selection endpoint lands within a target .
If a selection falls beyond  from the target center, it falls outside the target and is an error.
If it falls within , it is a hit.
As noted, the speed-accuracy tradeoff assumed by Fitts' law occurs when about 4% of the selection points fall outside .
1, a and b are empirically determined regression coefficients, which vary among users and devices.
The log term is known as the index of difficulty  and is measured in bits.
The value 1/b is called the index of performance  and is measured in bits/ms.
This has been the measure of throughput ; an alternative calculation is to use ID / MT .
Note that the formulation is not concerned with the specific values of A and W, but with their ratio.
This gives Fitts' law particular versatility, since TP results can be compared across different experiments.
However, comparisons of TP assume that participants perform with similar personal speed-accuracy biases .
Where a 4% error rate is not observed, a post hoc correction attributed to Crossman  and discussed by Welford  can be made to normalize TP using the effective  target width  in lieu of the nominal width W. Using We allows for mathematically growing or shrinking the effective target so that a 4% error rate would have been observed.
Although the correction is useful, research has shown that this adjustment is not always wholly corrective .
In an equation for predicting errors, the dependent variable gives the probability of an error P and ranges from 0% to 100%.
Intuitively, we expect errors to increase as target distance  increases, as target size  decreases, or as movement time  decreases.
Thus, these values are the independent variables in our equation for predicting errors.
Hereafter, we refer to the movement time predicted by Fitts' law as MT, the dependent variable, and the movement time with which someone actually moves as MTe, an independent variable.
Owing to tradition , we call the latter the "effective movement time."
Predicted error rates from Eq.
As a increases, the sigmoids translate to the right .
As b increases, the sigmoids get "pulled" to the right by their tails.
Conversely, if MTe  MT, the A, W, a, and b terms do not cancel, resulting in error rates other than 4%.
This is the issue addressed by Crossman's post hoc correction .
Although there is no closed-form solution for computing the area under the curve in Eq.
One is that Fitts' law holds over a range of movement times  even while A and W remain unchanged.
For low MTes where the MTe / MT ratio2 is less than, say, 0.60, the kind of rapid aimed movements assumed by Fitts' law where users correct their motion becomes difficult.
This is part of the distinction between closed-loop and open-loop movements .
The latter are akin to throwing a dart, where an initial ballistic action determines the path of uncorrected motion.
In practical terms, this means that participants do not fine-tune the location of the mouse pointer.
Instead, they "throw" the cursor at the target.
If faster movements are, in fact, open-loop, then we expect the error model to poorly fit our error rates for extreme MTes.
However, prior work  shows that Fitts' law holds for deliberate or hasty movements.
Our experiment indeed confirms this.
Another assumption is that the speed-accuracy tradeoff is logarithmic as Fitts' law purports.
There is support for this  in spatially constrained time-minimization tasks, like Fitts' reciprocal tapping task.
However, other work  shows a linear speed-accuracy tradeoff for temporally constrained tasks, like dotting on line targets with a pencil in sync with a metronome.
In our experiment, we are careful to manipulate MTe so as to maintain Fitts' logarithmic speed-accuracy tradeoff, as we will show.
An additional assumption is that single a and b regression coefficients coincide with changing levels of MTe, since they remain constant in Eq.
This is analogous to Fitts' law, where a and b remain constant over a wide range of IDs.
However, prior work  suggests that a and b for different speed-accuracy biases do not fully converge using Crossman's post hoc correction .
As we demonstrate, single a and b values do remain constant in our error model, but they should be elicited for a variety of MTe values spanning the movement times of interest.
A final assumption is that the selection endpoints are Gaussian about the target center, and that We is an accurate reflection of this.
Crossman's correction assumes this and prior work confirms this .
We further assume that a Gaussian spread occurs when MTe varies but A and W are fixed.
This may be true only for a range of MTe, since greater kurtosis and skew  are sometimes observed at particularly fast and slow velocities .
Having derived the Fitts-based error model for pointing and made the assumptions explicit, we now review related work addressing the speed-accuracy tradeoff.
We then present our experimental findings.
In 1963, Crossman and Goodeve  proposed the deterministic iterative-corrections model to explain Fitts' logarithmic speed-accuracy tradeoff in terms of submovement corrections.
Again, no error rate equation was derived, and subsequent work has cast doubt on the underlying claims of this model .
The data of interest were the stylus-mark distributions created around these lines.
This led to Schmidt's law:
Note that for Schmidt et al., the standard deviation of hits We was not Crossman's corrected We, which is actually 4.133 times this value.
Regardless, note how Schmidt's linear relationship differs from Eq.
5 where the relationship is logarithmic.
Although no prior work has formulated a predictive error rate equation using the parameters of Fitts' law, psychomotor research has been devoted to understanding movement output variability, which is the underlying source of errors.
Due to space constraints, we only review seminal examples.
The first work often credited with investigating the speedaccuracy tradeoff is Woodworth's in 1899 .
By manipulating movement amplitudes and times in a linedrawing task, Woodworth showed that deviations are, in fact, dependent upon movement velocity.
But Woodworth never formalized the speed-accuracy tradeoff.
As a result of Schmidt's work, researchers learned that spatially-constrained  time-minimization tasks follow Fitts' law, while temporally-constrained tasks without spatial constraints  follow Schmidt's law .
To examine the confluence of these issues, Zelaznik et al.
However, like Schmidt et al., Zelaznik et al.
In our experiment, although we also used a metronome, we retained a logarithmic speed-accuracy tradeoff.
This is likely because participants were explicitly instructed to click with the metronome but not to move with it.
This allowed them to arrive at the target and correct the mouse position before selection, if necessary.
We return to this issue in our experimental results.
This model allowed for two submovements: an initial ballistic one and an optional corrective one.
Movement time could be predicted with Eq.
For our purposes, the important point in Eq.
17 is that it lacks an explicit term for time, making it suitable only for tasks where participants move at the model's predicted MT, making it of limited value for our current investigation.
Testing was conducted with a 17" LCD monitor set to 1280x1024 resolution and connected to a Compaq EVO desktop computer running Windows XP .
The same IntelliMouse Optical was used by all participants, with its speed set to 7/10 in the mouse control panel and acceleration turned off.
Software was authored in C# using .NET 2.0 and presented trials to participants while logging their mouse activities in XML.
All other applications and nonessential services were disabled.
In 1997, Plamondon's kinematic theory  used a deltalognormal law to generate velocity profiles for both openand closed-loop movements.
Although this approach fit a variety of velocity profiles, it was criticized for lacking an explanation of underlying dynamics.
As with most prior work, no predictive error equation was derived.
It does, however, help a and b to converge.
No error rate equation was proposed.
In 2005, Grossman and Balakrishnan  extended Fitts' law to two dimensions by numerically mapping the probability of an open-loop movement hitting a 1D target to Fitts' ID.
Using this mapping, they generated IDs for 2D targets based on the chance that an open-loop movement lands inside a 2D region.
Although they used the concept of the probability of a hit, they did not define an error equation or use MTe as a parameter affecting this probability.
Clearly, a great deal of work on the speed-accuracy tradeoff for aimed movements exists, but few efforts have formulated predictive error rate equations.
We now describe an experiment to test the validity of our error model for pointing.
The study had two phases.
In the first phase, participants performed a conventional Fitts' reciprocal pointing task to elicit their personal Fitts' law models.
Participants repeated these conditions twice for a total of 12 x 9 x 2 = 216 target acquisitions.
With 16 participants, this resulted in 3456 total acquisitions.
If a target was missed, it flashed red and an error sound was played.
The error rate, which participants were to maintain at 4%, was shown after each A-W condition.
At the end of the first phase, the software performed a Fitts' law analysis, displaying a and b coefficients for that participant.
These coefficients were used in the second phase.
In the second phase, a visual and auditory metronome was used to manipulate participants' movement times .
We did not control movement time explicitly using raw time values  because doing so ignores individual participant differences--what is "fast" to one participant may be "slow" to another.
Instead, we used each participant's a and b coefficients from the first phase to determine the MT predicted by Fitts' law, and then we set the nominal metronome time, MTm, based on a percentage of MT, which we call MT%.
The values for A and W were the same as in phase one.
Thus, there were 90 A x W x MT% combinations.
For each A x W x MT% condition, participants performed 12 target acquisitions, with the first two ignored as practice.
The error rate for the 10 remaining target acquisitions was measured as the outcome for each condition.
Participants were tested over the 90 conditions twice, resulting in 180 error rate measures from 1800 clicks per participant.
With 16 participants, the experiment consisted of 2880 error rate measures from 28,800 clicks.
The metronome had both visual and auditory components.
The same vertical targets in phase one were used in phase two, but in phase two they were outlined by a gray animated border that grew smoothly from the top and bottom toward the center .
When the borders met in the middle, a "tick" sound was played, and the borders disappeared, only to begin growing again from the target ends.
Participants found this feedback to be clear, as it allowed them to both see and hear the progress of the metronome.
In both phases, Fitts' law models were fit for each participant using means from each A x W or A x W x MT% condition, with repeated conditions remaining separate .
For statistical tests, our error rate data are not normally distributed and do not allow ANOVA tests.
Accordingly, we use nonparametric Wilcoxon sign-rank and rank-sum tests .
For phase one, average MTe was 710 ms with an average error rate of 4.37%.
The mean TP was 5.08 bits/s, which is close to results from prior studies .
The average per-participant fit of Fitts' law was R2 = .763 for N = 18 points.
Although this is lower than often reported for Fitts' law studies, most studies fit fewer data points than we do here.
The goal of phase one was only to elicit Fitts' a and b parameters for each participant so that MT% could be used in phase two.
For phase two, movement times  ideally should match the nominal metronome times .
Average MTe was 613 ms, and the average MTe / MTm ratio was 1.04, indicating compliance with the metronome.
The average throughput was 5.42 bits/s.
The average a and b coefficients over all levels of MT% were -84.22 ms and 224.61 ms/bit, respectively.
Having controlled MTe using a metronome, it is important to verify that our trials exhibited Fitts' logarithmic speedaccuracy tradeoff and not the linear tradeoff of Schmidt et al.
Figure 4a shows that Fitts' law fits our data very well .
If a linear tradeoff were in effect, Figure 4b would show a straight line, not a curve.
In addition, we performed these analyses just on fast trials with MTe < 500 ms and found the same results.
Thus, our experimental manipulation of MTe maintains the logarithmic speed-accuracy tradeoff as modeled by Fitts' law.
Another check is whether the observed error rate for MT% = 1.00 was near the 4% nominal error rate assumed by Fitts' law.
In fact, the error rate for MT% = 1.00 was 5.78%, which is reasonably close to the ideal value of 4%.
Thus, despite the manipulation of MTe with the metronome, participants performed according to Fitts' law.
Participants were instructed to be as accurate as possible while clicking in sync with the metronome.
They were not told to move with the metronome, but, rather, to click with it.
Although prior studies  of temporally constrained movements show a linear speed-accuracy tradeoff, participants moved in tandem with a metronome, usually dotting between lines with a stylus.
In both phases of the experiment, Crossman's correction  was used.
This usually lowers R2 but provides more appropriate a and b coefficients .
Consistent with prior work , spatial outliers in phase one were removed if the observed movement amplitude was less than half the nominal movement amplitude, or if the selection endpoint was more than twice the target width from the target center.
This removed only one trial from phase one .
In phase two, spatial outliers were not removed because they could constitute legitimate errors.
Instead, temporal outliers were removed if participants deviated considerably from the prescribed movement time MTm.
Owing to its origins in Fitts' law, the error model for pointing maintains that target distance  and size  contribute proportionally to predicted error rates.
However, as we now discuss, this is not the case with our data.
Figure 7a recasts Figure 6a with data points grouped by A.
An intermixing of error rates is evident, consistent with Fitts' notion of ID.
Figure 7b recasts Figure 6a with data points grouped by W. Bands are clearly visible for each level of W without the intermixing consistent with Fitts' notion of ID.
In Figure 8a, we group the data in Figure 4a by W. Movement time is affected by W just as Fitts' law predicts, namely in combination with A as ID.
Figure 8b shows how this corresponds to predicted error rates: As expected, the graphs look almost identical.
However, in Figure 8c, when we plot the actual observed error rates, a discontinuity appears: Decreasing ID, which should cause error rates to go down, actually causes error rates to go up when target size  decreases.
These findings indicate that the unified notion of ID does not hold for errors as it does for movement time.
On average, predicted error rates are within 3.59 percentage points of observed error rates and are not significantly different .
Our manipulation of MT% allows us to examine how error rates vary with movement time.
Figure 6a shows predicted and observed error rates for each A x W x MT% point over MT%.
Predicted and observed error rates show strong correlations with MT% .
Figure 6b shows the same data averaged over ID for each level of MT%.
On the whole, our error model for pointing provides good error-rate predictions .
Although models are always imperfect and measurements noisy, the match between error rate predictions and observed error rates is strong, especially given the contrived nature of experimentally controlled movement times.
Our data confirm the logarithmic speed-accuracy tradeoff and the relative harmony between our metronome-guided pointing and pointing modeled by Fitts' law .
This itself is noteworthy, as prior metronome studies  often exhibit a linear speed-accuracy tradeoff.
As Figure 2b shows, the values for Fitts' a and b coefficients substantially affect predicted error rates.
Future work is necessary to tease out the sensitivities of the error model to its parameters.
Our own explorations indicate that a and b should be elicited from trials that span the movement times of interest.
We discovered that single perparticipant values for a and b improve model predictions compared to separate a and b values for each level of MT%, or values from a subset of MT%s.
These insights are consistent with Zhai et al.
Also, a and b values from traditional Fitts tasks, where error rates are held at 4% , make for poor error model predictions.
Instead, when eliciting a and b for use with the error model, Crossman's correction should be applied, all movement time conditions should be pooled, and per-participant a and b should be elicited.
It is important to emphasize that neither the metronome nor the notion of "MT%" is necessary for a and b elicitation; these were only used for experimental manipulation.
Likewise, for fitting an instance of the error model, it is not necessary to run the traditional Fitts calibration trials from phase one.
W's disproportionate effect on error rates is important because it is at odds with Fitts' notion of ID.
Even within the same level of ID, Wallace and Newell  found lower error rates for larger W. And C. L. MacKenzie et al.
Clearly, more work is necessary to refine W's role in the error model for pointing.
Finally, we should note that an error model is useful in areas of human factors outside HCI.
For example, on an assembly line, inspectors might have limited time to grab items as they pass by.
And the design of aircraft cockpit controls, with which Fitts himself was quite familiar , might be informed by better error prediction and estimation.
If a metronome is used with a stylus, it may be difficult to maintain Fitts' logarithmic speed-accuracy tradeoff; perhaps a Schmidtbased error model for pointing could be similarly effective.
5 could be applied to Eq.
The field of human-computer interaction has benefited over the years from quantitative models of human performance, and Fitts' law is undoubtedly the most prevalent of these.
However, Fitts' law is centrally concerned with movementtime prediction, not the prediction of error rates.
In this work, we "round out" the theory by deriving an error model for pointing that is strongly implied by Fitts' law.
The model holds over a range of target sizes, target distances, and movement times, although discontinuities with Fitts' law emerge concerning the role of target size.
Researchers, modelers, designers, and usability experts may benefit from quantitative models such as ours, which provide input for design and support rigorous evaluation of interactive systems.
Also, we should discover more precisely the role of W and its relationship to A in determining pointing errors; clearly the idea of "equal but inverse contribution," so firmly rooted in Fitts' law, does not entirely apply.
Other future work should test the model in different experimental conditions, where MTe is not controlled by a metronome, but instead, perhaps, by different payment schemes  or reinforcement .
The model also should be tested for discrete movements, rather than Fitts' reciprocal tapping.
