We present GreenHat, an interactive mobile learning application that helps students learn about biodiversity and sustainability issues in their surroundings from experts' points of view, before participating in unfamiliar debates about their familiar surroundings.
Using the interactive location-sensitive map and video on a smart phone, GreenHat simulates how experts go about making observations in the field and encourages students to actively observe their environment.
We present our design process, our initial prototype, report the results from our preliminary evaluation, and discuss ongoing work.
By connecting these experts' analyses with the students' everyday landscapes, students can look at their environment from a new perspective, and develop their opinion on location-sensitive controversial conservation issues.
Mobile technologies can support the development of expert perspectives by prompting novices with context-relevant information, interactively engaging the student with multiple forms of information and inquiry, and connecting their mobile experiences with the greater community discussion.
Sustainability and increasing ecological awareness is of increasing interest to the interaction design community .
Previous work on sustainability in interaction design has focused on leveraging social networks to promote ecologically friendly action , or enabling citizen science by using cellphones as a mobile sensing platform .
While these projects promoted ecological awareness and engaging citizen scientists data, they were not necessarily used to foster debate around sustainability issues.
The NatureTalk aimed to enhance creativity by helping children capture, geo-tag, and explore sound .
Researchers have also developed paper-based mobile tools for field biologists .
However, these interfaces are much more explorative in nature, and do not necessarily assist a novice in adopting an expert point of view.
One of the primary challenges in scaffolding novices to become experts is helping them first develop a "professional vision" - being able to see the world from an expert's perspective .
Goodwin identifies the practices of coding, highlighting, and producing and articulating material representation as ways that participants build and contest professional vision.
However, in situated contexts where experts are not present to identify the appropriate coding, highlighting, and articulation of material representations, mobile learning systems have the potential to assist students in adopting these expert points of view.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Previous user needs research on Mobile Learning applications  has identified three core needs: Capture, Access, Connect.
The features of the GreenHat system address the three main need categories.
In addition to automatically-generated time and location metadata, students can add tags to group information.
Users' past tagging activity can also be used by GreenHat Mobile to suggest additional content.
As the student continues to use the system, GreenHat Mobile prompts further mobile exploration by highlighting locations tagged with commonly used terms.
This view enables collaborators to start conversations centered around each others' field work.
What, then, is it like to experience this familiar environment from an expert's perspective?
What exactly are the experts noticing?
What kinds of questions are they asking?
What kinds of observations are they making?
It is this kind of perspective shift in actively observing one's environment we wanted to simulate in our mobile learning application.
While experts' availability is limited, mobile devices have the potential to provide information "on demand" for learners even in the absence of experts .
Based on literature on expert vs. novice learning , our goal is to simulate an experience for the learner as if s/he is taking a walk with experts on the field.
Our design solution was to use a location-sensitive smart phone and have the device point at points of interest in situ as experts may.
We curated the content of the experts' tour and delivered their teachable moments on students' mobile phones in a combination of video, images, and an interactive map.
The information resolution moved from a macro view to a micro view.
The campus map first indicated their current location and guided students to a specific area .
Once the student reached their destination, the phone initiated a video of the expert discussing an issue specific to the area .
This not only showed the expert pointing at specific trees and area, but also demonstrated how the experts go about making observations in the field.
In order to understand the specific issues of sustainability and biodiversity on campus, the design team first gathered and studied material available through the campus' existing online resources .
The design team then took a tour of the campus with experts, including a conservationist biologist and a landscape architect, and conducted interviews and discussions with these experts.
Based on insights we gained from the tour and interviews and from mobile learning literature, we developed the following design features for GreenHat.
While the design team was in the field with the experts, we noticed that the experts looked at the familiar environment differently from us and noticed things that we usually would not about the familiar places .
The expert's physical demeanor and engagement with the environment were different from ours while we walked on the forest paths on campus together.
For example, the expert carefully looked around the ground as we walked together , looked up on the trees , looked around the shrubs .
In contrast to in-class or desktop learning environments, mobile learning is a multi-sensory experience .
Learning about nature in nature is powerful, but as our conservation biology expert commented, "one does not need to hop on a bus to Yosemite to learn about biodiversity."
Students spend a significant amount of time traveling through various places on campus where there is nature .
We agree with the expert that there are plenty of opportunities to provide situated learning on biodiversity right in students' back yard.
And, in fact, learning in familiar places make conservation issues even more personal to the student.
Presenting evidence and facts in the familiar physical environment to the learner provides a unique learning experience.
Our design solution is to provide video of experts' presenting evidence by pointing at specific physical locations, at the same location.
This actively engages the students in making observations in the field .
Discussions at the physical familiar location allow students to build on their personal knowledge and experience.
As the students visit various familiar locations on campus, they are introduced to additional unfamiliar complex issues and debates.
Our mobile learning tool engages the students with these topics by challenging them in situ with debate questions, and asking them to providing both their opinion and evidence.
Once at the desktop, we provide a web forum for the students to expand on their mobile learning experience.
In the web interface, students can view the history of their activities made with their mobile device 
The GreenHat Mobile prototype was implemented using the Android G1 Dev Phone , which features an 8cm  480x320 pixel touch screen, a slide-out QWERTY keyboard, a built-in GPS receiver, and Wi-Fi capabilities.
The prototype software was written in Java using the Android Software Development Kit.
Participant responses where saved directly to an SQLite database on each device.
We wanted to avoid having biased or polarized views by supporting pluralism in perspectives.
For example, a nature conservationist may have a mission to restore the landscape with native plants, but what constraints might the landscape architect have?
Are there solutions that satisfy both perspectives?
To help the students explore variety of possible solutions by considering multiple perspectives, we designed the following four-step inquiry to engage the students in the topic.
As the videos play, a list of "key ideas" is displayed next to the video.
A total of 19 undergraduate and graduate students participated in our study.
Twelve students have participated in the GreenHat Mobile group.
Each participant spent approximately one hour and a half exploring the campus with GreenHat Mobile.
To record their experience, experimenters "shadowed" the participants with video cameras and field notes.
After the tour, the experimenters asked a set of openended questions such as "How was the experience of learning about Strawberry Creek?"
Seven students participated in the GreenHat Desktop condition, where they had access to all the same digital material as the GreenHat Mobile condition  but received these materials on the desktop computer in a room.
In both conditions, the students have explored 5 different locations on the campus, following the 4-step inquiry.
We connect the mobile learning experience with the students' existing desktop learning experience.
Learning "on the go" provides unique opportunities for the students to make observations in situ and discover relevant facts.
However, certain behaviors such as typing long notes or browsing large collections of digital library resources are not ideal on a mobile device with a small screen and keyboard.
Our goal is to support uniquely "mobile" learning experiences, but at the same time not limit the experience to mobile devices only.
After the trip, the students may reflect and expand on their activities by visiting their personalized online map on a web interface.
This web interface also allows them to explore relevant keywords, edit their entries, browse and comment on others' entries, and visit relevant online resources.
The two groups were equally diverse in their answers and reasoning behind their answers.
Despite the disadvantage of typing on the small keyboard, the Mobile group wrote as much as the Desktop group with a standard-sized keyboard .
While the students' responses to the questions were equally diverse in both Mobile Learning group and Desktop Learning group, the Mobile Learning group seemed to give more contextual evidence in their responses.
For example, a student in Mobile condition wrote, "The lawn seems more functional on this side and further removed from the bustle of students walking to and from class."
Another student in Mobile condition wrote, "I actually like hearing the sound of the creek and being able to sit on the grass and see the creek at the same time."
These types of comments from personal observation were not seen in the desktop condition.
In describing their answers, the desktop group tended to quote the video, e.g., " because the video said "
Some of the connections the students made with their environment happened outside of the prompts made by GreenHat in the Mobile group.
The Mobile students during the post-study interview described that they would now look at their campus differently.
Some students described that they have "learned to be more skeptical" and questioning what they see.
GreenHat invited students to explore complex issues of sustainability and biodiversity presented at various physical locations in their familiar environment.
Our preliminary evaluation of GreenHat prototype showed that having access to multiple experts' perspectives in the physical environment, i.e., how the experts would look at and interrogate the very environment the students stand, encouraged the students to actively observe the physical environment and provide more contextual evidence in forming their responses.
Mobile technologies can support the development of expert perspectives by prompting novices with context-relevant information, interactively engaging the student with multiple forms of information and inquiry, and connecting their mobile experiences with the greater community discussion.
We contribute the design of mobile learning experience that takes advantage of access to multiple experts and context-sensitive information in the learner's immediate physical environment.
The students in the Mobile Learning group reported that the experience of going through their campus and learning about debates on sustainability and biodiversity was "personal."
They described that it would not be the same experience if they had learned about the same issue at a desktop, as they would not be as "immersed in the environment" as they were.
For example, the students learned that the design of a particular creek side garden with lawn is highly un-sustainable .
However, at the same time, they were there on a nice sunny day to observe their fellow students enjoying the green lawn during breaks.
They were pushed to consider multiple aspects of the design challenge.
The GPS reception at some locations was not as good as we had originally anticipated due to "urban canyons."
Some prompts by GPS were not precise, occurring earlier or later than we designed.
In such cases, the combination of the map, images, and videos of experts pointing at specific objects in the location were helpful in guiding the students.
Students reported that some of the videos seemed too long for mobile learning.
We plan to edit the videos so that they can be viewed in smaller chunks and also allow the students to save the point where they paused their video and continue watching it later.
