Elderly users suffering from hand tremor have difficulties interacting with touchscreens because of finger oscillation.
It has been previously observed that sliding one's finger across the screen may help reduce this oscillation.
In this work, we empirically confirm this advantage by  measuring finger oscillation during different actions and  comparing error rate and user satisfaction between traditional tapping and swabbing in which the user slides his finger towards a target on a screen edge to select it.
We found that oscillation is generally reduced during sliding.
Also, compared to tapping, swabbing resulted in improved error rates and user satisfaction.
We believe that swabbing will make touchscreens more accessible to senior users with tremor.
In particular, tremor-induced oscillations cause the finger to deviate from the target or to produce duplicate inputs.
Although this can be alleviated by increasing target size and space between targets, this would require more screen space, which is often limited.
Our initial observations  indicated that sliding the finger across the screen during swabbing appeared to dampen deviation, but this observation has not been confirmed empirically.
Neither has swabbing been compared to tapping, the basic touchscreen interaction technique.
With the global increase of the senior population , tremor will be a significant concern in designing assistive technologies in the future.
Although touchscreens have several benefits--they provide direct hand-eye coordination, need minimal training, and require less space , users with tremor have difficulties us-
After a review of related work, we report on a study of finger oscillation during swabbing and tapping in four actions of touchscreen interaction , and comparing error rate and user satisfaction between swabbing and tapping.
We discuss our findings that  sliding reduces the oscillation of finger tips, and that  compared to tapping, swabbing resulted in improved error rates and user satisfaction.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Swabbing is a single-touch selection method proposed by Mertens et al.
The user touches any area on the screen and slides his finger towards the target placed on an edge of the screen .
After the finger moved beyond a distance threshold, a linear regression is calculated from recent touch coordinates to determine the intended target, which is then highlighted.
To select the target, the user either lifts his finger or slides it across the target and beyond the screen.
To cancel the highlighting, the user slides the finger backward.
The target placement eliminates the users' anxiety of overshooting and maximizes the opening angle from the initial touch point towards each target.
Swabbing trades off input speed for accuracy because sliding always takes longer than tapping.
Finger interactions differ from interactions using a stylus  or indirect pointing devices, e.g., a mouse ; these differences limit the adoption of existing input methods for touchscreens and for seniors.
We review the limitations in adopting some methods and compare them to swabbing as follows.
With Goal Crossing , the user crosses the mouse cursor over the target to select it.
The benefit, which is also maintained in swabbing, is that the user does not have to aim at a limited target area.
Crossing targets on a touchscreen for a longer time, however, is demanding especially for elderly users because they cannot rest their hand on the surface--only the finger is supported.
Since only trajectories are needed in swabbing, the sliding distance can be shorter than the distance to the target.
Nevertheless, the swabbing technique also supports crossing.
With Barrier pointing , a physical screen edge and plane is used to catch the stylus or to guide stroke movements, which can increase selection accuracy.
Nevertheless, when applied to finger interaction, the hand covers the targets during selection.
Also, physical screen edges are disappearing on modern devices such as Apple's iPad.
With Touch , a target is selected if the stylus enters its bounds, and the stylus can be landed or lifted anywhere.
Touch can increase input accuracy for older users but was not designed for users with tremor.
The oscillation might cause neighbor targets to be touched.
Increasing the space between targets is possible but often limited by screen space.
With swabbing, the trajectory determines only one target at a time.
As shown in Figure 3, we placed an HP TouchSmart tm21090eg2 on a stand with the screen surface inclined 20 from the desk surface.
The desk height was at the same level of the elbow when the user's arm was orthogonal to the ground.
From the top view, the screen was placed in front of the user at a distance within the length of the forearm.
Each participant used a fixed finger angle throughout the study.
We hypothesized that the finger will exhibit less tremor while sliding on the screen.
Therefore, we measured the acceleration of the fingertip in four actions: hovering over a spot, resting on a spot, repeatedly tapping on a spot, and sliding  in a designated area.
We omitted visual feedback in order to prevent the bias to any feedback.
Similar to , we used a velcro ring to attach a tri-axis accelerometer  to the back of the extreme joint of the test finger; the entire tip of the finger was uncovered.
For each action, we recorded 10 seconds of acceleration data and discarded the first and the last second due to extreme variance, likely caused by the onset and the completion of the task.
The data was transformed into the frequency domain by a Fast-Fourier Transform 
The peak magnitude of each action was the highest magnitude within the tremor frequency  .
A significant axis has a peak magnitude of more than 0.1 G.
In order to evaluate the potential benefits of swabbing, we addressed the following research questions.
Users with intention tremor--tremor during target-directed movements-- were recruited from a local hospital; none of them had used any touchscreen device before.
In general, the peak magnitude in sliding was consistently lower than in the other actions.
Although there were differences across users, the results suggest that sliding can lessen the oscillation magnitude in the significant axes.
As shown in Figure 7, the median error rate in swabbing was lower than in tapping.
A two-way repeated measures ANOVA on error proportion with quasibinomial error distribution revealed no significant interaction effect among participants, number of targets, or methods.
In each trial, participants performed either a tapping or swabbing action to select a designated target laid out as shown in Figure 6.
In both methods, participants started each trial on a crosshair located on the same side as the hand.
In swabbing, they had to start sliding from the center of the screen.
The targets were in a square grid for tapping and were on the edges of the screen for swabbing.
To prevent a learning effect, there was no hit/miss feedback.
The targets were spread evenly across the screen because previous research has shown that finger selection accuracy can differ for different areas .
For this experiment, selection was initiated after the finger had moved beyond 50% of the average of the shortest distance from center point to target  and the longest distance 
We omitted feedback  to prevent users from developing a strategy for swabbing in the later trials.
The order of methods and number of targets was counterbalanced.
Although there was no significant interaction effect of method x number of targets on error rate, the positive impact of swabbing appeared to be strongest for the 16 targets layout.
This is likely due to two reasons:  the high variance of error rates in 25 and 36 targets and  the lack of statistical power due to the small number of participants .
Nevertheless, swabbing had a significant advantage for the 16 targets condition .
This could be especially useful for devices with numeric keypads such as a phone.
Although this study only compared tapping on a grid layout of targets to swabbing on a radial layout of targets, we conducted a preliminary study beforehand to test only nine targets and tapping on a swabbing layout.
We found that most users could accurately tap in 9 targets  because the target size was large .
We found no reduction of error rates in tapping on the swabbing layout.
As shown in Figure 8, swabbing was significantly slower than tapping for 25 and 36 targets, but the main effect of participants and the interaction between participants and method make it inconclusive.
The time of tapping, which is a singlecontact, and the time of swabbing, which is a continuous contact, cannot be directly compared because swabbing time depends on the contact area, pressure, finger humidity, angle, and direction of movement.
R. Balakrishnan and I. MacKenzie.
Performance differences in the fingers, wrist, and forearm in computer input control.
Consensus statement of the movement disorder society on tremor.
J. Froehlich, J. Wobbrock, and S. Kane.
Barrier pointing: Using physical edges to assist target acquisition on mobile device touch screens.
Using an accelerometer sensor to measure human hand motion.
A summary of the PSSUQ results is shown in Figure 9.
Although swabbing was inherently slower than tapping, participants were satisfied with this input method.
The result indicates that users with tremor prefer more accurate input methods to faster ones.
We have compared swabbing to tapping as input methods for elderly users with tremor.
In general, sliding can lessen finger tremor when interacting on a touchscreen.
Overall, swabbing improved error rates and user satisfaction.
Although this result is promising, future experiments with more participants are needed.
Based on our findings we derived at two design implications: When to choose swabbing: Tapping is a viable choice for square targets that are at least 54 mm wide.
When the target width is smaller than 41 mm, swabbing becomes a better alternative.
Speed-accuracy tradeoff: Elderly users with tremor may prefer a more accurate input method, even if it is slower.
