Fitts' law, a one-dimensional model of human movement, is commonly applied to two-dimensional target acquisition tasks on interactive computing systems.
For rectangular targets, such as words, it is demonstrated that the model can break down and yield unrealistically low 
The Shannon formulation is shown to partially correct this bits.
As well, two problem, since ID is always 20 alternative interpretations of "target width" are introduced that accommodate the two-dimensional nature of tasks.
Results of an experiment are presented that show a significant improvement in the model's performance using the suggested changes.
The contribution of the present paper is in extending Fitts' law to 2D target acquisition tasks and in alleviating common weaknesses in applying the model.
Following a brief introduction, we demonstrate -- with examples from published research -- that inaccurate, even erroneous, measures often emerge in typical applications of the model.
Modifications are introduced and an experiment is presented to compare alternative models.
Fitts' law, where a and b are constants determined through linear regression.
W corresponds to "accuracy" - the required region where an action terminates.
The log term is the index of difficulty  and carries the unit "bits" .
If MT is measured in "seconds", then the unit for a is "seconds" and for b, "seconds/bit".
The reciprocal of b is the index of performance  in This is the human rate of information "bits/second".
An example is Fitts' law, a speed-accuracy model of human movement developed from research in manmachine systems for air traffic control .
In early applications of the law, an operator manipulated a control  over a specified amplitude to a terminal position of a specified accuracy .
Since the 1970s, many researchers have adopted a different paradigm.
Objects of interest are often "iconic" -- represented on a two-dimensional CRT display and selected by a mouse, joystick, or trackball Unfortunately, and as we shall .
These equations differ only in the formulations for ID.
On the whole, Equation 3, known as the Shannon formulation, is prefenwd because it q provides a slightly better fit with observations, q exactly mimics the information theorem underlying Fitts' law, and q always gives a positive rating for the index of task difficulty.
The experiments conducted by Fitts tested human performance in making horizontal moves toward a target.
As seen in Figure 1, both the amplitude of the move and the width of the terminating region are measured along the same axis.
It follows that the model is inherently onedimensional.
This implies that the minimum A is W/2, otherwise the starting position is inside the target.
In another Fitts' law experiment using similar conditions, Gillan, Holden, Adam, Rudisill, and Magee  required subjects to select a target 26 characters  wide from a distance of 2 cm.
However, many investigations vary the angle of approach to "smooth over" or to investigate directional effects .
If the targets are circles , then the lD constraint in the model remains largely intact .
However, if targets are rectangles, such as words, the situation is confounded.
The amplitude is still the distance to the centre of the target; but the role of target width is unclear.
This is illustrated in Figure 2.
If the approach angle is 0 , then the lD scenario applies.
If the approach angle is 90 , then the roles of width and height reverse .
Unfortunately, this has not been accommodated in past research.
The horizontal measurement was always considered the target "width", regardless of approach angle; so, some unusual interpretations of task difficulty  emerged.
Obviously, a negative rating for task difficulty poses a serious theoretical problem.
We suggest two complementary ways to correct this.
The first is to use the Shannon formulation in calculating ID .
It is easily shown that the Shannon formulation always yields a positive  ID.
Using the Fitts or Welford formulation, however, the rating is negative when the A: Wratio drops below 1:2.
A second and additional strategy is to substitute for W a measure more consistent with the 2D nature of the task.
The inherent lD constraint in the model is maintained by measuring W along the approach axis.
This is shown as WI  in the figure, Notwithstanding the assertion that subjects may $'cut corners" to minimize distances, the W' model is appealing because it allows a lD interpretation of a 2D task.
Subjects performed multiple trials on a simple target selection task.
For each trial, a small circle appeared near the centre of the display, and a rectangular target appeared elsewhere .
Subjects were instructed to manipulate the mouse and move the cursor inside the circle, then wait for a visual cue before beginning.
The cue was a small, solid rectangular bar which appeared on the left of the screen and expanded in size for about 1 second.
After the bar stabilized, a move could begin.
Subjects prepared their moves as long as mxessary, but were told to move as quicld y and accurately as possible once the cursor left the circle.
Timing began when the cursor left the circle.
The goal was to move to the target and select it by pressing and releasing the mouse button.
A beep was sounded for trials in error.
Possibilities include W1 or the smaller of W or H. Another possible substitution for target width is "the smaller of W or H".
This pragmatic approach has intuitive appeal in that the smaller of the two dimensions seems more indicative of the accuracy demands of the task.
We call this the "SMALLER-OF" model.
This model is computationally simple since it can be applied only knowing A, W, and H. The W model, on the other hand, requires A, W, H, OA, and a geometric calculation to determine the correct substitution for W .
The objective of the present research was to test the viability of the WI and SMALLER-OF models as alternatives to a "STATUS QUO" model, whereby W is always the horizontal extent of a target.
As well, two other models were considered.
The area model  has some appeal, since it is not limited to rectangular targets, and since area also seems to reflect the accuracy demand of the task.
Substituting W+ H seems implausible, however.
In the following paragraphs, we describe an experiment that was conducted to test the models described above.
A target selection task was used with rectangular targets approached from various angles.
If a move started before the solid bar stabilized, a beep was heard and the subject restarted the move.
Subjects were instructed to balance speed and accuracy for an error rate around 4%.
An examiner was present for all trials.
Deeign A fully within-subjects repeated measures design was used.
Each unit mapped into 10 pixels for a maximum amplitude of 320 pixels .
Dependent variables were movement time  and error rate .
Only 78 of 240 possible cells were used.
This kept the experiment manageable and exhausted a wide and important range of conditions.
Twenty-six amplitude/size conditions  were crossed with the three approach angles.
Conditions with W = H  were excluded since they yield ordy small differences in ZDS among the models tested.
Approach Angle Approach angle was the only factor fully crossed with other factors.
Therefore, an analysis of variance was applied oxdy to the main effect of approach angle on the dependent measures of movement time and error rate.
Trials were timed from the tumor leaving the start circle to the button-down action at the target.
Error rates were very close the optimal rating of 4%.
The grand mean was 4.6%, with means along the horizontal, diagonal, and vertical axes of 3.9%, 5. l?lo, and 4.7% respectively.
The above results were expected based on previous findings .
Although the differences should be noted, they do not give one model an advantage since a range of short-and-wide and tall-and-narrow targets were used.
Fit of the Models Our main objective was to compare several interpretations of target width when the approach angle varies.
I'he 78 conditions were presented in random order until all were exhausted.
Fifteen blocks were administered over four days  for a total of 1170 trials per subject.
RESULTS Adjustment of Data A Newman-Keuls test using movement time and error rate as criterion variables showed no significant differences in the 15 block means.
The data were then entered in a test for outliers, whereby trials with selection coordinates more than three standard deviations from the mean were eliminated.
The SMALLER-OF model had the highest correlation and the lowest standard error, while the STATUS QUO model  had the lowest r and the highest SE.
Performance indices  were in the range of 4.6 to 7.4 bits/s.
The intercepts were all positive with the SMALLER-OF model yielding the intercept closest to the origin.
The highest correlation in Figure 6 was for the SMALLEROF model.
Using this model we conclude that the predicted time  to point to and select a rectangular target, regardless of approach angle, is M"= 230 + 166 log2, 
Since these results are potentially important to researchers interested in applying Fitts' law to two-dimensional target acquisition tasks, discussions should continue in more detail.
The role of target height and approach angle varies in each model and therefore the comparisons may not be equitable.
For example, the STATUS QUO model does not use H and 8A.
Is this a strength or a weakness in the model?
In one sense, it is a strength, because fewer parameters brings generality and ease in application.
On the other hand, if an additional and commonly varied parameter is shown to effect the dependent variable of interest, and the effect is to &grade a model's performance in comparison to another, then the absence of the extra parameter is a weakness.l Of course, the conditions tested must be representative of the application.
The present experiment measured the time to acquire rectangular targets in two-dimensional tasks.
The levels of factors were not unlike those in interactive computer graphics systems, with the ~ssible exception of text selection, where the majority of targets are short-and-wide .
On generality, the same argument applies in comparing the SMALLER-OF and the W!
Although applying the WI model requires A, W, H, and 6A, the SMALLER-OF model only considers A, W, and H. This is both a strength and a potential weakness in the SMALLER-OF model.
Perhaps angles between 0 and 45, for example, would yield variations in movement time more consistent with the WI model than the SMALLER-OF model.
This remains to be tested.
Nevertheless, the simplicity in applying the SMALLER-OF model with one less parameter is noteworthy.
Model Comparisons Due to the ranking of correlations in Figure 6, further comparisons between the models were undertaken using Hotelling's z test for the difference between correlation coefficients .
The correlations for the STATUS QUO, SMALLER-OF, and W' models are compared in Figure 7.
Furthermore, the SMALLER-OF and WI models did not differ significantly from each other .
An initial conclusion, therefore, is that the SMALLER-OF and W' models are empirically superior to the STATUS QUO model, As noted earlier, the W' model is theoretically attractive since it retains the one-dimensionality of the model.
In a practical sense, the SMALLER-OF model is appealing because it can be applied without consideration of approach angle.
This is also true of the STATUS QUO model, but not of the Wtmodel.
The extra variable contributes to the calculation of target width in the index of difficulty.
Including target width  does not necessarily improve the fit.
By a STATUS QUO model, ID is a function only of A and W, where W is the width of the text object.
So, as the number of characters increases, ID decreases  and, therefore, the predicted MT decreases.
Is this a reasonable expectation?
After all, me larger a word, the easier it is to select!
Upon closer examination however, it is evident that expectations disagree with predictions.
Considering only the STATUS QUO model initially, it is easy to demonstrate that erroneous predictions follow under extreme, yet reasonable, conditions.
As noted earlier, a negative Ill emerges using the Fitts or Welford formulation when A: W is less than 1:2.
Although improbable for lD tasks, this situation is perfectly common for 2D tasks.
Using the Shannon formulation the limit in ID as W --> C=is O bits.
This seems reasonable, but as we now demonstrate, the rating for ID, although not negative, can become unrealistically low in 2D tasks using a STATUS QUO interpretation of target width.
Figure 8 is a clear refutation of applying the status quo definition -- that width = horizontal extent.
Intuitively, target selection time for task  will be somewhat less than for task .
But this is not predicted by a STATUS QUO model.
Intuitively, target selection time for task  should be about the same as for task .
Again, this is not predicted by a STATUS QUO model.
Predictions do match expectations if the task difficulties are computed using the SMALLER-OF or W model.
For further evidence, we need only examine the observations of Gillan et EL , who used conditions of W = 0.25, 1.0,3.5, and 6.0 cm with H held constant at 0.5 cm .
The targets were words or phrases of length 1, 5, 14, or 26 characters.
The contour lines in Figure 9 support the SMALLER-OF model over the STATUS QUO model.
The latter effect, although not accounted for by the STATUS QUO model, is folly expected with the SMALLER-OF model because the target height was unchanging and consistently smaller than the target width.
The WI model, although slightly more difficult to apply, performed as well as the SMALLER-OF model in Figure 7.
The model assumes that subjects move toward the centre of the target.
No doubt, behavioral optimization would follow under extreme conditions, such as selecting a "very wide" target at close range.
Such extremes were not tested.
To prevent biasing the comparisons for any one model, the experiment full y crossed the thiree approach angles with all A-W- H conditions; thus, the minimum amplitude for each condition could be applied at each approach angle.
Conditions such as A = 2.0 cm and W = 6 cm  preclude the possibility of 8A = 0 since the starting position would be inside the target .
In fact, the designs employed by Card et al.
The present design, whereby both short-andwide and tall-and-narrow targets were fully crossed with 0,45, and 90 approach angles, is unbiased with respect to the models tested.
Optimization trends were investigated by calculating the actual amplitudes and approach angles for all 78 conditions.
As expected, optimization was most evident for the extreme short-and-wide and tall-and-narrow targets.
The largest deviation occurred under the condition W= 1, H =8, A = 8, and 8A = 45, where means for the actual amplitude and approach angle were 7.1 units and 36.9.
For the vast majority of conditions, however, actual amplitudes and angles were remarkably close to the specified conditions.
Analyses using actual measures for A and 9A were not pursued further.
When non-rectangular targets are used, applying the SMALLER-OF model is problematic; whereas, the W $ model is applied in the usurd way.
Nevertheless, one can imagine odd-shaped targets without an obvious "centre".
The Wt model may yield unreasonably large or small estimates for target width in some instances.
The area model  has some intuitive appeal in this case.
Perhaps an odd-shaped target should be reduced to a minimum-circumference shape -- a circle -- having the same area.
The WXH model would substitute the area for W, while the W model would substitute the diameter.
This model is theoretical y attractive since it retains the onedimensionality of Fitts' law; however, the approach angle  must be known a priori, The second - the SMALLER-OF model -- substitutes for W either the width or height of the target, whichever is smaller.
This model is easy to apply, but is limited to rectangular targets, unlike the WI model.
Both models, in tests of correlation, performed significantly better than the STATUS QUO model; however, no difference was detected between them.
These findings should prove useful in subsequent applications of Fitts' law to target acquisitions tasks on computing systems with graphical user interfaces.
The results in Figure 6 and Figure 7 illustrate a problem with traditional applications of Fitts' law to twodimensional target acquisition tasks.
We have shown that the interpretation of target width and the formulation used in the calculation of a task's index of difficulty play a critical role in the accuracy of the model, The Fitts and Welford formulations suffer by yielding a negative rating for a task's index of difficulty, particularly in 2D tasks since the A: W ratio can be very small.
The Shannon formulation alleviates this by always providing a positive  rating for ID.
Consistently using the horizontal extent of a target as its "width"  ako weakens the model and leads to inaccurate and sometimes erroneous predictions.
Two models performed significantly better than the STATUS QUO model.
The first - the WI model substitutes for W the extent of the target along an 6.
Transactions on Human Factors in Electronics, 4,2529.
A evaluation of an eye tracker as a device for computer input.
Proceedings of the CHI+GI '87 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems and Graphics interf~e, 183-188.
