With over 13.3 million children living below poverty line in the United States, there is a pressing need for engaging HCI research with children at the socio-economic margins.
Drawing from design studio culture and art therapy literature, we explore wearable computing as a creative and tangible medium 
Working with a local outreach organization for `at-risk' middle school girls, we conducted five weekly workshops during which participants ideated, designed and implemented personal wearable computing projects.
These sessions inspired participants  who tend to be uninterested and uncooperative in educational activities to complete interactive projects and engage with workshop volunteers as mentors and peers.
We present the challenges, merits and outcomes of our approach, proposing wearable computing as a healing outlet and a mentoring strategy for at-risk children.
Art therapy uses materials such as paints, clays, chalk, etc.
Art therapy emphasizes "physical involvement with the materials" that allows children to explore and express feelings that may be difficult to explain .
For example, prior research has described how tangible mediums enable children to channel emotions through physical objects rather than behavioral episodes  : "The physical involvement in exploring art materials appears to be of great benefit to these damaged children, as well as providing the opportunity to externalize feelings, particularly of rage and shame."
Working with a local organization for at-risk girls, we explore wearable electronics as a new set of creative materials.
Risk factors such as poverty, single or absent-parent homes, abuse and trauma  contribute to the number of at-risk children in the United States, where one in five children lives below poverty line and over 420,000 are in foster care .
In this paper, we explore approaches for engaging HCI research with the delicate and complex communities of `at-risk' youths.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
We explore experiences of physical placement, attachment and interaction with components such as LEDs, buttons, sensors, etc., in conjunction with attendant fabrics and textiles, as an approach for facilitating creative expressions among young at-risk populations.
Numerous efforts aim to introduce computer science to children through magic shows , avatar design , 3-D storytelling , as well as LEGO Mindstorms and other robotics platforms .
More recently, creativity and design have been emphasized as the founding principles of many computer clubhouses , for instance at the MIT Media Lab Lifelong Kindergarten1, as well as a range of classes and workshops2.
Scratch  and Modkit  support creative programming, while Robot Diaries facilitate creative engagement with technology .
The LilyPad Arduino has been discussed as a tool for mainstream education contexts , most notably by Ngai, et.
In this paper, we explore how the use of the LilyPad could be expanded into the educational and mentoring practices surrounding marginal, at-risk communities.
We draw inspiration from research that engages with stakeholders at the socio-economic margins: mobile computing for low-income communities in rural India  and PlayPower - a platform empowering distributed learning through low-cost games.
Hands-on experience has been shown to facilitate active learning through interventions such as the Logo turtle  or even basic calculators , as well as studies in traditional subjects education .
Creative hands-on activities can increase engagement and learning  and improve problem-solving skills .
We contribute to and productively expand this body of work by exploring how creativity and problem-solving can be supported through hands-on making of wearable computing projects.
While many outreach programs support young females and minorities who are interested in technology , few efforts target children at socio-economic margins or those who are not initially cooperative or interested.
We are a group of HCI researchers motivated by and passionate about reaching out to marginal groups as a matter of service.
Over the past two years, we have been exploring different approaches for engaging with the children at Gwen's Girls5, a local outreach organization that offers gender-specific services to struggling, low-income, or `atrisk' girls.
Our initial efforts used traditional methods to conduct several classes including website creation, music synthesis, and basic circuits.
These lecture-style sessions were mostly unsuccessful: the girls quickly lost interest and became uncooperative by refusing to listen, walking out, mocking the instructors, etc.
The girls were drawn to creating their own content , as well as taking apart gadgets 
These lessons as well prior art therapy approaches  for working with at-risk children, inspired us to pursue the physical and creative LilyPad Arduino as a new point of engagement with Gwen's Girls.
Our experiences reveal unique,  unexpected challenges, merits and outcomes, and we detail these in hopes of motivating future research in this area.
Wearable  computing refers to the practice of embedding electronics and elements of tangible interaction into clothing and fabric.
The LilyPad Arduino- a suite of low-cost electronics that can be easily sewn into textiles and fabrics has ushered a resurgence of participation and ideas within the wearable community.
Developed by Leah Buechley at the MIT Media Lab, this technology includes the Arduino - a microcontroller that can be mounted to fabrics, fabric-friendly components such as LEDs, sensors, etc., and the interconnect of conductive thread.
This technology has been adopted by a milieu of communities including  DIY enthusiasts, artists, small businesses and academic researchers .
Except for a few brief group activities, participants worked independently or with workshop volunteers .
Our five weekly sessions, lasting 11/2 -2 hours each, progressed from basic circuit concepts  to programming the LilyPad Arduino , to brainstorming and design  and implementing a full project .
We returned to the Gwen's Girls after our last session for follow-up interviews with two staff members and the girls.
We worked with the 10-12 age group at Gwen's Girls  to maximize impact at an early age.
Due to doctor's visits and summer travel, attendance ranged from 4 to 7 participants per session, with 4 girls attending enough sessions to finish a final project.
With the girls' and their guardians' permission, we recorded audio from each session and photographed select work.
Qualitative data was transcribed and coded .
We reference data owing to particular participants as: S- Gwen's Girls staff, Pparticipants , and V- workshop volunteers .
All girls are assigned a case manager who provides care at the Gwen's Girls site, as well as in the girls'  homes.
Girls are either referred to Gwen's Girls by their foster home, parents or guardians, or court ordered to attend the program, and their attitudes towards the program vary:
I would say that some of our girls are court ordered to be here.
Some of them are here because they are involved in our foster care program, so in that instance too, they're sort of made to be here.
Some of them are here because their parents want them to be here so whether they want to be here..." 
Gwen's Girls was founded in 2002 by Gwendolyn J. Elliot, one of the first female African American police officers in the United States and the first in Pittsburgh.
Gwen's Girls offers support for at-risk girls, addressing the challenges and difficulties faced in early adulthood.
Over the last eight years, several branches have been established in Pittsburgh, with services for afterschool hours and over the summer.
The emphasis is on prevention- preventing girls from being removed from their  homes and re-unification- reuniting girls with their families.
Over thirty girls attend the summer program at the branch we worked with, and nearly one hundred are involved in afterschool, foster care, and prevention/re-unification services.
A staff member describes the unique Gwen's Girls population:
It's girls in the East End of Pittsburgh... who are often dealing with some kind of emotional trauma.
So that's a very specific population.
99% of our girls are African American... um and I would same the same amount is probably below poverty ."
The girls tend to use computers for online games such as y86 , some social networking sites including WeeWorld Avatars7, as well as for music .
Besides the few courses organized by the authors prior the workshops, the only computer class offered by Gwen's Girls is on internet safety.
We began by talking to the girls as a group, to introduce ourselves and gauge their comfort level and experiences with technology.
Participants were shy and unengaged during this discussion: hesitating to speak, they participated only after considerable prompting.
We encouraged the girls to name favorite or frequently used technologies, and answers ranged from cell phones, to laptops and computers, to ovens.
When asked to describe a fun technology, the girls were hesitant to respond.
After extensive prompting by the volunteers who shared a few personal favorites, participants mentioned Facebook and cameras.
Only one girl described a school hands-on project where she had to light a small `light bulb' by connecting it to a battery.
Annoying aspects of technology surfaced during the discussion including computer crashes and not being able to assemble projects from parts.
Participants were reluctant to name `fun' jobs in technology, but one girl eventually mentioned fixing broken electronics such as Nintendo Game Boys.
The girls were then shown several exemplary LilyPad projects available as images and videos on the web9.
We also shared projects that have been made locally by the volunteers .
Participants showed some interest , but as participants later told us, the demos were a bit intimidating:
And if they're going to get into something that's like new and scary, that's going to put them in a potentially awkward situation where they seem...maybe if they seem stupid if they don't know something..." 
In addition, the exercises of lighting an LED and controlling electricity flow with a button helped the girls arrive at a common starting point for understanding basic circuits.
A staff member later pointed out, "I think for children who've never done anything like that before, it's really good to have a good simple base."
The concept of conductivity was demonstrated in a few slides illustrating electron flow between a battery and an LED.
The girls then individually wired the circuit as seen in Figure 3, connecting a coin cell battery  to an LED with alligator clips.
Participants were visibly excited when their LEDs "turned on".
Next, participants built an e-textile button10 from pre-cut felt and conductive fabric and integrated it into their circuit to control an LED.
During the remainder of the session, participants explored a range of materials 
They attached working buttons and LEDs their shirts, pants, or stand-alone objects .
They were excited to take home  working projects, except for one participant who chose an overly ambitious design and could not finish.
In this session, participants explored features of the LillyPad Arduino.
In a brief  group presentation, volunteers explained that an Arduino is a microcontroller  with a "memory" that could be programmed to control LEDs and sensors.
For simplicity, we explained that analog "a" pins are for input "to read from sensors", and digital  pins- for output, "to light LEDs" .
Drawing from the success of other creative environments  we chose to use the Arduino IDE , introducing it as software that "talks to" and "instructs" the Arduino.
Participants were seated around a studio table, each using a separate laptop with a pre-configured Arduino IDE.
The girls followed tutorials- printouts compiled by the volunteers, to write, verify and load Arduino code onto the LilyPad.
Using a template to blink a single LED, participants programmed multiple LEDs to blink in sequence.
Next, the girls used another program sketch to look at values from a light sensor, experimenting with how their gestures and different light settings in the room resulted in higher and lower readings.
Participant presenting her design  and sweatshirt design with all pin connections drawn in .
V1: And is it ok to say bad ideas or silly ideas or crazy ideas?
P3: Cause they might compare it... and it might turn into something good.
Although each person worked independently, the girls tended to discuss and experiment with each other's projects.
For instance, one girl asked to turn off studio lights to cause another participant's LEDs to blink; several participants waved  over another girls' project to make LEDs turn on, etc.
Although we initially expected the programming session to be the most difficult and perhaps least exciting, the girls maintained interest and completed all exercises.
Unlike the first session, during which the girls were physically seated with the staff members from Gwen's girls, who repeatedly told them to "pay attention!"
The girls shared a large table, interacting only with each other and the volunteers during the session.
A staff member later told us:
Participants became increasingly more curious about how their code translated into tangible LED and sensor behavior.
They asked many questions about the LilyPad: "So is  going to remember it and keep going on?".
The girls were also intrigued about why hand gestures affected sensor values .
At the end of the session, we prompted the girls for feedback 
Participants told us that they were excited to be able to control physical objects  in software: " the light  faster".
Conversely, they disliked "when it didn't light up", due to programming or connection errors.
To help structure and facilitate ideation, we first asked participants choose an item they wanted to modify into a LilyPad project by selecting from a range of printed images, including t-shirts, sweatshirts, belts, purses, teddy bears, shoes, hats and more.
Participants were also given pieces of paper  with images of various electronic components: LEDs, temperature sensors, light sensors, buttons, Arduino, battery, etc.
The girls used a whiteboard and magnets to arrange and attach  components to the item they chose for their project .
While they were eager to visually arrange the parts on the poster, they struggled to articulate the ideas  behind their projects.
Workshop volunteers helped each participant finalize and present their design concept to the group, as illustrated in a session excerpt below:
P6: This is the sensor.
V1: Heat, ok. P6: And this is a button, and the LilyPad goes in here.
P6: Oh what happens when it get hot?
Oh, they all gonna turn on...  V1: What happens, do they flash?
Do they all turn on?
We began by reviewing ideas from the previous sessions.
The girls remembered basic concepts, for instance, "we connected the wires to the light thing and made it light" or, "always connect the positive to plus and the minus to the minus."
Participants also recognized the LilyPad as the `brain' that can `talk to' sensors and LEDs 
Having established a base for using LilyPad components, the third session focused on brainstorming and designing a final project.
Participants were not familiar with `brainstorming', and were not sure how to share their ideas:
Participants were attentive and applauded  after each presentation, despite the back-and-forth dialogue between the workshop volunteers and presenter.
The girls were encouraged to comment or suggest improvements .
For instance, after one presentation a girl commented:
During these final sessions, participants worked on their projects.
Each girl brought in a personal item 
The posters  they made earlier were available around the studio, and participants used them to arrange all hardware parts on their item.
Fabric glue secured components in place while the girls sewed  pins with conductive thread.
Sewing was the most time-intensive activity, as it was still new to the girls, complicated by having to avoid overlaps between thread .
Volunteers assisted with sewing and coated threads with hot glue to avoid shorts.
While working with hardware, participants continued to iterate on their designs based on perceived amounts of work and time required to complete the projects, as well as part constraints.
For instance, in the following excerpt, a participant responds to the lack of an accelerometer by brainstorming alternative project behavior:
P2: It's going to light up when I trigger motion.
V1: How are we going to do that?
P2: I have no idea.
V1: Do we have an accelerometer?
You may not be able to do motion.
We have light and temperature sensors that are easy to do.
P2: Okay, so when it's hot it will light up.
V3: You might want to ...  a button that lights the LEDs.
And then I'll be here next year then if we have time next year, I'll come back and do .
Although participants were initially unsure how to begin their projects, they became increasingly more focused once parts of their projects were working.
While components and tools were laid out and available during all sessions, session 5  was the only session initiated by the girls themselves, who entered the studio and immediately began working with the materials.
Throughout sessions 4 and 5, participants tended to ask clarification questions about sewing, electrical connections, and programming, as well as the various gadgets they explored around our lab .
Once all components were attached and connected, participants worked with workshop volunteers to write their Arduino program.
Similar to session 3, the girls at first struggled to articulate the behavior they wanted to translate into code.
Prompting about specific scenarios helped participants communicate and program their ideas:
We returned to Gwen's Girls a week later, to conduct a group interview with the girls and individual interviews with staff members.
The girls were asked to identify interesting, difficult, fun, boring, etc.
In this activity the girls collectively selected cards containing images corresponding to activities such as sewing, circuits, programming, design, and others.
Only one participant was enthusiastic to work on more wearable computing projects, while the others remained unsure.
One girl told us the sessions changed her attitude towards technology as she realized: "I can do more things on the computer than just download things" , and another said she would be interested to "take a computer apart" .
Three participants agreed that they liked having a finished project, showing their work to their friends, other staff members, siblings or parents/guardians.
One girl told us she liked "connecting everything together, to see how it works", and another enjoyed "seeing other projects made me wanna do something similar to see how fun it would look."
A staff member also observed the girls discussing their projects outside of the workshops:
The staff were positive about our workshops, because sessions were framed as a "craft project that teaches them about electricity"; exposed the girls to "doing something different and challenging"; and provided an opportunity to introduce the girls to our college campus .
Prior LilyPad workshops for children tend to emphasize `the practice of education and children's crafts'  and adopt the rhetoric of `introducing electronics to children' .
Although technical learning was an outcome, the novelty of our work stems from the LilyPad being a point of engagement and boundary object between that at-risk children and HCI researchers.
One participant was particularly unhappy because her final project did not turn out as she intended .
All participants agreed that while sewing was "pretty fun" at first, it became "tiring", "boring" and even "annoying" towards the last session.
The design session was considered most difficult, as one girl explained "designing... it takes a lot of effort to find out how you gonna do it", and another participant agreed: "yea cause its hard to think of... things".
When asked to compare the paper prototyping session to arts and crafts- the most liked activity at Gwen's Girls, participants pointed out the latter was easier:
The majority of ongoing LilyPad research engages with children who are already interested in the subject, for instance recruiting children from a program "in which students pay to participate in science-related classes" .
In contrast, our participants are from complex families and economic backgrounds that render them unable to "pay to participate".
At-risk children tend to be untrusting, uncooperative and unengaged in educational activities, and thus widely overlooked by HCI research.
We faced several key difficulties, including participants' lack of initial motivation, inability to articulate ideas and withdrawal from non-hands-on activities, which highlight unique challenges largely unaddressed in prior research.
While our brainstorming session was structured by component constraints, the girls were not asked to design for a specific task, as they often were in craft sessions:
Our participants initially struggled to articulate project ideas and this challenge seems unexplored by prior LilyPad workshops .
The paper prototyping session of our workshop offers a novel contribution for supporting ideation among children.
Our participants, who were often unable to verbalize the desired behavior of their projects, effectively expressed ideas through tangible placement and drawing of paper parts.
The use of glue, markers and paper to simulate electronics helped participants adopt sensors, LEDs, etc.
While our workshops were not evaluated as art therapy sessions, we draw parallels between related literature and our work.
Art therapy is motivated by the idea that humans may struggle to express emotions and desires within the range of verbal and written language .
We encountered this phenomenon throughout our sessions, especially when our participants were challenged by verbal ideation.
Our workshops enabled participants to successfully express ideas through paper prototyping and the physical arrangement of paper and electronic parts, fabrics and materials.
The items made by the girls, ranging from small artifacts  to larger-scale final projects 
While we leveraged these items as materials to showcase basic electronic concepts, participants used them to showcase personal ideas and skills.
Our workshops facilitated this process through a bottom-up teaching style, by minimizing the conventional student-instructor power structure.
Our participants are not enthusiastic about group  lessons.
However, they do like interacting with the other girls in the group, for instance, by listening to each others' design presentations or exploring projects made by friends.
During our workshops, we too tried to assume the role of peers, assisting  rather than directing the girls.
Participants ideated open-ended LilyPad projects, constrained by components rather than appearance, function or intent.
During sessions 4 and 5, participants continued to `brainstorm' and problem-solve, albeit unwittingly, redesigning their projects as they navigated time, skill, and component constraints.
From altering layouts of LEDs, to changing project behavior due to absence of parts, participants took control and ownership of their work.
By asking rather than telling the girls how their projects should function, we helped create instantiations of what they considered to be their ideas and their work.
As `active participants', the girls were in control and consequently "proud of what they had made", sharing their projects with friends, families and other staff members.
We see parallels between this use of space during art therapy and our arrangement of the room as inspired by design studio culture literature.
The persistence, availability and accessibility of materials throughout all sessions  enabled the girls to take charge of their projects, especially during the last session.
Our participants prefer activities that take them away from their routine space .
The workshops served as a productive change of context, exposing the girls not only to our studio but also to a college campus- a setting that, as a staff member explained, they may not "want to" or be able to experience otherwise.
During the first session, the girls were `thrown' into a new space, filled with unknown objects and unfamiliar people.
With their `walls put up', they appeared to be estranged, introverted, and unengaged.
However, the following week, they returned to a semi-familiar space and session 2 altered a routine power structure by separating participants from staff members and placing the focus on them, "making it their project and their time" .
At the same time, the setting did not isolate participants from each other.
As they completed individual tasks in a group setting, participants were inspired to discuss and experiment with each other's work.
As sessions progressed, participants became more comfortable with the space, exploring surrounding objects and materials, such as soldering irons and inductors.
In this increasingly familiar context, researchers themselves became familiar; participants frequently initiated questions about our backgrounds, pets, and everyday interests.
However, when we later returned to Gwen's Girls for our follow-up interview, it seemed as though we were strangers: intruding on their routine space we initiated an unfamiliar activity- the semi-formal interview and card sorting.
Consequently, participants were shy, uncooperative and unsure about working on wearable computing projects in the future.
As staff members previously pointed out, our participants are a marginal, low-income, and at-risk population who inherently have "a lot of walls put up".
With craft and gardening being our participants' favorite activities, we see hands-on making as a core approach for engaging with this population.
During our workshops, the girls' visible enthusiasm for physically connecting LEDs to batteries, gluing, drawing and attaching components during brainstorming,  sewing, and finally showing off their finished projects suggest beneficial `physical involvement'  with LilyPad components.
Participants' ability to create functional projects appeared to openly impact their moods and attitudes.
Unfortunately, time limitations necessitated workshop volunteers to troubleshoot the majority of electronic shorts and programming bugs.
However, our participants' enthusiasm and ability to resolve problems such as time, skill, and part constraints suggest a design space for new methods that involve participants in software and hardware troubleshooting.
Similar to participants' experiences of empowerment through creating working projects, novel ways to enable independent fixing of technical issues could contribute to a sense of accomplishment as well as problem-solving skills and technical knowledge.
More generally, there appears to be space for developing creative and intuitive troubleshooting techniques to fluidly empower this population to resolve technical problems.
For example, one instantiation could involve mystery games asking participants to design circuits with shorts and having peers `track down' the problems, or conducting code walk- through exercises with a voltmeter.
By importing design studio culture, focusing on hands-on making and empowering participants to create and own their projects, we were able to gain trust and `put down walls' between us  and a complex `at-risk' population.
Future work can pursue this approach on a broader scale, leveraging the LilyPad to break boundaries, subvert power structures and engage HCI research with overlooked, underprivileged and marginal populations.
We presented wearable computing as an approach for engaging HCI research with a community of `at-risk' children.
Our workshops imported ideas from design studio culture, enabling participants to freely access a range of materials and work on personal projects in a shared studio space.
We leverage our findings and ideas from art therapy to propose wearable electronics as creative materials that can motivate learning, problem-solving and expressive hands-on making.
We hope that our work inspires future efforts that mentor and `break boundaries' through the use of tangible media such as the LilyPad Arduino.
Art therapy leverages creative materials such as markers, paints, clays, etc., to facilitate expressive, meaningful and, in some cases, therapeutic "physical involvement".
Our workshops were not explicitly modeled to be art therapy sessions.
Nevertheless, there appears to be a parallel between participants' use of wearable components and what could be considered conventional craft materials: participants adopted LEDs, sensors and Arduino's as materials to be aesthetically arranged, physically attached, and creatively controlled.
The greatest challenge appeared to stem not from manipulating  tangible parts, but from articulating their behaviors.
This apparent disconnect between physical components 
Stop-motion videos, storyboards, and reenactments can enable children to create and explore concrete representations of the embedded interactions they imagine and desire.
More broadly, materializing aspects of ideation could open significant opportunities to increase "physical involvement".
This direction could catalyze future collaborations with art therapy researchers to collectively explore wearable computing as a new and tangible medium for externalizing, channeling and expressing emotions.
We thank Gwen's Girls for their participation, feedback and the heartwarming insights.
We also thank Jennifer Marlow and Stephen Oney for volunteering during the workshops, and Will Odom and our anonymous reviewers for their time and help with this paper.
Partial support for this work was provided by the Vira I. Heinz Endowment.
The Iterative Design of a Virtual Design Studio.
Techtrends: A Journal of the Association for Educational Communications and Technology.
Supporting design studio culture in HCI.
The LilyPad Arduino: Toward Wearable Engineering for Everyone.
The LilyPad Arduino: Using Computational Textiles to Investigate Engagement, Aesthetics, and Diversity in Computer Science Education.
In Interaction Design and Children , June 2006.
LilyPad in the Wild: How Hardware's Long Tail is Supporting New Engineering and Design Communities.
Engaging with with Computer Science through Magic Shows.
Robots for kids: Exploring new technologies for learning.
Pervasive Fabrication: Making Construction Ubiquitous in Education.
Exposing middle school girls to programming via creative tools.
Hill, A. M. "Problem Solving in Real-Life Contexts: An Alternative for Design in Technology Education."
International Journal of Technology and Design Education.
B., Peppler, K. A., Chapman, R. N. "The Computer Clubhouse: Constructionism and Creativity in Youth Communities".
Katterfeldt, E., Dittert, N., Schelhowe.
EduWear: smart textiles as ways of relating computing technology to everyday life.
Interaction Design and Children .
An Exploratory Study of Unsupervised Mobile Learning in Rural India.
Kozlowska, K., Hanney, L. An Art Therapy Group for Children Traumatized by Parental Violence and Separation.
Kvan, T., Jia, Y., Students' learning styles and their correlation with performance in architectural design studio, Design Studies, Volume 26, Issue 1, January 2005 20.
Lomas, D., Douglass, J., & Rehn, D. Playpower: Radically Affordable Computer-Aided Learning with $12 TVComputers.
Hands-on, simulated, and remote laboratories: A comparative literature review.
Design and evaluation of a computer science and engineering course for middle school girls.
At-risk youth: Definitions, dimensions and relationships.
Mcgrath, B.. "Partners in Learning: Twelve Ways Technology Changes the Teacher-Student Relationship."
T EH Journal , Vol.
The TeeBoard: an education-friendly construction platform for e-textiles and wearable computing.
Robot Diaries: Creative Technology Fluency for Middle School Girls.
In IEEE Robotics and Autonomous Systems.
Paris, S. G., Yambor, K. M., and Packard, B. W. "Hands-On Biology: A Museum-School-University Partnership for Enhancing Students' Interest and Learning in Science" The Elementary School Journal.
Mindstorms: Children, Computers, and Powerful Ideas.
Algebra for all: The role of technology and constructivism in an algebra course for at-risk students.
Resnick, M. Computer as Paintbrush: Technology, Play, and the Creative Society.
In Play = Learning: How play motivates and enhances children's cognitive and social-emotional growth.
Sowing the seeds for a more creative society.
International Society for Technology in Education 35.
The Design Studio: An Exploration of Its Traditions and Potentials.
Intl Specialized Book Service 39.
Art Therapy in Theory & Practice.
Magnolia Street Publishers, Chicago, IL, USA 1996.
U.S. Department of Commerce Economics and Statistics Administration.
U.S. Census Bureau, Population Division  At Risk Conditions of U.S. School-age children.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
Adoption and Foster Care Analysis and Reporting System FY 2009 data.
Art Therapy for Children: How it Leads to Change.
Clinical Child Psychology & Psychiatry, Vol.11 45.
Group interactive art therapy: its use in training and treatment.
