Much more research is needed to understand human performance in learning and using virtual keyboards.
The invention of typewriting with physical keyboards is often credited to Christopher L. Sholes, Carlos Glidden and Samuel Soule in 1867 .
Many years after the typewriter invention, L.V.
Longley and F. E. McFurrin discovered touch-typing  in the 1880s, but it was not widely adopted by training schools until about 1915 .
Systematic study of human performance in typewriting and optimizing the keyboard layout accordingly happened even later, with the best known example being the Dvorak study and layout .
In comparison to over 130 years of research on typewriting with a physical keyboard, research on writing with virtual keyboards is merely in its infancy.
In that context, this study set out to advance our understanding of some of the most basic research issues in virtual keyboarding.
In a ten-session experiment, six participants practiced typing with an expanding rehearsal method on an optimized virtual keyboard.
Based on a large amount of in-situ performance data, this paper reports the following findings.
First, the Fitts-digraph movement efficiency model of virtual keyboards is revised.
The format and parameters of Fitts' law used previously in virtual keyboards research were incorrect.
Second, performance limit predictions of various layouts are calculated with the new model.
Third, learning with expanding rehearsal intervals for maximum memory benefits is effective, but many improvements of the training algorithm used can be made in the future.
Finally, increased visual load when typing previously practiced text did not significantly change users' performance at this stage of learning, but typing unpracticed text did have a performance effect, suggesting a certain degree of text specific learning when typing on virtual keyboards.
The increasing importance of mobile or handheld devices calls for research on effective text entry interfaces on these devices.
In response, stylus based virtual keyboards have recently received increasing attention in the research literature .
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
The first issue goes back to a central and a most intensively studied concept - the upper speed limit of typing with virtual keyboards.
After all, it is the premise of high speed potential that has attracted researchers' interest in virtual keyboards in comparison to other techniques such as handwriting.
In other words, the time to move the tapping stylus from one key i 1 to another j depends on the distance between the two  and the size of key j .
IP is the Fitts' index of performance .
The mean time to tap from one key to another should be the weighted average between all pairs of letters, i.e.
Assuming 5 characters per word , this equation allows us to calculate tapping speed in words per minute  on various virtual keyboard layouts.
Table 1 summarizes the results of such a calculation on a few known layouts.
Performance estimates of expert users with various virtual keyboard layouts 
Table 1, even if we only choose the modest range of IP values , the highest speed prediction can vary from 43 to 70 wpm.
Is 70 wpm really achievable?
Regrettably, the Fitts' law parameters have never been measured empirically in the context of virtual keyboarding.
This is not surprising given the difficulty of separating virtual keyboard tapping movement time from the time spent on visual search and other higher-level cognitive processes, especially with novice participants.
Experimentation with multiple subjects over an extended period of time without significant interruption is laborious and logistically difficult.
However, unlike the typical Fitts' law experiment, virtual keyboard "targets" are tightly packed together and tapping on keys are not done in a reciprocal fashion.
Testing the validity of Fitts' law and empirically measuring its parameters in the context of virtual keyboarding, therefore, are imperative to virtual keyboard research and hence one objective of the current study.
Second, there has not been much research on the learning process of getting to the predicted potential speed of a virtual keyboard.
In fact the only published longitudinal study on a virtual keyboard is by MacKenzie and Zhang , which reported the learning curves of two virtual keyboard layouts, QWERTY and OPTI, from an experiment in which participants practiced text entry on the two keyboards for twenty 45-minute sessions.
Users reached an average of 44.3 wpm performance at the end of 20 sessions on the OPTI layout.
The curve of learning a new virtual keyboard  was regressed to the equation of power law of learning: speed = 17.2 N 0.3219 , where N is the session number.
In fact equation  was used as the so-called "Fitts-digraph energy" function in the simulated annealing optimization of the Metropolis and the ATOMIK layouts  .
While the overall validity of Fitts' law for tapping tasks has been proven repeatedly by a vast literature, there is a wide range of values of the Fitts' law parameters a and b reported in the literature.
For example, IP  has been reported as low as 4.9 bits per second  by MacKenzie, Sellen & Buxton , and as high as 12 bps By Fitts .
As the Fitts' law parameters change, the movement speed limit on virtual keyboards change dramatically.
Virtual keyboard learning curves reported by MacKenzie and Zhang in , reproduced with permission.
While the empirical data reported by MacKenzie and Zhang are extremely valuable, their results may not be completely conclusive or generalizable, and more research is needed for the following reasons.
First, the experiment was conducted in a within subject design.
Each subject practiced and tested on both layouts.
It is unclear how the skills may or may not have transferred between the conditions.
For example the ability to quickly visually locate the keys learned in one layout could be used in another.
The transfer could also be negative, if the memories of the two layouts interfere with each other.
Second, their training  is conducted in a relatively small set of  short and memorable sentences.
It is unclear to what extent the participants' performance achieved was specific to that small and closed text corpus.
We are also interested in applying various methods of skill acquisition established in psychological research.
Given that learning virtual keyboarding likely involves memory, we decided to apply the method of repetition with expanding rehearsal interval, which is well known in memory research .
Expanding rehearsal has been hailed as evidence that runs sufficiently counter to Neisser's "law2 " by Baddeley .
Briefly, the expanding rehearsal method suggests that trial repetitions for skill acquisition should be neither totally massed nor totally distributed.
Rather, they should be optimized by systematically increasing the interval between repetitions.
For example, a good way to learn a new foreign word is to rehearse the word frequently at first and gradually reduce the frequency of rehearsal as it becomes better memorized.
This method seems to be well suited for learning graphical keyboards.
The Metropolis keyboard, adapted from Zhai, Hunter & Smith  interval.
The interval for each item was increased only when the participant learned the item well enough to type it without spending a significant portion of the total typing time searching for the keys.
This was judged by the algorithm with a Fitts' law prediction of the time needed to tap all the letters within that item.
If the typing time was within Fitts' law prediction plus 50% tolerance, the item was judged as being learned by the participant and the practice interval increased.
If the participant took much longer to type the item, an error trial was registered and the item was immediately repeated.
If the participant typed the item within Fitts' law prediction the second time, the rehearsal interval for the item remained unchanged.
If it took more than two trials to type the item successfully, the rehearsal interval for the item was decreased.
With this ERI algorithm, the better an item was learned the longer the time until that item was presented for further practice, and the sooner new digraphs and words were added to the training list.
Although secondary, we are also interested in the following two issues regarding test conditions used in studying virtual keyboards.
First, virtual keyboarding is visually guided thus requires visual attention.
In typical virtual keyboard experiments this attention must compete with the need to look away from the keyboard in order to read the test sentence to be typed.
How much performance is gained if the test sentences are also voiced to the participants?
Secondly, what is the performance difference between sentences participants have and have not typed before?
This will give us some clues about how text specific virtual keyboarding skills are.
With these research questions in mind, we conducted the following experiment.
Each experimental session consisted of a 40 minute training phase and one or more 5 minute typing tests.
In the training phase participants typed text items on a virtual keyboard, including letters, digraphs  or common words, as determined by an expanding rehearsal interval  algorithm.
The algorithm scheduled the reappearance of each training item  with a gradually increasing Neisser's "law" - If X is an important or interesting feature of human behavior then X has rarely been studied by psychologists  .
We used the Metropolis layout in this experiment .
Similar to the structure of a molecule, the locations of the "atoms", i.e.
Tapping the Wacom stylus on the tablet generated a mouse click in the corresponding position on the computer screen.
Our training program presented text to be typed and a graphical keyboard in a window on the computer screen.
A printout of the graphical keyboard was sized and positioned on the Wacom tablet so as to map to its onscreen counterpart.
Six graduate internship students, two female, four male, participated in the experiment.
All were right handed in using the pen.
They were fluent in reading and writing English although for some participants, English was not their native language.
None of the participants had seen the keyboard before this study.
Each of the 10 sessions consisted of 40 minutes of practice followed by a five-minute test, with slight differences for sessions 1 and 10 .
Before each session, participants were encouraged to position the computer, tablet, and chair in the most comfortable configuration.
One participant put the tablet on top of the ThinkPad keyboard so the computer screen would be closer and more easily viewed.
During the practice session, the training program both displayed on the screen and voiced the digitally recorded text, allowing participants to maintain visual focus on the keyboard instead of the computer screen.
Tapping on a correct key produced a beep, briefly highlighted the corresponding onscreen key, and removed the character from the text display.
Tapping the wrong key produced an error sound.
The x-y coordinates and time stamp of every tap was recorded.
Examples of practice digraphs and words include the following: th, he, or, at, er, an, in, nd, ic, ng, the, for, that, and, said, with, there, but, has, over, into, percent, equal, size, just, about.
The procedure for the test was the same as for training except that text consisted of a set of complete sentences randomly selected from news.
Participants were asked to type as quickly and accurately as possible for the test.
A new sentence would appear in the text display after the period of the current sentence was typed.
The first session included an initial test before any learning took place to establish baseline novice performance.
Participants were also videotaped during these last three tests to capture their hand movement during the voiced test and their eye gaze during the non-voiced tests.
The normal test sentences were randomly selected from news with slight editing: The blaze was not threatening any structures and would not do so as long as it continued moving north fire officials said.
IBM is the first and the one that carries the most impact.
There is a tremendous statement there about the universality of man.
But the race is considered wide open particularly because John Paul has outlived many cardinals seen as possibilities.
Rival fans tossed chairs and bottles after a night of violence in the hours before a title game between Turkey and England.
He picked up a slice of turkey with his chopsticks swirled it in the broth and put it on my plate.
I asked Mr Takayama whether it was a slow night and he shrugged saying two parties were coming the next night.
A metallic jersey tube dress had the sides opened up almost to the armpits with dipping pointed panels front and back.
Before we study the fitness and parameters of Fitts' law in virtual keyboarding, it is informative to first investigate the distribution of the stylus hit points on the keys.
Given the signal to noise ratio analogy of Fitts' tapping task, it is surprising that the distribution of the hit points have rarely been reported empirically.
We analyzed the hit points from the test data of all subjects for all days after the first day.
Figure 3 shows the 2D overview of the hit points over the keyboard.
As we can see, the clusters of hits on the keyboard are clearly separated by the boundaries between the keys.
Figure 4 shows a 3D perspective view of the hit points.
Due to the optimization effect of the Metropolis layout, keys in the center had more hits than the ones on the outside, despite the relatively small set of random text used in the tests.
Combining all key distributions together to make an "average" key, after normalization by total hits on each key, Figures 5 shows the X and Y 1D plots of the hit point distribution.
Keys in the center, such as the space key, follow the same shape of distribution .
However, hit points on keys on the far right of the keyboard, e.g.
Because participants used their right hand to hold the stylus, resting the heel of that hand on the tablet, we think this shift is due to participants minimizing the effort needed to tap a key close to the heel of their tapping hand but more research is required to verify this.
In other words, movements in virtual keyboarding follow Fitts' law quite well , but the parameters of Fitts' law are very different from those of previous virtual keyboard performance models and estimates.
Fitts' law regression of training taps With the Fitts' law regression results based on in-situ data of virtual keyboarding, we can now finally put the modeling of virtual keyboard movement efficiency on firmer, empirical ground.
The revised performance estimate numbers in Table 2 are lower, although not by much, than the final performance data reported by MacKenzie and Zhang  on the OPTI keyboard and QWERTY keyboards.
This could mean either the participants in MacKenzie's and Zhang's study were faster than ours on average, or there is a significant nonmovement  time modeled into our Fitts' law estimation.
It is unlikely, however, that even expert level users will need less visual cognitive time in natural typing than in our training sessions.
Note that model  should not be layout dependent because the Fitts' law parameters measured in the study were based on digraph movement data of many words across all keys, aggregated by between-key distance.
Note also this revision of the model does not change the optimization process of virtual keyboard layout, because the revision does not change the relative contributions from the between-key distances.
This means that the previous estimates of virtual keyboard performance were all incorrect  .
They typically assumed the intercept of Fitts' law  to be zero , and the slope  to be from 4.9 to 12 bps.
With the above based on in-situ empirical data, we no longer have to guess the Fitts' law parameters with uncertainty.
Table 2 shows the revised estimates of various layouts with this new model.
Note that the performance numbers are not very different from previous estimates at IP = 4.9, but the theoretical assumptions and practical reliability and confidence of these estimates are greatly improved.
Due to the non-zero constant a in Fitts' law, which is independent of movement distance, and the increased IP, the layout  optimization effect of virtual keyboarding is somewhat reduced.
Overall the data points measured in this study are very similar to  those reported in , despite the qualitative differences in learning method , keyboard layout , session duration , skill transfer , test text used , and error handing  between the two studies, as outlined earlier in this paper.
Whether such a learning curve is fundamentally consistent regardless of the conditions calls for further research.
Participants gave various comments on the ERI training program used in this experiment.
While the overall approach was felt effective, many improvements were asked for.
First, participants felt the training was too repetitive because they had to restart their practice without carrying over the states of the training items from the previous day.
Second, they quickly became bored with digraph training, preferring to train on words only.
Third, they found the expansion coefficient, currently set at 1.68, not aggressive enough.
Future research needs to incorporate these changes to test the ultimate power of the expanding rehearsal method.
On the last day of the experiment, two more tests were conducted with different conditions to investigate some secondary but interesting issues in virtual keyboarding.
One test used the normal sentence set but removed voicing, so the participants were forced to look away from the Wacom tablet to the onscreen text display.
The other test used new text participants had not seen before.
Figure 11 shows the difference between these two conditions and the standard test condition .
There was no significant difference between the voiced and the unvoiced, familiar text conditions , suggesting that at least at this speed  and this stage of learning , visual attention when typing familiar phrases is not a major limiting factor.
Interestingly, participants were much slower with new text they had never seen or typed before , suggesting at least part of the typing skills at this stage depended on how familiar and well practiced they were with the testing text.
This also suggests that open  rather than a closed limited number of sentences should be used in future virtual keyboard tests to reflect practically meaningful performance scores.
Virtual keyboard research is still in its infancy, compared to research on typewriting with physical keyboards.
There have been many basic issues that were not addressed in a sound fashion, if addressed at all on virtual keyboarding.
Results in this exploratory study began to consolidate data and views in the literature and hopefully point future research in this area in productive directions.
Through micro hit point distribution discovery as well as regression analyses, we found that Fitts' law indeed holds for the movements in virtual keyboarding.
However, the Fitts' law parameters are very different from what has been believed and used in the virtual keyboard literature - the intercept of Fitts' law is not zero and the index of performance is 7.9 bps.
Based on these results we revised the Fitts-digraph model of virtual keyboards, the very foundation of much of the virtual keyboard literature.
We gave more realistic and reliable performance estimates of various virtual keyboard layouts.
We found that practicing with an expanding rehearsal memory method is effective although many improvements can be made to our current program, such as reducing digraph training.
Participants' typing performance in this experiment progressed along a power law curve from 11.6 wpm to 31 wpm at the end of 10 sessions.
We also found that visual attention was not a performancelimiting factor using familiar text at this stage and speed.
Our results also suggest that open text should be used in future tests of virtual keyboarding performance.
Baddeley, Human Memory - Theory and Practice.
Cognitive aspects of skilled typewriting.
Fitts, P.M., The information capacity of the human motor system in controlling the amplitude of movement.
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1954.
Getschow, C.O., M.J. Rosen, and GoodenoughTrepagnier.
A systematic approach to design a minimum distance alphabetical keyboard.
Development of a Digram-Based Typing Key Layout for Single-Finger/Stylus Input.
MacKenzie, I.S., Fitts' law as a research and design tool in human computer interaction.
A comparison of input devices in elemental pointing and dragging tasks.
The design and evaluation of a high-performance soft keyboard.
Neisser, U., Memory: What are the important questions?, in Practical aspects of memory, M.M.
Jacko, J. Chu, and F. Moro, The role of visual search in the design of effective soft keyboards.
Behaviour and Information Technology, 2001.
Optimised Virtual Keyboards with and without Alphabetical Ordering - A Novice User Study.
MacKenzie, Theoretical upper and lower bounds on typing speeds using a stylus and keyboard,.
Behaviour & Information Technology, 1995.
Yamada, H., A historical study of typewriters and typing methods: from the position of planning Japanese parallels.
Journal of Information Processing, 1980.
The Metropolis Keyboard - an exploration of quantitative techniques for virtual keyboard design.
Smith, and M. Hunter, Performance Optimization of Virtual Keyboards.
