Existing electronic navigation applications deliver information mainly through the visual and audio channels, however, there are many situations where a user's visual and auditory capacities are limited or subject to ambient interference.
For example, firemen working in a burning building may have their vision impaired by smoke and their hearing may be overwhelmed by noise.
Presenting navigation information via the tactile sense may be an effective alternative or complement to visual and auditory displays in such situations .
Research has shown that tactile navigation displays help improve navigation performance, target detection and situation awareness in many operational settings, such as aircraft piloting , vehicular driving , boat driving , pedestrian navigation , situation awareness , and alerts for command decision making .
According to May et al.
Direction plays a significant part in navigation completion while landmarks help in building spatial knowledge of the surroundings.
We did not investigate distance in this study partly because "approaching" feedback does not make sense in the lab setting and, following a more general principle, where there is a large number of factors with potential influence it is often necessary to tease them out in a series of studies, as we have done.
Here, we focus on direction and landmark recognition.
Distance is a factor in our current field trials but it is worth noting that May et al.
In tactile-based pedestrian navigation systems, directional information is presented as tactile icons, i.e.
Wearable tactile navigation displays may provide an alternative or complement to mobile visual navigation displays.
Landmark information may provide a useful complement to directional information for navigation, however, there has been no reported use of landmark information in tactile navigation displays.
We report a study that compared two tactile display techniques for landmark representation using one or two actuators respectively.
The single-actuator technique generated different vibration patterns on a single actuator to represent different landmarks.
The dual-actuator technique generated a single vibration pattern using two simultaneous actuators and different pairs of actuators around the body represented different landmarks.
We compared the two techniques on four measures: distinguishability, learnability, short term memorability and user preference.
Results showed that users performed equally well when either technique was used to represent landmarks alone.
However, when landmark representations were presented together with directional signals, performance with the single-actuator technique was significantly reduced while performance with the dual-actuator technique remained unchanged.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
This paper reports the evaluation of tactile landmark representation techniques that could work effectively in combination with tactile directional representation techniques that we have previously shown to be effective .
The representation of landmarks is even more challenging.
Landmarks can be any objects or places on routes that are stationary, distinct and salient .
If we were to map landmarks using a symbolic approach, appropriate metaphors would require investigation.
For example, it might be possible to draw on a shape metaphor, with each landmark signal represented by a simplified form of its shape.
In addition, the numerous landmarks studied in research projects and used in commercial systems are not systematically classified, are highly diverse and are often poorly differentiated.
As a result, signal patterns for landmarks and their meaning associations are effectively arbitrary.
All these constraints suggest an abstract approach to extending our tactile directional representation technique to include the tactile representation of landmarks.
The design challenges also include the creation of a usable set of tactile icons to be displayed on a device when rendering size is limited  and human tactile perception capacity is restricted .
An approach to the tactile representation of landmarks therefore requires two steps: the identification of a limited set of appropriate landmarks and the selection of appropriate representation techniques.
The number of unique landmarks that could be represented is very large but both Chan et al.
In a previous study , we identified a small set of important and generalisable landmark types based on particular navigational purposes proposed by Sorrow and Hirtle : commuting , questing , and exploring the area.
We use that set here.
To create a distinguishable and learnable set of abstract tactile stimuli, researchers  have suggested that a technique that manipulates tactile signal duration on a single actuator to create a variety of rhythms provides effective results.
In this study, we employed the heuristic tactile rhythms proposed by Ternes and MacLean .
Another technique that may help the users of a tactile navigation system distinguish direction from landmark signals is to introduce discontinuity.
Having motivated our objective of investigating representations of direction and landmark type with the waist belt, a technique to introduce discontinuity had to be localised to the waist area.
Since any directional signal is generated on one actuator, discontinuity may be achieved by increasing the number of contact points on the body , e.g.
In addition, it is large enough to accommodate multiple-location tactile perception compared to other areas such as the wrists, legs and head.
In previous studies , we showed that a wearable device in the form of a waist belt using an point vibration technique to represent directions provided very effective tactile representation of directions for navigation tasks.
This paper investigates the effectiveness of combining this technique with complementary tactile landmark representation techniques.
As we aimed to develop a tactile navigation display that can provide directional and landmark information, the chosen techniques to represent landmarks must work effectively and be distinguishable from a tactile technique used to represent directions.
For this study, we drew on tactile display design frameworks  for general guidelines and suggestions; an absolute point vibration technique  for the design of directional signals; and the heuristic tactile rhythms  for the design of landmark signals.
In addition, we assume that the use of tactile displays follows the information processing loop of the Prenav model, consisting of the processes of sensation-perceptiondecision-action .
There are two main approaches to creating informative tactile stimuli: the abstract and symbolic approaches .
Abstract representation focuses on manipulating a stimulus' characteristics, whereas the symbolic approach focuses on the semantic association of stimuli with known metaphors.
For example, MacLean et al.
In this paper, we refer to the two techniques as the single-actuator and dual-actuator techniques respectively.
Both techniques for tactile representation of landmarks were presented alone and together with tactile directional signals.
The tactile display took the form of a waist belt with embedded actuators.
For the set of landmarks we drew on our previous research .
This research suggested that the most suitable small set of landmarks for our prototype tactile landmark representation should be: mall and market, religious place, tourist attraction, public transportation, bridge, monument and memorial, and railway station.
These findings corroborated the results of previous research suggesting that there are some generic landmarks that will be appropriate across different environments .
To represent directions, we used an established technique, generating an absolute vibration in a corresponding location on the user's body .
We evaluated novel tactile representation techniques for the landmarks, both alone and in combination with the directional signals.
The main equipment for our experiment consisted of controllers, motors, and an associated switch circuit.
The main controller unit was built using two 0/16/16 interface kit controllers, manufactured by Phidgets .
The actuators were 1 cm in diameter, which was small enough to be easily embedded in clothing.
The motors were connected to the controller's digital output channels.
Motor vibration was powered by a 6v battery and controlled by an additional custom-built controller switch.
The prototype was connected to an HP Compaq tablet PC via a USB port.
The control software was written using the programming language Java under the Microsoft Windows environment.
When the control switch and interface controllers received an input from the tablet PC, corresponding tactile stimuli patterns were generated.
The system performed this by turning the output channels of the interface controllers on and off very quickly.
The wearable device consisted of 8 actuators mounted in a waist belt .
It was worn around the participant's waist over light clothing.
For the single-actuator technique, we used a set of tactile stimuli proposed by Ternes and McLean .
They were designed by using eliminative heuristics and constraints, a principled validation methodology based on perceptual optimization .
They have been systematically designed, tested and proved to be perceptible and distinguishable.
Each signal in a set contains different note length and evenness.
Rhythm is defined as a repeated monotone pattern of variable-length notes, arranged relative to a beat  and played at a set tempo, manipulated by changing the length, number, or gaps between notes .
Essential elements of the heuristics are that signals:  are monotone,  have a gap between successive notes,  have 2 second duration,  contain repetitions, and  to be perceivable must last at least 1/16 of the 500 ms interval  plus the same-length break; this signal is called an `eighth'  note.
Each note length includes a 62.5 ms gap except the 1/8 note which has a 31.25 ms gap.
For example, a 2-second short stimulus contains a number of repetitions of 1/4 notes; a 2-second long stimulus contains repetitions of 3/4 notes.
The initial set of Ternes and MacLean's heuristic tactile rhythms contains 21 signals.
In the original studies , participants experienced vibrations through their hands and a stylus.
In order to make sure that these stimuli were still distinguishable when displayed on the waist area, we ran pilot sessions with four participants.
Results showed that five out of 21 rhythms were clearly distinguishable .
We further followed the positive selection heuristics by testing a combination of two of the five rhythms.
As a result, signal S6 is a combination of S2 and S3; Signal S7 is a combination of S5 and S2.
In contrast to the single-actuator technique which used different vibration patterns to represent different landmarks, our dual-actuator technique used the same vibration pattern for all landmarks.
The pattern used was the same as that for directional signals: a 1.2 second stimulus consisting of 12 repetitions of a 50-millisecond pulse and inter-pulse.
The different landmarks were represented by different combinations of actuators simultaneously providing the signal.
Schiffman  suggested that increasing the contact area of tactile stimuli would result in better perception and distinguishability among different types of information.
Loomis  suggested that an effective approach to this would be to use multiple contact points, however, an optimum number was not suggested.
Our initial pilot testing found several possible combinations to be indistinguishable from each other.
We omitted these from further study and ran pilot studies with 4 participants using the remaining combinations to find the optimum number of simultaneously activated actuators to represent our 7 landmarks.
Tested alternatives included  pairs of non-adjacent actuators,  pairs of adjacent actuators,  three non-adjacent actuators,  three adjacent actuators,  four non-adjacent actuators, and  five adjacent actuators.
We measured accuracy, mental demand, physical demand, temporal demand, effort, level of frustration, and both distinguishability amongst the landmark signals themselves and distinguishability from directional signals.
Results from this pilot study suggested that the best arrangement was two non-adjacent actuators.
This alternative received high scores on distinguishability and accuracy performance, and low scores on mental, physical and temporal demand and effort required.
It should be noted here that for the waist belt device with 8 actuators, the more actuators that were simultaneously activated, the more confused participants were.
Assuming for ease of referring to the angles that the belt is in the form of a circle, the final list of actuator pairs included: 
Following existing suggestions  and guidelines , each directional tactile stimulus involved actuation of one motor and consisted of 12 repetitions of signals at 50millisecond pulse and inter-pulse duration, giving a 1.2 second stimulus .
The eight directions represented included: east, west, north, south, southeast, southwest, northeast, and northwest.
Each actuator represented a direction based on its location around the participant's waist, with north represented by the front centre actuator .
For details on the design, generation and use of the directional signals see .
None of the participants reported irregularity with tactile perception around their waist at the time of the study.
We established from pre-test questionnaires that all participants understood the concept of "direction" and "landmark" and had no difficulties identifying them.
Each of them received a 5 British pounds monetary incentive at the end of the experiment.
The dependent variables were response time  and accuracy performance.
Response time refers to the onset of the stimulus to the onset of the response, including the movement time.
The experiments were divided into two stages with five conditions , 2 of the stage 1 conditions being repeated in stage 2.
Each participant ran all five conditions.
In the first stage, we measured distinguishability, learnability and users' preferences.
The first condition was a control condition in which only directional signals were presented.
In conditions 2 and 4, only landmark signals were presented.
In conditions 3 and 5, we presented directional signals together with landmark signals.
In stage 2, we measured the short term memorability of each type of signal.
Approximately 30 minutes after participants finished conditions 2 and 4, we interviewed them and asked them to complete a set of questionnaires.
They then repeated conditions 2 and 4.
Both response time and accuracy performance were measured and compared with previous results.
Since our focus for the study was on landmark representation rather than directional representation, we did not repeat C3 and C5 during stage 2.
The vibration signals for directions are symbolically straightforward.
They involve symbolic mapping of a limited set of cardinal and ordinal directions to their respective vibration signals on corresponding parts of the body.
The representation of landmarks is more challenging.
In the navigation design domain, the large set of landmarks studied in research papers and used in commercial systems are not systematically classified and differentiated.
As a result, signal patterns for landmarks and their meaning associations are effectively arbitrary.
Hence, it was hypothesised that learning time required for landmark representations will be significantly longer than those for directions  as participants have to learn the association between the signal and what it represents.
We hypothesized that participants will be able to recognize 7 landmarks with at least 80% accuracy in at least 1 non-control condition, either in condition 2 or 4 .
Based on the same previous research, we predicted that participants will be able to distinguish landmark from directional signals in conditions 3 and 5 .
With the single-actuator technique, signal patterns could be generated on an actuator that has just generated a direction signal, so participants might suffer from tactile adaptation, i.e.
As a result, they might fail to distinguish between different signal types.
Using two actuators to represent landmarks introduces `discontinuity'  that could help to make landmark signals perceptibly different from direction signals.
Hence, we predicted that the dual-actuator technique will produce better performance than the singleactuator technique when representing landmarks in a waist-belt tactile display that provides both directional and landmark information .
Participants were given training to learn the signal patterns and their associations.
In phase 1, each vibration stimulus was presented twice with its associated meaning, direction or landmark.
Phase 2 allowed participants to memorise the signals for 4 minutes.
By clicking with a stylus on direction and landmark icons on a tablet PC screen, the participant generated the associated vibration signals.
In phase 3, vibration signals were generated randomly and participants had to select the associated direction or landmark icon.
They received feedback for every selection that they made.
Signals were repeated until the correct selection was made.
In the final phase, participants were presented with vibration signals and again they selected the associated direction or landmark.
In this phase, participants were given a performance score only at the end of each set.
Training stopped when participants scored over 71% or had been through 4 repetitions of the entire 4-stage process.
In stage 1, we investigated whether performance with the two tactile representation techniques for landmarks differed in terms of learnability and distinguishability.
The system generated tactile stimuli and participants identified perceived directions or landmarks by selecting corresponding icons on a touch screen tablet PC.
We measured: perceived directions, perceived landmarks and response time.
All participants started with C1.
The order of experimental conditions C2-C5 was counterbalanced.
Vibration signals in all conditions were generated in a pseudo-random order.
In addition, landmark associations with vibration signals were systematically shuffled.
Vibration signals and meaning associations were counterbalanced amongst participants.
In the control condition C1 , participants experienced 3 repetitions of 8 directions.
Repetitions were introduced to mitigate the possibility that participants might make correct responses by chance.
In C2 and C3, the tactile single-actuator technique was used to generate landmark signals.
In C2, only landmark stimuli were generated.
In C3, the system generated a random directional signal, paused for 2 seconds, and then generated a landmark signal on the same actuator.
In conditions C4 and C5, the dual-actuator technique was used to generate landmark signals.
In C4, landmark stimuli were generated on pairs of actuators.
Of the seven landmark signals, four were generated using the 180 distance pairs.
The other three pairs were a mix of pseudorandom 90 , and 135 pairs, counterbalanced on the left and the right sides and front and back of the body.
We randomized the non-adjacent pairs and sought the optimum distance that provided the best performance.
In C5, the system generated a random directional signal, paused for 2 seconds, and then generated a landmark signal on a pair of actuators.
Each stimulus was presented only once.
When each tactile stimulus had been generated, participants were required to indicate  to which direction or landmark they thought it corresponded, by selecting one of the associated icons on the tablet PC.
The computer logged response time.
Each session was followed by a short questionnaire capturing subjective data on distinguishability and learnability.
When participants had finished all 5 conditions, they were asked to answer questions comparing the one- and dual-actuator techniques.
In stage 2, we aimed to compare the two tactile representation techniques for their short term memorability.
Stage 2 took place after participants completed distraction tasks, i.e.
Participants were asked to repeat conditions 2 and 4 in the same order that they had carried them out in stage 1.
In each condition, each stimulus was presented only once.
When each tactile stimulus had been generated, participants were required to indicate  the associated landmark by selecting an icon on the tablet PC and  their level of confidence in their answer on a 1 to 5 likert scale .
The computer logged response time.
Performance scores for all techniques at the end of training showed no significant difference F = 2.82, p > .05.
We predicted that participants would exceed 70% accuracy performance with either landmark technique.
Results in Table 7  show that participants were able to recognize landmark signals with over 80% accuracy rate for both landmark techniques.
We predicted that the performance of landmark signal perception would be affected by the presence of directional signals.
We ran a dependent t-test that compared accuracy performance of C2-C3  with C4C5 .
With the single-actuator technique, landmark identification performance was significantly lower when directional information was present than when it was absent, t = 2.65, p < .05.
In contrast, with the dual-actuator technique participants were able to identify landmarks equally well whether or not directional signals were presented t = 0.32, p > .05.
Therefore, we reject H4 since the presence of directional signals affected only the landmark single-actuator but not the landmark dual-actuator technique.
Post-hoc pairwise comparisons  indicated that training requirements for both landmark representation techniques were significantly greater than those for the directional technique in number of training rounds , training duration , and number of training signals .
No significant difference was found in training duration, rounds and number of signal trials between the one- and dual-actuator techniques .
These results were congruent with our expectation that learning to associate landmark signals with their meanings should require more effort than learning directions since meaning associations for landmarks are completely arbitrary.
The repeated-measures ANOVA  showed that the time to complete each condition was not significantly affected by the type of representation technique, F = 1.60, p > .05.
Post-hoc pairwise comparison  revealed that participants performed significantly better with directional identification than with both landmark techniques, .
There was no difference in accuracy performance between the landmark one- and dual-actuator techniques .
Prior to the study, we predicted that participants would spend more time and effort in learning landmarks with the single-actuator technique .
In order to measure the landmark signals memorability, we distracted participants with interviews and questionnaire sessions before asking them to repeat conditions 2 and 4.
Raw results are presented in Table 7, 3rd row.
Paired-samples t-tests showed no significant difference in forgetting rates between the two landmark representation techniques.
Results showed that the one- and dual-actuator techniques offered almost equal support for landmark representation.
To be precise, they required equal amounts of training and users performed equally well in experimental conditions in which only landmark signals were presented.
However, both direction and landmark information are crucial for navigation completion and should be provided in an operational tactile pedestrian navigation system.
According to the accuracy performance results of C3 and C5 , participants were able to perform significantly better with the dual-actuator technique than with the single-actuator technique when landmark signals were presented together with directional signals t = 2.63, p < .05.
For the dual-actuator representation technique, we varied the pairs of actuators used.
All the 180 actuator pairs were used by all participants.
Other pairs were distributed evenly across all participants.
Detailed results on the accuracy of each actuator pair are presented in Table 9.
Post-questionnaires were used at the end of each experimental condition.
We gathered user's subjective data on the two landmark representation techniques on several measures.
They included: distinguishability from direction signals, distinguishability amongst landmarks themselves, memorability, ease of meaning association, and the level of directional signals' interference.
Participants gave ratings on a 1-5 likert scale, 1 being low and 5 being high.
The single-actuator representation technique scored lower than the dual-actuator technique in all subjective measures except for distinguishability amongst landmark signals, in which it scored equal with the dual-actuator technique .
Paired-samples t-tests showed no significant difference in all subjective measures.
Based on landmark accuracy performance and the subjective measurement scores on distinguishability, we conclude that all participants were able to distinguish landmarks from directional signals in both conditions 3 and 5.
As for subjective preference between the two landmark representation techniques, while 12 participants  preferred the dual-actuator to the single-actuator technique, paired-samples t-tests showed no significant difference in preference, t = -0.89, p > .05.
Whichever technique a participant preferred, their comments and reasons were very similar and included "easy to remember and interpret", "more natural", and "easy to associate with landmarks".
If we look carefully at accuracy performance, each participant performed better with his or her preferred technique in C2 and C4.
Participants performed well with the actuator pairs that were vertically or horizontally aligned with their body.
The next best pair was the 3-8 pair.
The actuator pairs which afforded highest performance, are shown in Figure 4.
We recommend choosing these 7 pairs to represent our set of 7 landmarks in a tactile navigation aid.
However, results revealed that asymmetric or diagonal pairs did not support good performance.
Participants had an average response time of 4 seconds per signal across all conditions.
This value is probably just about satisfactory for the intended use.
Nevertheless, if these signals were to be used in outdoor urban environments, performance levels might drop since there are several other factors such as different levels of users' cognitive load and levels of noise in those environments.
We anticipate that further training might help decrease response time in the lab setting, which might in turn reduce response time in applied environments.
Further study is necessary to investigate whether extensive training can better the performance and the extent to which external factors such as noise might affect the results and system robustness, especially in the field.
The wearability and aesthetics of such systems will be crucial to user acceptance.
Clearly our prototype, involving a notebook computer and protruding wires, allows for little meaningful evaluation of these issues.
It is also worth noting that the tactile signal is brief and skin perception adapts through time so continued stimulation may lead to a decrease or even elimination of the sensory experience .
This may cause some missed signals in use.
And as with all vibration-based systems, it is susceptible to not being perceived in high vibration environments.
Our experimental study assessed learnability and short-term memorability and we have obtained some promising results.
However, based on these results, it is not possible to determine the effects of longer term use.
A longitudinal study is required to address such issues.
Our next steps are to refine the tactile navigation prototype for use in field trials in an urban area.
We will build on the insights from the lab-based work reported here to investigate specific applications' utility and acceptability with various users and in particular settings, for example in situations of high cognitive and visual load.
Through these investigations, we will evaluate and improve the design and address user acceptability, and the performance-related benefits and challenges of a wearable tactile pedestrian navigation system.
In this paper, we report an empirical study which compared two techniques to represent landmark information via the tactile channel.
Our results have shown that the mapping symbology chosen to represent landmarks achieved acceptable performance.
Through a device capable of presenting the information with a number of actuators, users perceived the vibration signals quite well and they were able to recognize the signals' meanings.
Compared with directional signals, participants took a significantly longer time to learn landmark signals and their associations.
In the presence of directional signals, performance of landmark identification significantly dropped for the single-actuator technique and remained the same with the dual-actuator technique.
With training, participants were able to distinguish landmark signals from directional signals and recognized over 80% of learned landmarks.
With respect to both techniques' forgetting rates, it appeared that they were equal.
Results from our study suggest that the dual-actuator technique was better than the single-actuator technique in various ways, especially as it afforded better performance when presented together with directional signals.
Structured Guidelines to Support the Design of Haptic Displays.
Sensation and Perception: An Integrated Approach.
The Nature of Landmarks for Real and Electronic Spaces.
Srikulwong, M. and O'Neill, E. A Direct Experimental Comparison of Back Array and Waist-Belt Tactile Interfaces for Indicating Direction.
Srikulwong, M. and O'Neill, E. A Comparison of Two Wearable Tactile Interfaces with a Complementary Display in Two Orientations.
Srikulwong, M. and O'Neill, E. Tactile Representation of Landmark Types for Pedestrian Navigation: User Survey and Experimental Evaluation.
In Workshop on Using Audio and Haptics for Delivering Spatial Information via Mobile Devices at MobileHCI 2010, HaptiMap , 18-21. http://www.english.certec.lth.se/haptics/HaptiMap/Mobi leHCI2010workshop_proceedings.pdf.
Tan, H.Z., Gray, R., Young, J.J. and Traylor, R. A Haptic Back Display for Attentional and Directional Cueing.
Designing Large Sets of Haptic Icons with One-actuator.
Tsukada, K. and Yasumura, M. ActiveBelt: Belt-type Wearable Tactile Display for Directional Navigation.
Presenting directions with a vibrotactile torso display.
Van Erp, J.B.F., Van Veen, H.A.H.C., Jansen, C. and Dobbins, T. Waypoint Navigation with a Vibrotactile Waist Belt.
Tactile Displays for Navigation and Orientation: Perception and Behavior.
