Enabling phones to infer whether they are currently in a pocket, purse or on a table facilitates a range of new interactions from placement-dependent notifications setting to preventing "pocket dialing."
We collected data from 693 participants to understand where people keep their phone in different contexts and why.
Using this data, we identified three placement personas: Single Place Pat, Consistent Casey, and All-over Alex.
Based on these results, we collected two weeks of labeled accelerometer data in-situ from 32 participants.
We used this data to build models for inferring phone placement, achieving an accuracy of approximately 85% for inferring whether the phone is in an enclosed location and for inferring if the phone is on the user.
Finally, we prototyped a capacitive grid and a multispectral sensor and collected data from 15 participants in a laboratory to understand the added value of these sensors.
First, we carried out a series of in-person interviews and a Mechanical Turk survey to understand how people manage the location of their phone in a variety of contexts.
From this dataset, we identified three phone placement personas: Single Place Pat, Consistent Casey and All-over Alex, who have distinct placement behaviors.
Informed by our understanding of phone placement, we then collected two weeks of accelerometer data from 32 participants' personal mobile devices.
Using the experience sampling method , participants recorded how the device was being stored in-situ.
To evaluate algorithms for inferring the placement or proprioception of the phone, we built and evaluated models using features from the in-situ accelerometer data.
These models achieve accuracies of 85% for two different two-class models  and 75% for a four-class model .
Finally, we explored opportunities to improve the accuracy of the accelerometer-only models, using prototype sensors that leverage capacitive sensing , multi-spectral properties, and light/proximity sensing.
We compare data gathered with these sensors in a laboratory setting, with resulting models achieving top accuracy levels of 85% to 100%.
Our results shed new light on where the phone is being kept and the tradeoffs between different sensing approaches for inferring phone placement.
Specifically: * We contribute an in-situ assessment of using accelerometer data for inferring phone placement, where prior work has focused exclusively on the laboratory.
We assess the value of capacitive sensing for inferring phone placement, a modality not previously explored We directly compare new and existing sensors, where previous work has only examined the value of individ-
Throughout most of the world, mobile phones are ubiquitous - it is truly the uncommon case to find someone who does not own a mobile phone.
While a few studies have examined the proximity of people to their phones  and where people have them while out and about , we still know relatively little about how people manage the burden of carrying a device.
What are the possible places that people keep their phones?
What are the factors that influence where a person puts her phone?
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Discovery  used features derived from listening on the microphone and a multi-round classification approach to infer whether the phone was in a pocket or not with approximately 80% accuracy.
The Polite Ringer II system  uses a combination of gyroscope, accelerometer, compass, light, and proximity sensors to infer when the user picks up the phone to receive a call so that the ringtone volume could be muted when the phone is picked up.
HandSense  contains two capacitive sensors on each side of a phone-shaped prototype to determine how the user is holding the device, which they can use to classify six different hand-grip configurations.
In contrast to these unobtrusive techniques, others have explored approaches that could be observable by users.
For example, activating the vibration motor on the device and detecting movement using the accelerometer , and a combination of active vibration and the emission of short `beeps' while listening on the microphone and accelerometer to fingerprint the environmental response .
A potentially less noticeable active approach uses a photo resistor and a light-to-frequency converter for sensing light from five LEDs  .
Using their device, Harrison and Hudson tested 27 different placements and achieved an average accuracy of 87% in their testing.
We replicated this device and include it in our laboratory study for comparison.
Overall, this wide range of previous inference approaches covers disjoint pieces across the range of possible phone placement sensing methods with data collections and experiments conducted in controlled laboratory settings.
Our research goes beyond previous contributions by collecting data in-situ and directly comparing a range of existing and new sensing techniques for inferring phone placement.
Recently, researchers have questioned how often a person's phone is in their immediate proximity.
Whether or not the person was home, sleeping, or if it was the weekend had the biggest impact on behavior .
They also highlighted that a user's context and routine affected phone proximity, for example leaving the phone out when at home and carrying it in a pocket outside of the home.
Our research complements these studies by examining the question of where the phone is being kept.
More closely related, in 2005, Ichikawa, et al.
Their results were strongly divided by gender, with 57% of men reporting that their phone was in their trouser pocket , and 76% of women reporting that their phones were kept in a shoulder bag or backpack .
Informed by this research, our phone placement interviews look more broadly at placement in different contexts, which also enables us to develop phone placement personas.
Our work contributes the first large-scale dataset that examines where people keep their phones throughout the day and how they make that decision.
To better understanding where people keep their phones, we explore the extent to which phones might be able to infer their placement.
Several efforts have focused on detecting from accelerometer data where on the body an item is located while a user is walking , and also in combination with gyroscope data .
These systems leverage motion constraints of human anatomy to infer phone location, all reporting accuracies of approximately 90% in laboratory experiments.
None of these approaches attempt to classify any off-body locations .
Other approaches aim to be activity invariant by incorporating data from other sensors either in addition to or instead of the accelerometer.
Sensay  used a light sensor in a lab environment to determine when a phone was in a trou-
We began our investigation of phone placement with 50 short, semi-structured interviews with desk-based office workers in their usual office setting at our company.
We approached participants in their offices and if they agreed to participate we asked: * * What was the current location of her mobile phone.
Where she normally keeps the phone at work, at home while sleeping and awake, in the car, and while out walking around.
How she decides where to put her phone.
We had a total of 93  office worker participants .
To understand the broader generalizability of our results, and avoid any possible bias from an internal office worker population, we deployed a survey based on our interview questions on Amazon's Mechanical Turk  to 600 participants  located in the U.S. and paid each respondent U.S. $0.25.
We made a few formatting changes to suit the nature of an online survey.
Most notable is that instead of providing a free-text response for "How do you choose where to keep your phone?"
There was some evidence MTurk respondents have more diverse jobs than our internal population, e.g.
65% spend less than 6 hours on a computer.
Given the similarity, we present all results together and note any large differences.
Some MTurk participants were under 20  and the rest of our participants were 40 and older.
Respondents' phone OSs were distributed across Android , iPhone , feature phones , Windows Phone , Blackberry  and the rest  were MTurk participants that did not indicate operating system.
MTurk respondents had a larger percentage of Android and feature phones than the OWork respondents.
Desk reported by 68% of respondents.
The places mentioned by the 7% of participants that answered Other, mostly MTurk respondents, suggest participants were not in an office including having the phone on a bed or couch.
Although an equivalent percentage of male  and female  participants reported having their phone on the table right now, we saw a similar gender difference in phone placement around trouser pockets and purses to what Ichikawa  observed.
Conversely, all 27 participants that reported having their phone in their purse right now were female .
More generally, the most common places all 693 participants reported putting their phones in the last 24hrs  were similar to the Right Now results.
From prior work , we identified 10 places that participants might put their phone: a Front Trouser Pocket, Back Trouser Pocket, Jacket Pocket, Shirt Pocket, Purse, Backpack/Bag, Case on Belt, Out on Table or Desk, Out in Car, and In Hand.
Of these, participants reported putting their phone in 2.8 places on average  in the last 24 hours, and 4.8 places on average overall .
Additionally, 8% of participants used a free response Other option to mention places including bed, nightstand, kitchen counter, and bra.
Table 1 shows where participants told us they put their phone in four different contexts: Walking, Driving, Home While Awake and in the Office.
Participants could indicate more than one location and the average number of locations ranged from 1.4  to 1.6 .
For simplicity we merged three categories that received few responses into other categories.
Trousers includes both front and back pockets as back pocket was less than 1% except when Walking when it was 8%.
Jacket includes shirt pocket which was less than 1% for every context and Other includes case on belt which was 3% or less for every context.
At Home or in the Office about half our participants put phones on a table, and slightly under half of our participants keep their phones out while Driving.
Response rates appeared consistent across men and women for these places.
Only 7%  participants indicated they put their phone in the same place regardless of activity or location, we termed this group Single Place Pats.
Given the common usage of the front trouser pocket by men, we initially thought these participants might all be men.
We found to our surprise this group had a similar percentage of male  and female  participants.
However, not surprisingly the single location where participants kept the phone differed by gender.
Male participants primarily used the front trouser pocket , and women used purses and bags .
In addition a few participants indicated their single location was a belt case , car , jacket , or back trouser pocket .
37%  of our participants were Consistent Caseys who specified a single, but different place for each of walking, driving, and at home.
Slightly more than half of these Consistent Caseys  specified a different place for each activity, while the rest  had two of the same places and one different; consistent with Single Place Pats, front trouser pocket was the most common duplicated place for men and purse for women.
The final group of participants with distinct placement behavior were All-over Alexs who reported more than 2 places for each of walking, driving and at home when awake.
This was 17% of our participants  and was made up of similar percentages of men  and women participants .
These participants indicated on average 7.6 different places across Walking, Driving and at Home.
Table 1: Where participants place their phone in different activities and locations.
Respondents could indicate more than one place.
Most popular place is bolded per column.
F denotes a significantly higher percentage of female participants indicated this location based on Chi-square, M for males.
Again we see the preference of men for trouser pocket and women for purses across contexts.
We were somewhat surprised how few people indicated their phone was in a purse or bag at Home.
The larger percentage of Other locations for Driving include passenger seat, cupholder, and center console.
In several of the at-Home Other responses, participants indicated they had no particular place for the phone and were likely to carry it with them.
We also asked participants about where they kept their phone while sleeping.
Based on the interviews we added the options of nightstand and bed to the MTurk survey.
We were surprised by the prevalence of bed responses; two participants even used the Other option to tell us they kept the phone under the pillow.
Another surprise was that 16 of the Other responses were floor.
In the interviews, participants explained that the phone had to be on the floor because that was the location of the nearest plug to the bed.
To understand how participants decide where to put their phone, we analyzed the responses to an open-ended question asked during the OWork interviews.
First, one author generated codes for 50 of the responses.
Then two authors independently coded all responses.
Conflicting codes were resolved through discussion.
These codes were used as options on the MTurk survey.
We believe the ability to select reasons rather than provide a free response explains why MTurk participants on average selected more reasons  as compared to our OWork interviewees .
Note that the percentages do not add up to 100 because responses could be coded for multiple categories.
We saw no gender differences in the reasons reported.
Accessibility/Receive Notifications : Participants in this category wanted to have their phones on their body or as convenient as possible to reach.
426 of the 575 participants  in this category explicitly noted they wanted the phone to be close so that they would be able to receive notifications and calls.
As one participant said " need to be able to hear/feel it, needs to be accessible, so no purse."
Don't Lose/Habit : These participants had a default location where they would put their phone, often because they did not want to forget where they had put their phone.
Of the 537 people in this category, 383  people explicitly indicated not wanting to lose their phone.
Safety of the Phone : Participants in this category wanted to ensure that their phone was secure and protected.
Specific concerns included falling out of a pocket, getting scratched by keys, or being sat on in the back pocket.
Interestingly, a larger percentage of All-over Alex participants  indicated safety as a decision factor than Consistent Caseys.
Comfort : Participants identified that some places they would otherwise like to keep the phone were uncomfortable.
A few participants were concerned about health and radiation, but for most the concern was physical discomfort from keeping the phone in a trouser pocket, particularly while sitting.
Minimize Distraction : Participants put their phone in particular places so that it would not interrupt them.
This is the opposite of the first category, although some participants fit into both categories: "alarm at night so  close by, pockets aren't big enough so hand or purse, keep it close by unless  don't want to be disturbed."
Other : A few participants mentioned other reasons, the most common was charging as a factor that affects where they put their phone.
Unanswered surveys expired when the next set of accelerometer data was collected and unlabeled accelerometer data was deleted.
Participants specified a bedtime at which WYP turned off and a wake time at which it resumed.
Participants could also "snooze" WYP for up to two hours at a time.
Survey responses and corresponding accelerometer data were automatically uploaded to a server.
Fifty-nine percent of participants were between 20 and 39 years old and the rest were older.
Participants received $10 plus $0.25 per survey response  as a gift card at the conclusion of their two week study period after a short final interview.
It is important to acknowledge the potential limitations in the comprehensiveness of the ESM responses; times when phones are away from their owner would be under-reported.
We believe the ground-truth labels are most useful for showing the breadth of places participants placed their phones, especially the additional sub-categories we coded from the Other responses .
To account for the differing number of responses per participant, we calculated how many different participants reported putting their phone in a particular place in addition to total number of responses for a category, so we could see which categories are common across participants.
Out was by far the most common top-level category with 63% of responses  contributed by all 32 participants.
Several interesting places matching survey responses were reported in the Out-other responses across participants including couch/chair , bed , floor , lap  and shelf .
We saw only one difference in reporting based on gender, 61% of the Table responses came from women.
Pocket was the next most frequently reported top-level category .
Consistent with the survey data, we saw gender differences, 74% of Pocket responses were from men and 26% from women.
To collect sensor data in-situ that we could use to train and evaluate phone placement models we used the experiencesampling method  to collect accelerometer data from 32 participants' personal smartphones in conjunction with a ground-truth label describing the phone's placement.
These in-situ labels complement the retrospective self-report data from the Phone Placement interviews.
While interview participants were undoubtedly as complete as possible, in-situ survey data enriches our understanding of where users choose to keep their phones.
We built a data collection application, "Where's Your Phone?"
WYP collects 10 seconds of accelerometer data  roughly every 30 minutes.
It then prompts the participant to answer "Where was your phone at XX:XXpm?"
Below this question, participants were given 6 choices including Other and I Don't Know.
Each category had a few sub-categories.
Table 2: Phone placement labels and corresponding classifications.
Note that two more categories existed that were not included for any classifications: "Do not know", which participants answered when they weren't sure where the phone was, and "Other" responses which we could not code into any of the existing or newly created categories.
Trousers Pocket at least once, most of the responses  are from men.
Conversely, the 413 Bag reports  are 91% from women.
Though responses about phone placement while Driving are less frequent , they do highlight the diversity of places people put their phones.
Responses were split between Cup Holder , Passenger Seat , Cradle , Lap  and others with smaller numbers including the Center Console, Dashboard and Door.
Note that participants do not necessarily have a single location in the car; half of participants reported more than one location.
Using their Phone Placement interview data we calculated whether any ESM participants were Single Place Pats , Consistent Caseys  or All-Over Alexs .
The other participants either did not clearly indicate a single preferred location  or did not have enough locations to be considered All-Over Alexs.
Participants' ESM response behavior seemed to correspond with this categorization.
56% of the 307 responses by the Single Place Pat participant indicated his phone was in his front trouser pocket.
He also only ever reported having his phone in 8 of the 23 sub-categories.
Matching the behavior of having a few consistent locations, the three most common places the six Caseys reported having their phones accounted for an average of 73% of their responses.
They also only ever reported having their phone in an average of 9.2 different sub-categories.
Three of the All-over Alex ESM participants had over 100 ESM responses, which were fairly evenly spread across sub-categories; their top three categories accounted for only 61% of responses on average and they had on average 7 categories that each received fewer than 10% of responses.
The GPS data we collected with each ESM response allowed us to categorize responses that happened at a participant's Home, Work, Other or Unknown location .
We did not observe any surprises.
For example, 69% of responses for the car were made in Other locations; people reported their phone being Out roughly evenly across Home , Other , and Work ; and Pocket is much more common in Other places  than at Home  or Work .
The ESM study highlights the rich diversity of places that participants put their phones and allowed us to collect labeled sensor data in-situ.
To evaluate whether phones can infer the places that people put their phones in the ESM and Phone Placement studies, we used the labeled accelerometer data collected in-situ by our ESM participants.
We used these features to evaluate models for three classification problems .
All models were built using the Weka Tooklkit's SMO SVM with a polynomial kernel .
We chose these features and the SMO algorithm by experimenting with pilot data we collected earlier.
Results are reported from a leave-one-participant-out cross-validation.
We chose each of the following classification problems based on the results from the studies in the previous section: Enclosed or Out: whether the phone is out and potentially visible to a user, or if it is put away.
This model achieved a mean accuracy of 85.3%.
The confusion matrix can be seen in Table 3a, along with precision and recall values.
On Person or Not: whether or not the phone is on the user.
This model achieved a mean accuracy of 85.7% .
In Bag, In Pocket, Out, or In Hand: where the phone is at a finer granularity.
This is useful for the "find my phone" functionality  and for sharing the user/phone's context to provide social awareness.
The performance of this model was lower than for the previous two models, as we expect when increasing the number of classes.
The model achieved a mean accuracy of 75.4%, with Out being the most accurately classified, followed by Pocket.
Bag and Hand performed much worse.
We identified several criteria as important for the set of sensors we would test.
First, we wanted to maximize privacy and minimize computational expense, in hopes that our solution could run continuously in the background on mobile devices.
These criteria combined to defeat computer vision or audio-based approaches.
Another criterion was that the techniques should ultimately not disturb the user.
This eliminated some of the previously proposed techniques, which emit sound  or activate the vibration motor .
This left us with the following sensors: Proximity Sensor and Light Sensor: These sensors already exist on many of today's mobile devices.
It would be preferable to collect this data in the field, but a combination of technical limitations for accessing those sensors and the variety of configurations that lacked these sensors on the device made data collection during the ESM study infeasible.
In this study, we collected the data using a development phone that gave us access to all sensors on the device.
Two-Dimensional Capacitive Array: While nearly all mobile devices use capacitive technology in their touchscreens, most processing of the capacitive input is done in hardware.
As a result, we built a prototype capacitive-sensing device similar to that of Saponas, et al.
Our device reports a raw capacitance signal from a 10 by 20 grid at roughly 100 hertz.
The device was designed in a form factor similar to that of today's mobile phones .
The most apparent capability of this sensor is detecting when a hand grasps a phone.
Perhaps less obvious is that this sensor also detects the presence of a person's leg through the lining of a trouser pocket.
Multi-Spectral Sensor: Following as closely as we could to the approach taken by Harrison and Hudson , we constructed a sensing device comprised of red, green, blue, ultraviolet, and infrared LEDs, a photo resistor, and a TSL235R light-to-frequency converter .
The device was controlled by an Arduino Pro Mini, logging readings from the two sensors to an on-board microSD card.
In the case of the four-class model, several notable items stand out.
First, it is important to note that Bag and Hand, which performed quite poorly, also had distinctly fewer instances in our dataset than Pocket and Out.
The accelerometer can be thought of as capturing the orientation of the device, however unlike sitting out on a table , a phone may be placed in a bag any number of ways, depending on the style of the bag, the orientation of its pockets, etc.
Furthermore, at any given time a bag may or may not be being carried by a person, which could make some of these features confusing with other classes .
To assess what sensing modalities would be most useful to augment an accelerometer-only approach to inferring phone placement, we conducted a laboratory study.
While a lab study loses some of the external validity of our previous insitu study, we were able to test a variety of prototype devices that we could not deploy in the field.
Using these three devices , we collected data from 15 participants .
73% of participants were between 20 and 39 years old and the rest were older.
We asked participants to bring anything that they might normally put their phone into including jackets, purses, or other bags.
We collected data from each participant in any of the following places that they report having kept their phone: front trousers pocket, back trousers pocket, jacket pocket, bag/purse, and hand.
We chose these based on our Phone Placement survey responses.
To increase the external validity of this study, we did not have participants put our sensing devices in places that they would not normally put their phone.
While this meant that we would capture more data for some participants than for others, it also maximizes the realism of our collected data.
For each place participants normally keep their phone, they completed a series of activities to simulate the various conditions that the device might encounter in everyday life while in the placement.
For all placements except bag/purse, the activities were: sitting on a couch, sitting on a desk chair, standing in place, and walking around.
We did not have participants sit for the back trousers pocket placement.
For the bag/purse we had participants let the bag sit on the floor, stand while holding the bag, and walk while carrying the bag.
Participants spent 20 seconds on each activity.
Because each device had at least one sensor that was directional , we collected all data for each placement with each device facing both inwards and outwards.
We collected from two devices at a time to minimize the number of trials.
We assembled these six sensor recordings for each placement into a single virtualrecording.
This simulates a virtual device with the union of sensing capabilities from our three prototypes.
This means that a single instance of collected data included: capacitive data , multispectral data , phone light/proximity sensor data , and phone accelerometer readings.
We only considered one set of phone accelerometer readings because the second set from the phone facing the other direction was redundant.
We extracted features from the accelerometer facing one direction and our other sensors facing two directions.
This allowed us to simulate a device with sensors on two sides.
Following Harrison and Hudson's approach, our multispectral features are one reading from each of the light-tofrequency converter and photo resistor for each of no-light, red, blue, green, UV, and IR.
For the light and proximitysensor on the phone, we took the mean over the 20 second window of the ambient-light level and the binary proximity state.
Lastly, we took the mean over a one second window at each "pixel" in the capacitive sensing grid and computed three features over the grid: mean over pixels, median pixel value, number of non-zero pixels .
We used the same accelerometer features over a one second window as in the ESM study from the previous section.
Our classification technique and evaluation followed that of the ESM study: a leave-one-participant-out crossvalidation, where we counted each person or surface as a separate participant.
We analyzed the lab study data by addressing the same classification tasks that we identified for the ESM study: Enclosed or Out, On Person or Not, and In Bag, In Pocket, Out or In Hand.
Like the ESM data, we constructed Enclosed or Out models using Weka's SMO SVM with a polynomial kernel.
When we experimented with pilot data, we discovered that the On Person or Not and In Bag, In Pocket, Out or In Hand problems were classified much better using Weka's implementation of Random Forest.
Thus, we employ a Random Forest classifier for those problems in our lab study.
By contrast, when classifying whether or not the phone was on the participant, the light/proximity sensor performed the worst of each of the individual sensors .
In this case, the capacitive sensor was the single most useful sensor, achieving an accuracy of 88% on its own.
Again the addition of accelerometer is most helpful, improving the accuracy to 90%, while the multispectral and light/proximity sensors do not seem to improve the accuracy.
The capacitive sensing grid was likely so helpful because it can sense grasping of a device as well as detect a person's leg through the lining of many trouser pockets.
Ensuring they would receive notifications was a primary factor in how our survey respondents decided where they put their phone.
Results from the lab study show that the most successful sensing strategies for inferring whether or not the phone is On Person all involved the use of the capacitive sensor.
This is particularly notable for several reasons.
First, capacitive sensing has not been previously explored as a tool for inferring phone placement.
Additionally, today's smartphones already employ capacitive technology in their touchscreens, though the raw capacitance is not accessible in software.
In the four-way classification, the accelerometer performs the best of any single sensor , with the multispectral sensor also demonstrating its value .
Interestingly, the combination of these two sensors is not as valuable as the combination of the accelerometer with the light/proximity sensor, which achieved a combined accuracy of 83%.
Ultimately, the combination of accelerometer, light/proximity sensor, and capacitive sensor is most effective, achieving an accuracy of 85%.
The errors in this model come primarily from confusion over when the device is in a pocket or a bag.
We had hoped that the capacitive sensor would be more valuable in this case, helping to disambiguate between being in a bag and being up against somebody's skin.
Regardless, the overall improvement from accelerometer-only is still quite notable.
Survey data indicated that phones are frequently placed in bags and purses; however our models performed quite poorly on this class.
This represents an important problem that remains unsolved by the techniques that we examined here.
Our data suggests that there are enough differences between bags that generalized models may not be effective.
Because most people use a fairly small number of bags, one solution  would be to place RFID tags in the few places in a bag where users keep their phones, though a fully automatic phone-based solution is clearly preferable.
Our promising Phoneprioception results enable several new interactive device capabilities we are excited to explore.
Placement-based Notification Preferences: Accessibility, primarily for receiving notifications, was the most common phone placement decision factor reported by our participants.
For example, using vibration is a useful ringing preference when in a trouser pocket, but can be quite jarring if it vibrates while sitting on a hard surface.
Preventing Pocket Dial: Despite the fact that proximity sensors have become nearly universal on smartphones, accidental interaction with a phone's touchscreen remains a nuisance.
Phoneprioception enables the phone to infer that input may be accidental.
When a phone detects that it is "enclosed," it could lock the screen, or require some intelligent input before initializing a phone call.
Dynamic Authentication Requirements: Authentication on mobile phones can be painful, both because of the small interaction space and because of the frequency with which people interact with their phones.
However, using Phoneprioception, if the phone was confident it had been "on person" since the last time the user authenticated, it might not require reauthentication or use a less rigorous form of authentication.
Phoneprioception As Contextual Information: At its most basic, Phoneprioception exposes a new piece of contextual information for the phone.
As application developers consider using Phoneprioception we think it will be interesting to study people's response to applications that change behavior based on phone placement.
What happens when there is an unintended behavior triggered by where the phone is placed?
Will participants change their own behavior to fit this new capability of Phoneprioception or will they reject it?
From this data we identified three placement personas: Single Place Pat, Consistent Casey and All-over Alex.
We demonstrated that reasonably accurate classifications are possible with sensors that are already industry-standard, and that the addition of several other low-cost sensors further improve this performance.
Getting Closer: An Empirical Investigation of the Proximity of Users to their Smart Phones.
The WEKA data mining software: an update.
Lightweight material detection for placement-aware mobile computing.
Ichikawa, F., Chipchase, J., Grignani, R. Where's the phone?
Mobile Technology, Applications and Systems, 2005.
Kunze, K., Lukowicz, P., Junker, H., Troster, G. Where am I: Recognizing On-Body Positions of Wearable Sensors.
Kunze, K., Lukowicz, P. Symbolic object localization through active sampling of acceleration and sound signatures.
Pocket, Bag, Hand, etc.Automatically Detecting Phone Context through Discovery.
Farther Than You May Think: An Empirical Investigation of the Proximity of Users to Their Mobile Phones.
Saponas, T.S., Harrison, C., Benko, H. PocketTouch: through-fabric capacitive touch input.
A rotation based method for detecting on-body positions of mobile devices.
SenSay: A Context-Aware Mobile Phone.
Polite ringer II: a ringtone interaction system using sensor fusion.
Vahdatpour, A., Amini, N., Sarrafzadeh, M. On-body device localization for health and medical monitoring applications.
Wimmer, R., Boring, S. HandSense: discriminating different ways of grasping and holding a tangible user interface.
While we focused on smartphones, we believe the results have implications for a broad array of devices: mobile health technology, music players, cameras, remote controls, and of course tablets.
While sensor placement may vary for some of these devices, and not all placements will be equally likely across the devices , the basic capabilities of Phoneprioception outlined in this paper should apply beyond the specific form factor of the phone.
