In this paper, we report on a qualitative study of how users manage their reputation online.
We focus particularly on people who are bothered by content online about themselves and how they manage reputation damage and repair.
We describe how users view reputation management chores as necessary but unpleasant, and how they feel disempowered to repair their online reputation.
Participants were unable to identify feasible repair mechanisms and ultimately failed to resolve their problems.
Given the current state of dysfunction indicated by our findings, we advocate for increased HCI research attention to this area.
INTRODUCTION "Megan" was a manager at a company that went out of business due to a hostile takeover.
The employees all lost their jobs, Megan included.
Months later, Megan was visiting her family for the holidays, and her family members were taking turns Googling themselves for fun.
When it was Megan's turn, a page came up that she had never seen before.
Former employees had started an "I Hate this Company" webpage to bash all the managers, and Megan's name appeared on the list.
Stunned, Megan talked with her family about posting a response, but ultimately decided not to because other managers' responses had been met with a proliferation of nasty comments.
Megan's family told her that once the information was on the Internet, she had no recourse and there was nothing she could do or any money she could pay to remove it.
Nonetheless, over the coming months Megan researched reputation management firms.
She decided they were "sketchy" and she didn't trust them to help her.
Megan is currently training for a new profession.
The webpage still appears in a search for her name, and she is concerned it will negatively affect her ability to get clients when she starts her new career.
Copyrights for thirdparty components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the Owner/Author.
Copyright is held by the owner/author.
Reputation plays a key role in social interaction, providing a means of assessing the trustworthiness of others and enforcing social norms .
Managing one's reputation has always been a complex task, and it has become even more challenging with the advent of the Internet, which creates a potentially permanent record of people's alleged or actual actions that is readily accessible throughout much of the world.
Online damage to one's reputation can translate into offline harm, limiting an individual's opportunities to find a job, attend college, or establish social relationships.
Solove observes that "throughout history, people have found some mechanism for vindicating their reputations" and "every society needs some mechanism to resolve reputational harm" .
Nonetheless, as we will argue, the Internet era as yet offers few if any appropriate repair mechanisms for reputation harm, since those who are impugned have limited legal, social, or technical recourse.
The research community has the opportunity to affect the new mechanisms that evolve.
Accordingly, in this paper, we explore reputation damage and repair in the Internet era, with an eye to informing current and future systems.
Our main contributions are: * We present a novel qualitative study of participants' experiences with online reputation damage and repair.
Participants were unable to find feasible repair mechanisms and ultimately failed to resolve their problems.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows.
In the next section, we review related work.
We then introduce our participants and methodology.
Next we present our findings.
We close with discussion and conclusions.
A decade ago, Palen and Dourish identified search engine results as a self-presentation challenge .
By contrast with these, we focus on content which the user did not generate themselves, and content over which they have little direct influence or control.
Studies have also shown that users are concerned with online availability of public records , as well as online harassment, drama, and profanity .
Similarly, numerous journalistic reports  have chronicled online reputation damage over the years ; while these sources are not academic, they warrant consideration because they cover issues that are not yet well represented in the academic literature, and because our participants had often read articles in the press that informed their perspective on reputation damage.
Solove draws on such journalistic reports as well as legal cases ; by contrast we conducted an empirical study in which we interviewed participants directly about their attitudes and practices.
Additionally, Solove's work was published in 2007, and our work offers an updated perspective since many new Internet services and practices have arisen in the intervening years.
The process by which rumors spread has also been investigated; Liao and Shi report on the transmission of rumors in a Chinese microblogging system and provide a useful summary of related work .
We focus here on how users go about handling such content when it does appear online.
Reputation systems in services such as eBay have also received considerable attention .
Such systems operate in highly constrained environments in which users explicitly rate entities such as sellers or goods; by contrast we consider reputation in the broader context of what is generally represented about an individual on the Internet.
Little work has been done on repair, although Sleeper et al.
In Europe, the idea that data should be "forgotten" when it has outlived its usefulness has gained prominence and is now being tested in a rash of legal cases , and some technical directions have been proposed for forgetting online data .
This topic is however riddled with complexity since mechanisms for deleting digital content can be circumvented by users who make analog copies of the content before it expires.
Little research has been done on reputation management services, although websites, industry reports, and press provide information about them .
In a rare exception, Bartow considers reputation management companies, arguing they are incentivized to foster online conditions that perpetuate harassment .
In our initial pilot, we interviewed 7 people  recruited by an external recruiting firm.
These participants were not selected based on their concern with reputation management but rather were chosen to represent a wide range of Internet users, in order to contextualize the research in a more general population.
They lived in the San Francisco Bay Area, and ranged in age from 26 to approximately 60.
They represented a wide range of occupations, such as teacher or county clerk.
We conducted semi-structured interviews in person in February 2012.
The interviews were exploratory and brief, lasting approximately 15 minutes.
They were video-taped, detailed notes were taken, and illustrative quotes were transcribed.
We then interviewed 21 people  who have been `bothered' by information about themselves or their small businesses on the Internet.1 These participants were selected based on responses to a screener distributed by an external recruiting firm to a large national panel of potential participants.
The screener included multiple choice and free-text responses; all responses were reviewed and participants were selected to represent diversity of demographics and experiences with problematic online content.
They lived in metropolitan areas, suburban areas, and smaller towns throughout the United States in states such as California, Kentucky, Pennsylvania, and Texas.
Participants represented several ethnicities and ranged in age from 24 to approximately 70.
They represented a wide range of occupations, such as life coach, stay-at-home parent, writer, attorney, and employment recruiter.
We conducted semi-structured interviews by phone in May and June 2012.
Interviews lasted approximately 1 hour and were recorded and transcribed.
We used a general inductive approach , which relies on detailed readings of raw data to derive themes relevant to evaluation objectives.
In our case, the primary evaluation objective was to inform the design of reputation management mechanisms by understanding and characterizing:  participants' practical and emotional experiences with online reputation management; and 
Intermingling of personal and professional reputation is common.
Participants reported that reputation attacks related to their personal lives affected them in their professional lives and vice versa.
For this reason, we included people who had been slurred personally and/or professionally as well as owners of several small businesses who primarily reported issues tied to their reputation as an individual .
The findings we report in this paper appear robust across the recruit.
Accordingly, we focused on these issues in the interviews, and then we jointly analyzed the data from both sets of interviews, closely reviewing the text, performing an affinity clustering to identify emergent themes , and iteratively revising and refining categories.
We also created a collection of all stories of reputation damage told by the participants and characterized them according to emergent features such as whether the accusation was true, the participant's strategic response, and the outcome.
In keeping with the general inductive approach, our analytic process yielded a small number of summary categories indicating that managing one's online reputation  is:  necessary,  unpleasant, and  disempowering.
In the next section, we broadly discuss reputation damage, and then we dedicate a section to each of these three categories in turn.
P14's4 client posted scathing comments about him, as well as personal information about his wife, in a public forum in an attempt to force him to provide additional services for no additional charge.
P02 was at an event at the beach when she was supposed to be at work.
A reporter was covering the event.
The reporter took photos of P02 in a bikini and included them in an online article along with P02's full name and employer and the fact that P02 was "playing hookey."
The article still appears prominently in searches for P02's name, even though the event was years ago.
Eight years ago P01 listed a degree he does resume, and a small town newspaper ran a falsification.
The article still comes up in the search results and he does not understand why, recent content about him exists.
Numerous sites afford users the ability to put favorable or unfavorable content online about themselves or others.
Naturally users can publish extensive information about themselves and others on social networking services, blogs, or other sites.
High-profile blogs such as Gawker  and Wonkette  have created reputation management crises for numerous celebrities and politicians.
Revenge porn sites show nude photos submitted by former romantic partners .
Third party sites can gather and profit from various data sources.
Dozens of data aggregators such as BeenVerified  and MyLife  draw on public records databases and publish information such as people's home addresses, ages, relatives' names, and criminal records.
Online mug shot databases show mug shots of people who were found innocent as well as guilty, and they have been accused of extortion for charging exorbitant removal fees .
Online review sites such as Yelp , Angie's List , and Ripoff Report  have become critical tools for consumer selection of services and businesses, and review sites such as RateMyTeachers  cover professionals.
The stakes are high when it comes to one's online reputation.
Reputation harm can limit career, academic and social opportunities - human resources recruiters, college recruiters, insurance agents, potential clients, potential romantic partners and many others use search engines to do online "background checks."
Once something negative is posted online about you it's there forever, slowly eroding your reputation and limiting your opportunities for a better life."
As can be seen from these examples, reputation damage varies according to factors such as whether the content is true or false, the motive for posting, and the recency of the information.
In our modest sample size, we did not observe any particular patterns related to these factors.
For example, participants reported similar difficulty removing information regardless of whether it was true or false.
The findings that we report here are therefore representative of our participants, but examination of the potential nuances relating to such factors remains a topic for future work.
A note about terminology is in order.
Like  and consistent with the perspective of our participants, we draw on lay definitions of concepts such as reputation , reputation management , and reputation damage .
While a discussion of academic definitions is beyond the scope of this paper, see the cross-disciplinary survey in .
Notationally, we indicate participants from the main study with pseudonyms P01-P21, and participants from the pilot with P22-P28.
We decline to provide additional demographic indicators in the pseudonyms to maximize anonymity, given the nature of the interviews.
Further, we anonymize companies' names in participants' quotes.
We use bold font in select quotes to emphasize content of particular interest.
They said this is the last stage and then your application process is done, and they asked her into a cubicle, and she had signed something agreeing for them to take a look at her  page... Somebody in a desperate situation is liable to do anything.
You really really want that job, you've been without work for a while, you might let somebody enter your house if you think it's gonna make some money... she told me she did it ."
Participants perceived that managing their online reputation is necessary.
Further, when it was damaged, they were highly motivated to improve their reputation and they took action to do so.
They explained that the Internet has become a central part of daily life, and therefore the information that can be found about them online plays a key role in establishing social relationships, job opportunities, business clientele, etc.
I think the Internet is becoming most people's bible of information about everything... as a business I have to adapt and realize that is happening and that it's important and it's something that has to be dealt with."
Reputation harm can also be dangerous.
For example, when hip hop artist Daniel Lee was wrongly accused of diploma falsification, outraged netizens threatened to kill Lee and his family .
Some Internet shamers have been alarmed by unexpectedly vicious responses to what they have posted and have begged Internet mobs to stop harassing the victims .
Further, reputation harm can cause emotional trauma such as humiliation, and online attacks have been implicated in a number of suicides .
Some argue that cyberbullying is simply traditional bullying in a new media.
However, others suggest it is qualitatively different because it is "always on", and because information is disseminated more widely and quickly than with traditional bullying .
Beyond specific impacts on career, social life, and emotional and physical well-being, reputation damage on the Internet is also concerning because it limits opportunities for rehabilitation and self-exploration .
Of course, in some cases reputation harm to an individual benefits society.
When allegations have basis in fact and someone is a danger to others, it may be appropriate and useful for the information to be highly publicized.
Similarly, legitimate whistleblowing merits support.
Further , public safety organizations are increasingly utilizing publicly available social data for investigative purposes, and some have recruited the public to provide information about potential criminals .
It's a personal expression from me to you... there's something implied about the trust of the moment I think... once it hits online, it becomes just verbiage that follows you around... the whole public sharing thing, that's just too raw."
Little concrete data is available about the prevalence of reputation harm on the Internet.
However, in a survey in 2010, 4% of online adults reported bad experiences because embarrassing or inaccurate information was posted about them online, a number unchanged since 2006 .
Our recruiting responses suggest the same order of magnitude.
Further, unpublished studies we have conducted suggest the number of people bothered by information online about themselves may be very roughly 20%.
By comparison, the number of people searching for themselves is fairly large .
While the number of people who feel they have been negatively impacted by content online may be quite low, the impact can be severe when it occurs.
A note is in order regarding the relationship of the three main categories to precipitating events.
Necessary and unpleasant apply broadly to reputation management and often occur even before any specific problems arise .
However, feelings of necessity and unpleasantness were generally intensified by specific events.
Further, anticipatory fear of hypothetical events exacerbated unpleasant feelings for some participants.
Disempowering as we observed it occurred primarily when participants were reacting to specific damage.
I do bad things and I don't want them to be there forever...
It's okay for them to be there now because it's funny or cool or whatever that I'm like drunk and smoking a cigarette or acting like an idiot on the sidewalk.
And it's kind of funny the next day, so you want to show your friends, `Oh, look what a big idiot I was last night!'
But next week it's not going to be funny anymore when I'm looking for a job, or in years, when I have children."
I'll never know why he was doing it.
I don't know who this guy is, he's just some crackpot in India."
It's getting out of hand... People are posting information they should not post."
I'm a little bit of a civil rights activist, I don't believe in censorship...  I do think that there need to be things in place that keep people accountable whether it's some twelve year old bullying the neighbor or some bad guy connecting with some teenage girl online."
You can put really anything out there you want with no filter or really no negative consequences usually."
Managing one's online reputation was experienced as tedious, unpleasant, and even frightening.
Participants oriented to reputation management as a chore for which they were too busy, and expressed a tendency to avoid or neglect it.
For example, while participants did search for themselves online, they often did so infrequently.
As a result, damaging information was often online for months before participants knew about it, and they were usually notified about it through social channels, e.g., phone calls from family.
Some added that they disliked thinking about it because it was "negative energy."
Therefore, they wanted to hire someone to whom they could delegate these tasks, although as discussed below they had reservations about current reputation management offerings.
I just don't have the time  to work six months on getting a negative comment that's not accurate down."
I know it has to be dealt with if it's affecting the business, but it's just hard for me to get into that kind of combative mindset.
But I think there is a world of random people out there that that's their entertainment.... people that just go how can we give someone a bad day... people that their charge comes from not serving the world, it comes from trashing the world."
There's a lot of crazy people that are out on the Internet that just like to destroy things for fun."
A number of participants reported being frightened by reputation-related horror stories in the media.
Small business owners said they are terrified of being struck down by a random negative review, and they have no idea how they would recover .
Some felt it was inevitable that they would eventually be attacked.
By contrast, some had not anticipated such an event and had been caught by surprise.
That's my biggest fear is someone comes and they don't like their workout and they leave me some crazy... review that they hated me or something... and I can't take it down...
It can easily be swayed so simple, like somebody doesn't like the lighting, or the water you serve tasted funny...
It could be something so minor and people take to the web to just blurt it out... That one day, it could kind of ruin your business."
Participants were originally optimistic that with sufficient effort they might mitigate damage to their online reputation, and they actively worked to do so.
However, their efforts generally failed, and over time they lost confidence in their ability to influence online content about themselves.
In this section we describe the strategies participants considered for handling reputation damage, as well as their experiences and results when pursuing these strategies.
Further, Section 230 of the Communications Decency Act  of 1996 plays a key role in the United States in determining legal liability for Internet content.
It essentially says that operators of Internet services are not considered publishers and thus are not liable for the content posted by others .
Even if and when the laws offer protection for reputation damage, legal recourse may be inordinately costly and time-consuming, hard to pursue if the attacker has posted anonymously , or complicated by international issues when attackers or site owners reside in other countries .
Additionally, some reputation management experts recommend against legal action because it can exacerbate the problem by drawing additional unwanted public attention to the issue .
One might expect rebuttal to be a viable option , but most participants were reluctant to rebut or refute negative content online.
Some were afraid that a rebuttal would only incite further attack.
Others did not want to dignify unfair attacks with a response.
In general, they could not imagine a good outcome from anything they might say.
Many reputation management experts also express reservations about the usefulness of rebutting, because a rebuttal may elevate the negative content in search engine results and an angry poster can rarely be appeased in any case .
I kind of feel insulted, and I shouldn't have to defend myself on that level."
There's nothing you really can do about that.
You just have to accept it and move on."
Some participants lamented the fact that all the parties who could help them defend themselves  took a "hands-off" position regarding content written by third parties .
Further, participants' attempts to reach site owners or search engines were often futile, which was a great source of frustration.
Participants often judged the reasonability of one site or search engine relative to how the others behaved.
I wrote in three or four times, and then I finally just gave up, because I never got a response from ..." - P09 "I was really having anxiety about it, like `this has to come down, immediately.'
There was no real way to contact them, they didn't have a phone number, and they weren't a real legitimate business."
It's just total slander... You can only have it down if there's certain criteria, like `talks about physical appearance', `uses profanity', things like that, and none of that applied."
In theory, legal action has the potential to facilitate takedown or vindicate a victim of reputation harm in the public eye.
In practice, however, it is difficult for an injured party to prevail in court; numerous legal scholars have argued that in the United States, laws are outdated and provide insufficient protection for online reputation damage .
The notion of freedom of speech  frames much of the dialog regarding what content can be posted, and what if any content must be removed.
I am all about this is America, you can do what you want, but  an area where I really think that there should be more responsibility.
I think if there's a website floating out there  there's just clear and blatant and hideous cyberbullying...
But they are the ones that are spreading the word.
Without them no one would find these things."
A number of participants had spoken with reputation management companies and/or tried free trials of their services.
The participants understood the basic approaches being proposed.
However, they registered three key objections to reputation management services.
First, participants found the companies "sketchy" and were worried they might be a "scam."
The brands of the companies were unfamiliar to the participants, and they were frustrated by "vague" descriptions of what the companies do.
They explained that they would be more confident about reputation management services from companies or individuals they know and trust .
But on the flip side of that, the vagueness of their methods and their inability to guarantee specifics tends to make me suspect."
I looked at some of em, did a trial on one...
Sounded kinda black hat to me so I was kinda leery..." - P15 "I've gone though probably 25 of these companies...
I just don't feel comfortable paying someone a price when I don't understand what they're doing and why they're doing it...
I don't have to fully understand the technical aspects of everything of course, and that's not what I'm looking for, but I guess I'm just looking for straight talk."
If somebody's doing that type of work for you or doing that type of service then I have to be real comfortable with them."
In this subsection we discuss reputation management services, techniques used by these services, and participants' perceptions of these services.
We dedicate extra attention to this topic because such services are heavily represented in the press and were significant in the minds of the participants.
Reputation management services are provided by players in an interlocking set of industries, such as public relations, marketing, social media monitoring, security and risk management, and crisis management.
Although some firms have a full-service model to serve many of these needs, a number of companies have emerged recently that focus primarily on reputation management.
While reputation management has typically been in the purview of the corporate world, more recently it has extended to politicians and celebrities, and then to `regular folks' .
Several notable firms include Reputation.com  , Reputation Management Consultants , Big Blue Robot , and Rexxfield .
Reputation management firms offer services such as advice on self-presentation, routine monitoring for adversarial content, and damage control in the event that problems arise.
To ensure favorable search results, the firms generally use a combination of positive content creation , search engine optimization , and data removal efforts.
So I don't get into that, that's a slippery slope right there.
I don't want to go down that path."
I may be dumb but I'm not stupid."
I know that if I click on it, it's going to improve its results... That would always be my concern with anything that I do .
That's the last thing that I would want to have happen is for it to somehow generate a click through on that link."
Costs for reputation management services vary widely, depending on factors such as the current ranking of negative content or the number of other people with the same name.
Entry-level services are in the $100 range at sites such as Reputation.com, but such services are largely targeted at people who have no negative content online and/or limited online presence.
When negative content exists, costs grow quickly into the thousands or tens of thousands of dollars, and success is not guaranteed .
Programs for celebrities, politicians, and executives reportedly average between $5,000 and $10,000 per month .
Rexxfield CEO Michael Roberts says he knows one person who spent $600,000 in one year trying to improve their online reputation .
Participants generally felt these costs were far out of reach, and they often perceived reputation management services as being for large companies or celebrities.
And I just can't afford that.
For a small  business, that's too much."
They're expensive, so it's not for us.
I wouldn't consider using them."
Based on the experiences of our participants, feasible mechanisms do not currently exist for preventing and repairing online reputation damage.
This is not to say that it is impossible to prevent and repair online reputation damage, but at a minimum the resources required in terms of time, money, and technical skills appear to be beyond what one might reasonably expect of most users.
This disadvantage is exacerbated by the asymmetric nature of attack versus defense in online reputation; in the current state of affairs it is far easier to harm someone's reputation than to repair it .
Given the current dysfunctional state of affairs, we advocate that the HCI community work to inspire and inform more effective technological, social, and legal mechanisms for reputation repair as well as the prevention of reputation damage.
Clearly, these issues are not easy to address, because efforts to limit speech in order to protect reputation may stifle legitimate discourse.
This is further complicated by the fact that the inherent tension between protecting reputation and protecting freedom of speech plays out differently in different cultural and legal contexts.
Nonetheless, we remain optimistic that knowledge and skills from the HCI community can be brought to bear to improve the situation.
We begin by discussing design principles that emerged from each of the categories of our analysis.
Principle 1: Focus on repair and prevention mechanisms rather than awareness and motivation.
Journalistic reports and industry materials about online reputation often focus on raising awareness and motivation.
Based on this guidance, researchers might pursue directions such as persuasive technology to encourage users to behave in certain ways.
However, as reported in the Necessary section, our findings indicate that the primary obstacle to managing damage is not lack of awareness or motivation .
Rather, the key problem is that the strategies people pursue are not effective.
Numerous additional factors contributed to feelings of fear and helplessness.
Some participants were afraid that monitoring negative content would elevate it in search results, making it even more prominent.
Some participants also mentioned that monitoring information without the ability to take it down is simply upsetting.
A few participants felt they did not have the skills necessary to manage their online reputation.
Further, reputation damage was often an isolating experience, as participants were often too embarrassed to talk to friends or family about it.
For example, our findings as reported in the Unpleasant section suggest that occasional focused use would be preferable to frequent casual use, so tools should be designed to minimize notifications and number of visits.
Further, negative information should be carefully contextualized and users should be reassured as appropriate.
Principle 3: Develop feasible solutions to everyday reputation problems.
As seen in the Disempowering section, addressing reputation management damage requires disproportionate effort, when it is possible at all.
Legal remedies are being pursued, but these are typically heavyweight and we would like to encourage complementary efforts by technologists.
Therefore, we recommend the development of effective, viable technical mechanisms appropriate for everyday problems and people.
Future work includes research to more fully characterize different cultural perspectives, a rigorous analysis of the potential of specific HCI programs to inform mechanisms for reputation damage and repair, and survey-based research to establish the prevalence and concrete impacts of reputation damage.
We thank the following for their thoughtful comments and contributions to this work: Paul Aoki, Sunny Consolvo, Jonathan McPhie, Martin Ortlieb, Rob Reeder, Steve Rogers, Lauren Schmidt, Sebastian Schnorf, Nikhil Sharma, Jessica Staddon, Cindy Yepez, and the CHI 2014 ACs and reviewers.
We are deeply grateful to the study participants for sharing their stories.
Acquisti, A. and Gross, R. Imagined Communities: Awareness, Information Sharing, and Privacy on Facebook.
Andalo, D. Ban Cyber-Bullying Clips, Johnson to Urge Websites.
Anderson, N. `Algorithms Can Have Errors': One Man's Quest to Purge Horrific Pictures from His Google Results.
Ayalon, O., and Toch, E. Retrospective Privacy: Managing Longitudinal Privacy in Online Social Networks.
Barack, L. Protect Your  Rep.
Bartow, A. Internet Defamation as Profit Center: The Monetization of Online Harassment.
Beyer, H., and Holtzblatt, K. Contextual Design: Defining Customer-Centered Systems.
Bilton, N. Erasing the Digital Past.
Wake Forest Law Review .
Crowell, G. Comprehensive Interview with Michael Roberts.
Daley, S. On Its Own, Europe Backs Web Privacy Fights.
The Stalking of Korean Hip Hop Superstar Daniel Lee.
However, determining "worth" is clearly complex and subjective, and research might yield improved models for assessing and presenting it.
For example, crowdsourcing might be used to assess the value or credibility of online content.
Previous research on determining and visualizing credibility  might be leveraged as well.
Many current efforts to handle reputation damage aim to manipulate search engine results via SEO, astroturfing, or other means.
However, these are not stable solutions since search engine algorithms typically evolve in response to these manipulations.
By contrast, we can take as inspiration a resource such as Wikipedia, which by virtue of its perceived credibility and popularity stably appears high in search results.
The HCI community is well positioned to address the complex challenges of creating a high quality, collaboratively edited resource for representing personal reputation.
We encourage the reader to envision other potential research directions, bearing in mind that based on what has happened in other media, mechanisms for reputation repair may take decades or even centuries to evolve .
Therefore, we need not limit ourselves to readily available technological capabilities, but rather we can also imagine building on techniques that do not yet exist but are likely to exist in the future.
In this paper, we discussed participants' experiences managing online reputation damage, illustrating how they find it necessary, yet unpleasant and disempowering.
In the current environment, lay people cannot reasonably be expected to handle reputation damage on their own.
Identity Management: Multiple Presentations of Self in Facebook.
Highlighting Disputed Claims on the Web.
Fahimy, G. Liable for Your Lies: Misrepresentation Law as a Mechanism for Regulating Behavior on Social Networking Sites.
Flynn, L. Google Says It Doesn't Plan to Change Search Results.
Ingram, M. Yes, Virginia, HR Execs Check Your Facebook Page.
Josang, A., Ismail, R., and Boyd, C. A Survey of Trust and Reputation Systems for Online Service Provision.
Kittur, A., Suh, B. and Chi, E. Can You Ever Trust a Wiki?
We're in It Together: Interpersonal Management of Disclosure in Social Network Services.
Liao, Q., and Shi, L. She Gets a Sports Car From Our Donation: Rumor Transmission in a Chinese Microblogging Community.
Luca, M. and Georgios, Z.
Fake It Till You Make It: Reputation, Competition, and Yelp Review Fraud.
Maag, C. A Hoax Turned Fatal Draws Anger but No Charges.
Malaga, R.A. Web-based Reputation Management Systems: Problems and Suggested Solutions.
Martinez, J. Harsh Reality for Hopefuls: You are What You Tweet.
Teen Conflict, Gossip, and Bullying in Networked Publics.
A Decade in Internet Time: Symposium on the Dynamics of the Internet and Society 2011.
Mayer-Schonberger, V. Delete: The Virtue of Forgetting in the Digital Age.
