ABSTRACT Reading frequently involves not just looking at words on a page, but also underlining, hi&li@ing and commenting either on the text or in a separate notebook This combination of reading with critical thinking and learning is called active reading .
To explore the premise that computation can enhanceactive reading we have built the XLibris "active reading machine."
XL.ibris uses a commercial high-resolution pen tablet display along with a paper-like user interface to support the key affordancesof paper for active reading: the reader can hold a scanned image of a page in his lap and mark on it with di$tai ink To go beyond paper, XLibris monitors the &e-form ink annotationsmadewhile reading, and usestheseto organize nnd to searchfor information.
Readerscan review, sort and filter clippings of their annotated text in a "Reader's Notebook" XLibris also searchesfor material related to the annotatedtext, and displays links to similar documents unobtrusively in the mar$n.
XLibris demonstratesthat computers can help active readers organize and find information while retaining many of the advantages of reading on paper.
Paper-like user interface, reading online, affordances of paper, pen computing, dynamic hypertext, document metaphor,information retrieval iNTRODUCTlON Computers, once expected to create a paper-less office, have instead produced ever-increasingquantities of paper documents.Dataquestpredicts that 1,344biion pageswill be generatedby printers and copiers in the US in 1997 .
Permission to make digit&hard copies ofall or part of this material for pmonal or classroom use is -ted without fee provided that the copies arenotmade or distriiuted for profit or amnxrcial advantage, the copyright notice, the title ofthe publication and its date appear, and notice is &II that copyrigbhtis by permission of the ACh%,Inc.
Although reading online presents a number of problems, we will show that integrating computation with reading also presentsnovel opportunities for improving the reading process.
Thus there is a tension between the advantages provided by computation and the advantagesprovided by paper: the choice depends on the reader's goals.
For reading a romance novel at the beach, low weight and portahiity are essential,and it is unlikely that computation could provide any real benefit.
For more dynamic types of reading, however,computation may be desirable.
Active reading is the combination of reading with critical thinking and learning, and is a fundamental part of education and knowledge work Active reading involves not just reading per se, but also underlining, highlighting and scribbling comments,either on the text itself or in a separatenotebook .
Readersuse thesemarks to organize their reading for later review and retrieval.
In addition, active reading often requires readersto move from one text to anotherto satisfy their information needs.
We have built an `active reading machine," XLibris, to explore the premise that computation can enhanceactive reading.
To make reading online acceptable, XLibris implementsa paperdocumentmetaphor that provideskey affordancesof paper.To go beyondpaperand make reading online desirable, XLibris helps readers organize and retrieve information.
By exploiting the existing practice of free-form ink annotation, XLibtis provides thesebenefits with minimal additional effort from the reader.
To apply these advantages to existing documents,XLibris allows input of both paper and digital documentsIndeed, an active reading machinewould likely be usedtogetherwith desktopcomputers and with paper.
The rest of this paper is organizedas follows.
We describe active reading practices, and the problems with reading online.
We then describethe XLibris systemin detail, and concludewith a discussionof related and future work ACTIVEREADING The combination of reading with critical thinking is a fundamental part of education and knowledge work This activity is practiced by students learning a textbook discipline, by lawyers processing discovery documents, researchers keeping "up to date," by analysts finding answersto specific questions,by executives cleaning out their inboxes, and by citizens deciding how to vote.
Active readingis a skill that most literate people share.
Today, active reading is a "craft skill" rather than a formal academicdiscipline.
Even though critical reading is a key part of learning from a text, reading is rarely included in school curricula beyondthe elementarylevel.
Nevertheless, improving the skills of learning from and.
More recently, Mortimer Adler's How to Read a Book -part of the Great Books campaign-presented a methodolo,v for active reading in greatdetail.
Adler and other educators recommend pigeon-holing a text, skimming the contents, reading at different speeds, marking  important information, and in general, "carrying on a conversation" with the author.
For example, scribbling "Norman would disagree!"
Thesepracticeshave beenobservedin real use in a number of studies  that are summarized in the remainderof this section.
Marks made whiie reading aid understanding, memorization and later retrieval Readers generate marks in different places: on the document, in a separate notebook,or sometimeson loose-leafpaper or note cards.
We use annotation to refer to marks on  reading matter, and notes to mean marks that are not colocated with the text to which they refer.
Annotations Many people annotatedirectly on paper documentswhile they are reading.When people do not want to mark in their books , they may write on removable Post-Itn' notes or on slips of paper.
The advantagesof annotating directly on the page are convenience, immersion in the document context, and visual search.Annotating documentsdoes not disrupt the flow of reading.
Also, annotations contain more information because they occur within the "context" of the document.
Finally, annotationsstand out visually, allowing readersto scanfor them.
The major disadvantage of annotationsis that they become lost in the piles of papers and books.
Annotations only work well when you seethem on the documentpage.
Notebooks Somereadersuse a bound notebook to store their notes in one place.
People use notebooks to record facts, figures, and key points, to copy interesting quotes, and to jot down ideas.
Readerscan review their notebooksto study and to understandwhat they have read.
Over time, a notebook becomesa reader's catalogue raisonmf, containing annotations and thoughts about documentsthat have beenread.
Additionally, flipping through the pagesin a notebook is a rapid way to review information acrossdocuments.
Although notebooksprovide the reader a broad overview of their reading, they often lack details and depth.
Readers must recreate the note's context-the document name, page number, idea, quotation, etc.-in the notebook.
Copying this context into a notebook can be tedious, time-consumingand error-prone.
Incomplete notes may not be comprehensible later, and may also create problemsof attribution.
Note Cardsand Loose-leafPaper People also use index cards and loose-leaf paper to write notes while reading.
The advantageof unbound notes is that they can be arranged and reorganized flexibly.
For example,authors often organize their notes by topic or to fit an outline.
The problem with unbound notes is the effort required to createand to managethem.
As with a notebook,there is no context available from the document,but there is also no context available from surrounding notes.
Furthermore managingdozensof note cardscan be a chore in itself.
Annotations highlight key information but tend to be lost in piles of paper.
Notebooks are reviewed easily, but taking notes is tedious and error-prone.
Unbound notes can be reorganized flexibly, but require evenmore effort by the note taker.
Finding r&&cl material Fmding related material and moving from one text to another is also part of active reading.
For example, an ecology student studying the effects of acid rain in the Appalachian hIounta.ins decides to search the Internet for information on the economy of West VirD$nia-A doctor reading up on a drug she's never prescribed decides to follow a referenceto a study of its side effects.
This activity of finding related materials while reading is often disconnected from the main activity.
Typical information retrieval interfaces force usersto suspendtheir reading activity to identify and then to retrieve related documents.Referencesfound in paper documentsare even more time-consuming to track down.
Although hypertext was designedto addresssome of these problems, authors cannot anticipate the information needs of all readers.
Ironically, although readers' interests change fluidly, interfaces for moving from reading to finding and back to reading again tend to be time consumingand disruptive.
Page orientation refers to the fixed division of paper documentsinto pagesand the fixed spatial layout of those pages.
Page layout conveys the organization of the document and supports navigation, skimming, and spatial memory .
One problem is that the landscapeorientation of typical monitors does not allow a full page of text to be displayed.
This leads to awkward view scrolling and zooming.
In addition, scrolling views that do not respectfixed page layout can make it difficult to read a documentnon-linearly.
Reading at work often involves using severaldocumentspaper and/or digital-together, eachwith their own display .
Paper provides an unlimited number of physical displays because it is cheap.
Tangibiity refers to the physical properties of sheets or stacks of paper that allow them to be held, moved, folded, rotated, etc.
Readers move their documents around in space to improve legibiity , to adjust perspective or gain objective distance , and to ease and speed up handwriting .
In contrast, reading online typically meansreading from a monitor on a desk.
The physical nature of paper also affords effortless navigation .
For example, readers can look at the previous page while marking on the current one, sensethe length of a document by its thickness and weight, and senselocation in a book by the thicknessof the sides.
Although legibility is a common explanation for why people prefer reading on paper, legibility does not appear to be a si,@ficant factor.
Many studiesin the 1980's found significant differences in reading speed or proofreading accuracy between CRT displays and paper, but these differences shrink or disappear with modem highquality CRTs .
Free-form ink annotation refers to the easeof marking on paper.
Annotating with a pen requires little coguitive overhead compared to typing or to selecting text with a mouseand issuing a command.Annotation is an important part of active reading, yet it tends to be very difficult online .
Furthermore, annotations on paper are conceptually and visually separate from the underlying document.
Supporting all of the advantagesof paper describedabove in an active reading machine seemsto he impossible.
It is also unnecessary: our goal is to improve active reading, not to replace paper.
Readerswill use active reading machines together with paper and traditional computers, and documents will move back and forth as best supports people's work.
This suggeststhat active reading machines need not necessarily provide multiple displays or support sharing directly.
Instead we have focused our attention on tangibility, freeform ink annotation, and pageorientation.
To provide these affordances,XLibris combines a pen tablet display with a paper document metaphor.
Together, these allow XLibris to emulate the physical experienceof reading and marking on paper: the reader can hold a scannedimage of a pagein their lap and mark on it with digital ink.
The richness of the interaction is derived from the form factor of the device and from the easeand familiarity of making markswith a pen.
The intent was to createa transparentuser interface that userswould acceptimplicitly without the typical and frustrating process of "learning the UI."
Unlike CRT monitors, tablets are graspable physical objects.
Although l-2 kg is heavier than most books, tablets are light enough to put in one'slap, comfortable to write on, and movable.By movable we meanthat they can be tilted easily, shifted around, etc., within a small space such as an office.
This distinguishestablets from portable computers  that can be packed up and transported from place to place, but may not be conveniently movable once unpackedfor use.
Conversely, a tethered device-a tablet connected to a stationary computer or source of power, or a book on a chain in a library-may be movablebut not portable.
Physical widgets incorporated into the tablet can further enhancetangibiity.
Readers turn pages by thumbing across these sensors, mimicking pageturning in a paperdocument.
XLibris reinforces thii user interface metaphorthrough the form factor of the device.
The tablet and the pen complementthe software interface to createa richer, more tangible documentreadingexperience.
XLibris differs radically from standardWIMP interfaces.
This is reflected not only in the document metaphor,but also in fundamental differences in interaction between a desktopcomputerand a tablet.
Although the mouseand the pen serve similar purposes, they have quite different affordances.Furthermore, screen spacein XLibris is at a premium becausetangibility requires a small form factor, and also because documentpagesrequire all the pixels that current display technolo,y provides.
An annotated document page in XLibris An essentialaspectof ink on paper is its lack of modality: you can write anything you want, anywhereon a page, in any order.
In XLibris, therefore, users can scribble notes, draw figures, and annotate text, all without switching modesor applications.
In contrast, conventional graphical user interfaces use widgets to produce a highly structured interaction, and typically force users to adapt to the structure of applications.
Similarly desirable is the ability to perform the sametask in different ways.
Users prefer interfaces that provide multiple navigation options 
Although the destinationin eachcasemay be the same,different interface actions may be appropriate for different goals, or the choice may dependon a user's prior experience.Thus we designedXLibris to support a variety of navigation mechanismsinterfaces; they will be discussedin detail in the "Support for navigation" section, below.
As we designedthe XLibris system,we identified several designprinciples that should pervadeand structure the user interface.Theseprinciples included a transparent user interface and modeless interaction.
XLibris maintains page layout by using tablets in portrait mode and devotes the entire display to a single page .
XLibris usespage turning rather than scrolling to move between pages of a document.
Page turning is preferred to scrolling because it preserves the visual characteristics of pages  and becauseit is more consistent with the paper document metaphor.
XL,ibris provides visual feedbackabout the length of the documentand about the reader's location within the docu-
These are small widgets at the top comers of the page that indicate visually the approximate size of the document,the reader's position in the document,and whether there is a following or a preceding page.
Location guides are similar to Book Emulator's black page edges but take up far less space;their designwill be refmed basedon experimentalevaluation.
XLibris supports free-form ink annotation directly on the page,my-where on the page.We believe that the ability to makeunstructured,idiosyncratic marks is a key aspectof a paper-like user interface.
Although such marks may not have explicit meaning to the computer, they have rich meaning to the user and thus support episodic memory.
XLibris provides different colors of highlighters and pens to increaseusers' flexibility of expression.
Operating XLibris In the real world, we envision our active reading machine coexisting witb personal computersand with paper, and we see documentsmoving freely between these three media, In our current system, readers can `print" from their desktop computer into XLibris and can scan paper documents into XLibris.
Similarly, we envision XLibris printing to paper or exporting text and images for use in desktopapplications.
Figure 5: "Silk screen" menu at bottom of page We have explored three styles of commandmenus.Initially we implementeda circular pie menu that popped up when users tapped while holding down the pen barrel button.
Since users found this awkward, we replaced the button with a "dwell" gesture:pressing the pen down and holding it stationary brings up the pie menu.
Dwell menus should not interfere with writing becausedwell is not part of paper practice: holding a pen in one spot on paper causes bleeding.
We also designedthe menu as a set of silk screen buttons, emulated by a button `bar at the bottom of the display, as shown in Figure 5.
ENHANCINGREADINGWITH COMPUTATION XLibris provides a paper-like user interface based on the document metaphor, but some functions of an active reading machine should not be entirely paper-like.
For example,active links do not exist in paper documents,and paper notebooks cannot be reorganized dynamically.
Although these features are not present "verbatim" in the document metaphor, they are not inconsistent with it.
For example, people have physically cut out sections of documents to generate clipping files, and there is a scholarly tradition of putting referencesto related works in the margins of a document.
These existing practices are reinterpreted in XLibris in a computational manner, as describedbelow.
The Reader's Notebook The Reader'sNotebook is a notebook of clippings derived from readers' annotations.
The Reader'sNotebook combines the advantages of annotating directly on the page, of taking notes in a separate notebook, and of organizing index cards.
One of the designguidelines we identified was that XLibris should support multiple navigation mechanisms.We have implemented the following: readers can turn pages using the pressure seusorsuntil the desired page is reached; a "document view" showing thumbnails of all pages simultaneously can be used to select the desired page ; or the "Reader's Notebooli' view  can be used to fiud a page with a familiar annotation.
A view history allows user to backtrack through the reading sessionin time.
We also envision using the location guidesto riffle through pages.
Figure 3: The document view shows page thumbnaiIs, idodii annotations, for the entire document.
XLibris uses small page images, or thumbnails, instead of generic icons to represent links to pages and documents.
As with a bound notebook,readerscan review concise annotations by time.
Finally, as with note cards, flexible filtering and sorting of the view allow readersto reorganizetheir information as their needschange.
Figure 6: The Reader's Notebook shows annotated clippings of documents laid end-to-end.
Clippings are labeled with document title and page number, and are lied to the corresponding pages.
The Reader's Notebook  extracts annotated clippings and lays them end-to-end in a separate,multipageview.
Each clipping is linked to the annotatedpage,so the reader can move fluidly betweennotes and documents.
Each clipping includes some surrounding text and is labeled with document title and page number to help the readerunderstandthe meaningof the marks.
How much text should be shown with each annotation?
Clippings are derived from the bounding boxes of annotationsby expanding them horizontally to the width of the page, and by expanding them vertically to include complete words.
Clippings that overlap are merged together.
The Reader's Notebook can display clippings from one document or from all documents,and can be sorted and filtered.
By default, clippings are sorted by time, so that new information appears at the end, as in a paper notebook.
Clippings can also be sorted by page number.
Searching through clippings sorted by page number is analogous to rummaging throua a pile of paper documents,but should be faster becausereadersneed not deal with lessimportant information.
Finally, readers can filter the clippings by ink color to search for different kinds of marks or to group related items together.Many readersalready use different pens to mark different types of information.
For example, some lawyers highlighht "pro" information in green and "con" information in red.
Margin Links XLibris supports a novel type of serendipirous retrieval.
Consider a library containmg large collections of documentsarrangedby topic.
This serendipity in finding books in a library is a common and often rewarding experience.
Magazines and journals sometimesprovide the same function.
Unfortunately, in both paper and online environments, fmding related materials while reading is often disconnected from the main activity.
Margin links provide serendipitous access to related documentsduring the reading process.As readersmark up documents, the system finds documents related to annotatedpassages and presentslinks unobtrusively, in the margin.
Each anchor is a thumbnail image of the target page.
Li creation does not disrupt the reading process.
The reader is free to disregard the suggestionand to continue reading.The intent is to provide a modeless link suggestion mechanism, and to allow readersto follow the links at their leisure, rather than at the time that the links are identified.
Query-mediated links Query-mediated links derive a query from a user's interaction with a document and use that query to identify related documents.
Golovchinsky  has shown that query-mediatedlii based on explicitly selected words and passages are effective in supporting information exploration tasks.
Similarly, XLibris computesmargin links from the words, phrases and passagesthat are implicitly selectedby the reader's marks.Each mark is converted in turn into a text selection, a full-text query, and a best-matchingpassage.
The system adds a margin link to the best match if its similarity value is abovea threshold.
Examples of highlighting, underlining, circling, and margin annotations.
Each annotation generates a query.
If a good match is found, XLibris adds a margin link  that shows the thumbnail of the destination page.
Query-mediated links require sources of appropriate documents for retrieval.
Although our prototype implementation relies on the reader's private collection, commercial digital document repositories are becoming available.
XLibris reco,ties severaldistinct ink patternsfrom which queries are computed These include underlined words, circled words, circled passages,and margin annotations .
Each type of annotation results in a different query for the search engine.
Marks that seIect specific words translate into queries that emphasizethose words over others in the samesentence.Marks that select longer passages generatequeries that search for similar phrases.
Currently, a separatequery is computed for each stroke; we envision grouping ink by time and type of annotation.
In summary,margin links allow the reader to stumble into information serendipitously-without any explicit interaction-in the context of their reading.
This contrasts with interfaces for brows*mg or information exploration, which separateinformation @hering from in-depth reading and rquire readersto describetheir interestsmore explicitly.
A number of systemshave explored digital ink annotation.
Wang Freestyle  provides free-form ink annotation on a fixed page of information, but does not use computation to enhance the ink.
The collaborative text editor MATE  interprets free-form ink revision marks as editing commands at the user's request, or allows usersto specify their own interpretation.
XLibris' Reader's Notebook is similar to the ink property index in Dynamite , but XLibris organizes the underlying document,not just the ink.
The Lectrice project at DEC SRC  designedand built a documentreaderintended to be an alternative to reading on paper.
However, Iectrice did not provide free-form digital ink annotation or support active reading.
The Remembrance Agent  finds documentsrelated to the Iast few lines typed into a text editor.
Whereas the RemembranceAgent supports writing, XLibris supports reading by generating margin links from ink annotations and the underlying document.
XLibris is implemented in C++ and the Win32 API, and runs on Wmdows 95lNT.
The program takes over the entire display, and does not use any Wmdows widgets.
Instead, XLibris defines a small set of widgets, renders them to an in-memory bitmap, rotates the bitmap, and copiesit to the display device.
In this way, XLibris usesa landscapedevice in portrait mode.
XLibris displays documents as 1OOdpi 64-color bitmap images shrunk slightly to fit into the aspect ratio and size of this display.
Although the mr@ns are clipped slightly on each side, enough space remains for ~armotations.
Documentscontaining 10 point text or larger ;arequite readable.
The image supports rendering independent of the source of the document The text, inferred from print commandsor from OCR, is tied to the image by a bounding box for each word This "text" supports iuformation retrieval, and is never shown to the readerdirectly.
This contrasts with our approach of supporting paper practicesand paper-based documents.
We began with the premise that computation can enhance active reading.
Toward this end we explored the task of active reading and the affordances of paper for reading.
We formulated a set of challengesfor reading onliie that must be overcome, and also a set of opportunities that computationprovides.
We have designed and implemented the XLibris "active reading machine."
XLibris implements a paper document metaphor that includes a page-orienteddisplay, documentlike navigation, ink annotation, and cues indicating document size and location within the document.
These software features are complementedby the affordancesof the pen tablet device on which XLibris runs.
The tangibility of the device reinforces the document reading experience.
XLibris allows users to mark up documentsin a manner analogousto writing on paper, but then goesbeyond paper by letting readersreview, sort and filter clippings of their annotated text in a "Reader's Notebook-" In addition, XLibris monitors the free-form ink annotationsmadewhile reading, and uses them to discover the reader's interests.
XLibris searchesfor material related to the annotatedtext, and displays links unobtrusively as "margin links."
We have begun a paper-basedstudy comparing reviewing annotations in the Reader's Notebook with reviewing annotations on the document.
In the future, we plan to deploy XLibris and evaluate its use in a real work setting.
The main obstaclethat must be overcomefirst is seamless scauningand printing into XLibris.
We thank Beverly Harrison, Anuj Gujar, Roy Want and Kim McCall for integrating the pressure sensors into XLibris.
We thank DEC SRC for making their Lectern documentformat publicly available.We thank membersof the Xerox PARC PDR team for comments and suggestions.We thank Joe Sullivan and Jii Baker for supportingthis research.
Adler, A, Gujar, A, Harrison, B-L., G'Hara, K., and Sellen, A  A Diary Study of Work-Related Reading: Design Implications for Digital Reading Devices.
Simon and Schuster, New York, NY.
In Hypertext: State of the Art, R MacAleeseand C.
P. Vial Paper.Available at 4.
Dillon, A  Readingfrom paper versusscreens:a critical review of the empirical literature.
Diion, A  Designing Usable Electronic Text.
Golovchinsky, G.  What the Query Told the Link: The integration of hypertext and information retrieval.
In Proceedings of Hypertext `97 , ACM Press,pp.
67-74. lO.Gould, A, Alfaro, L., Barnes, V., Finn, R., Grischkowsky, N., and Minuto, A  Reading is slower from CRT displaysthan from paper: attemptsto isolate a single-variable explanation.
