Think-aloud protocols are commonly used to evaluate player experiences of video games but suffer from a lack of objectivity and timeliness.
On the other hand, quantitative captures of physiological data are effective; providing detailed, unbiased and continuous responses of players, but lack contexts for interpretation.
This paper documents how both approaches could be used together in practice by comparing video-cued retrospective think-aloud data and physiological data collected during a video gameplay experiment.
We observed that many interesting physiological responses did not feature in participants' think-aloud data, and conversely, reports of interesting experiences were sometimes not observed in the collected physiological data.
Through learnings from our experiment, we present some of the challenges when combining these approaches and offer some guidelines as to how qualitative and quantitative data can be used together to gain deeper insights into player experiences.
Traditional approaches of evaluating player experiences are often qualitative.
This includes collecting subjective data from think-aloud protocols, direct observations and interviews during player test sessions.
These methods are commonly used by game designers  as they have been known to reflect reasonably accurate states.
However, observations and interviews might inhibit player's experiences as he/she might not be totally at ease being watched or questioned during gameplay.
Having players verbalise their thoughts and experiences by thinking-aloud during gameplay might distract and disrupt their experiences.
Furthermore, it might be difficult for players to accurately articulate their experiences whilst having to focus on the gameplay.
The use of video-cued retrospective think-aloud  resolves these issues to a certain extent but players might not remember all the important details retrospectively.
In addition, the sessions often require a lot of time and resources to conduct and analyze.
These shortcomings have motivated much research towards quantitative methods that seek out objective data of gameplay.
Quantitative methods have the potential to gather actual player responses in the game and possess high temporal precision to continuously capture a diverse body of information.
Current quantitative work mostly fall within telemetry or psychophysiology approaches.
Telemetry approaches primarily deal with the logging of player in-game interactions to build player models .
The advantage of telemetry approaches over qualitative methods is that they are nondisruptive and can continuously capture objective gameplay statistics in non-laboratory settings.
However, the data is limited to the in-game actions available to the player and events in the game world.
Hence, these "virtual observations" do not capture full experiences and might not represent the actual experiences of the player in real life, in particular how the player feels.
For example, a player might appear to take a long completing a task, but actually, she might be aroused with the game, enjoying exploring the game or stimulated by the aesthetics of the game.
Recently, psychophysiology emerged as a prominent branch of quantitative player experience research.
The meticulous crafting and evaluation of video game experiences are core to game design .
However, detecting, analyzing, and understanding people's gaming experiences is non-trivial due to the disruptive nature of user testing setups , the quantity and complexity of gameplay interactions , and the fact that people's experiences are difficult to grasp .
Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Current work  mostly involve inferring emotional valence and arousal using a combination of different measurements.
Video-based analysis of facial expressions have also been tried  but these methods are currently unfeasible due to the inherent challenges in computer vision .
Amongst physiological responses, capturing SCR and facial EMG responses appear to be most popular, followed by HR, as they are easily deployed during gameplay and measurements correspond well to emotional dimensions of arousal and valence .
Similar to telemetry, physiological measurements can capture player states continuously in real-time with high temporal precision.
In addition, physiological data represent the actual live states of the player during gameplay.
Unfortunately, this way of understanding gameplay experiences is problematic as physiological sensors lack contexts for interpretation making it difficult to determine causality.
The pros and cons of qualitative and quantitative approaches led us to posit that combining these two approaches might greatly benefit efforts seeking to better understand game playing experiences.
Others have attempted to evaluate implementations of some mixed methods in games , but how exactly qualitative and quantitative approaches can be combined effectively to understand players' gameplay experiences has not been sufficiently explored.
Hence this paper reports an in-depth study where we explored two different methods used to evaluate gaming experiences - video-cued retrospective think-aloud and physiological recordings.
In particular, this paper asks the following questions: Q1.
To what extent does video-cued retrospective thinkaloud descriptions of emotional experiences correlate to SCR, facial EMG and HR responses in gameplay?
How can data from video-cued retrospective thinkaloud approach be combined with data from SCR, facial EMG and HR to produce a better understanding of player experiences during gameplay?
Explicating some of the issues raised in these questions can contribute to guidelines for how these two methods could be used to evaluate gameplay experiences.
This paper also offers game researchers/designers insights into some of the learnings such as the pros and cons, as well as the challenges and opportunities of each approach when trying to understand and evaluate player experiences.
Next, we review other research that have similarly tried to combine qualitative and quantitative approaches to evaluate gaming experiences.
The tool appears promising as it can automate the laborious event syncing process common to game user tests.
However, there were no user evaluations performed and the tool can only be used for games created on a particular engine.
Their goal was to investigate whether this tool can yield a higher quality game with better gameplay experiences.
Their interviews with game designers revealed positive perceptions of the importance of physiological sensors in this tool.
In comparison, the work described in this paper is an in-depth study of the relationships between think-aloud and physiological data, with the aim of providing guidelines on how to combine them effectively to understand gameplay experiences.
They showed that game events consistently affected self-reports as well as SCR, HR and temperature.
In their work, they used a questionnaire based on the GEQ  for the self-report, and SCR and HR for the physiological signals, which they showed significant correlations.
However, the experiments in both cases, had low external validity as participants were presented with intrusive self-reporting surveying interfaces intermittently during gameplay.
For example, the latter had participants respond to the questionnaire every five minutes during gameplay.
The former work also introduced artificial game event triggers.
Moreover, participants were confined to experience categories present in their scale.
In this paper, the experimental setup presented is aimed at greatly improving the external validity by focusing on uninterrupted gameplay and using a retrospective open-ended self-reporting approach.
The type of physiological sensors we used were also different from these previous efforts.
For example, we have used facial EMG sensors  as prior work have shown significant facial EMG correlations to emotional valence .
They found that the combination of multiple qualitative data sources provided useful insights as to where interesting game moments evolved as well as learnings that occurred beyond gameplay.
However, they had immense difficulties processing and visually interpreting the physiological signals and so claimed that interpreting physiological data took too much effort to be useful.
As such, they did not correlate the physiological data to the rest of the qualitative data.
One reason might be also the fact that they were trying to find specific experience instances which they call breakdowns and breakthroughs as explained in their paper.
For us, the comparative analysis performed in this paper aims to unravel the intricacies of effectively linking qualitative reports and quantitative physiological data.
This is important as a number of studies  have successfully used physiological signals to explain game experiences.
Other researchers have recently explored the potential benefits of combining qualitative and quantitative approaches to analyse player experiences.
To our knowledge, our review did not find efforts that evaluated how quantitative machinecaptured data and qualitative self-reports can be used together effectively.
Given the lack of understanding of how to best combine quantitative and qualitative data to evaluate player experiences, we conducted an in-depth study whereby both think-aloud data and physiological data were collected from nine participants playing the Portal  game.
Next, we describe our method and how we analysed the data using two approaches: think-first approach and sense-first approach.
Think-first approach begins with qualitative data and this is compared with quantitative data.
Conversely, sensefirst approach begins with quantitative data and this is then compared with qualitative data.
As the terms  suggest, they describe which kind of data `leads' the analysis.
This, as the findings in our subsequent discussions show, has significant consequences.
Then we present the challenges and opportunities of each approach, as well as how they might be effectively combined.
Insights on how to apply our mixed method in other games and the limitations of our study are discussed leading to future work.
We finally close the paper with several guidelines for using our mixed method to evaluate player experiences.
Besides shooting portals and going through them, recurrent interactions in the game include picking up a large weighted cube, transporting it to an appropriate button on the ground and placing it there in order to activate a door.
In later levels, the cube is also used to block fatal beams as well as to drop onto enemy turrets to topple them.
Sometimes the player has to jump into a portal from a great height and use gravity to propel the character through a large cavity at the other end of the portal.
Another recurrent activity is entering an elevator in order to move to the next level, which usually takes some time, requiring the player's character to wait.
However, the game does not stall interactions at any point except upon the death of the player's character, where the game reloads the last saved state.
In other words, Portal is primarily about gameplay interactions, rather than dramatic elements like story, character and premise.
Choosing Portal for this study offers some advantages.
The slower pacing and unfolding of the game with a reasonably repetitive narrative requiring recurrent interactions, as well as apparent periods of action interspersed with less action, allowed us to capture `cleaner' and more `distinct' experiential data.
This is because players can use the various distinctive moments in the game to anchor their experiences of play when recounting them post-play.
This also meant that there are distinct segments of the ongoing physiological data where we can observe clear peaks that could be mapped to particular events in the game.
Finally, the various  events in the game provide us a temporal structure to discuss with participants their experiences, and during analysis, use this structure to compare the think-aloud and physiological data.
Our approach involves capturing and comparing data from two sources of participants' playing of the video game Portal.
These data sources are,  physiological data  of the participants during gameplay and  video-cued retrospective think-aloud recordings  after their gameplay where participants recounted their experiences of the game.
Gameplay videos  were also captured during gameplay.
To help contextualise our results, we will first briefly describe and explain why we chose Portal.
Portal is an immersive first-person puzzle game.
It is immersive not in the traditional sense of rich story lines and characters, but in terms of the deep interactions, though the game does have a mystery plot that slowly unfolds with each puzzle.
Unlike popular modern first-person shooter games, Portal does not have highly intense combat scenarios or scary premises.
Instead, Portal has the notion of play at the heart of its game.
The core interactions of Portal involves the player shooting portals in walls in order to navigate through a spatial puzzle, exit from one level and advance to the following level.
These can be either orange or blue portals which creates a pathway between two spaces within the game that did not exist, thus, allowing players to move across places instantly.
Each level is a carefully crafted spatial puzzle that usually requires a fair amount of thinking and trial-and-error from the player in order to figure out where to strategically create portals and to use various trap devices to navigate through each level in order to locate the exit.
The levels are also strewn with hints via visuals on the wall and grounds, as well as via a robotic voice that constantly speaks in a sarcastic manner.
Participants were recruited via undergraduate and postgraduate university mailing lists.
Altogether, 10 participants signed up.
After consenting to the study, participants were asked to fill an online pre-play survey to determine some of their basic characteristics, e.g., age, gender, gaming interests, gaming habits, and whether they have played Portal games.
However, one participant had to be excluded from the study due to an abundance of facial hair that prevented the EMG electrodes to be properly attached.
All participants  were keen video gamers.
Five participants  enjoy playing firstperson shooter games, six participants  enjoy role-playing games, seven participants  enjoy strategy games, four participants  enjoy games with simulation, three participants  enjoy puzzle games, and three participants  enjoy playing sports games.
Of the nine participants, six  indicated that they have played the Portal Series before .
The researchers stopped the play session after 30 minutes.
After removing the sensors, one researcher briefed the participants on the think-aloud session whilst the other researcher prepared the video replays.
The participants were asked to verbalize their prior experiences whilst watching a replay of their gameplay capture screen.
After that, the replay was started and the retrospective think-aloud commenced.
A webcam was used to record the think-aloud session.
During the think-aloud, the first researcher also prompted the participant if there were long periods of silence as it was recognized as good practice to reduce the percentage of unreported information .
The total time taken for each participant was around 2 to 2.5 hours and no compensation was given.
After the think-aloud, a short interview was conducted by the first researcher to find out whether the presence of the sensors and the camera affected the participants' play experience.
Ethics for the procedure was approved by the University of Technology, Sydney prior to the study.
The hardware setup consisted of an Alienware M18x gaming laptop with an 18-inch display and modern gaming specifications.
An Xbox 360 controller was attached to the laptop as the game input.
Thought Technology's  Procomp Infiniti was used to encode inputs from their skin conductance sensor, two facial EMG sensors, and EKG sensor .
The affiliated Biograph Infiniti software was used to process the signals.
Two webcams were used to record an elevated overview and the frontal view of the player respectively, as shown in Figure 1.
Screen capturing and remote monitoring freeware were used to record and monitor the various game and information feeds from another room.
In order to compare the kinds of insights gained when combining think-aloud and psychophysiological approaches, we needed to code three types of data: the think-aloud data, the gameplay data and the physiological data into think-codes, game-events and sense-codes respectively.
With nine participants playing the game for 30 minutes, we had 270 minutes of gameplay/physiological recordings , 334 minutes of recorded video-cued think-aloud data and 18221 words of transcribed think-aloud data.`Time'  was the common element we used to anchor our coding.
The detailed reduction process involved for each type of data is described below.
After consent forms were signed and pre-play questionnaires completed, participants were briefed about the structure of the experiment.
Physiological sensors were then attached onto the participants.
The skin conductance electrodes were strapped onto the middle phalanxes of the ring and last finger of the left hand in order to ensure minimal disruption whilst using the controller.
The pre-gelled EMG electrodes consist of two sets, one on the zygomaticus major and the other on the corrugator supercilii muscles on the face respectively as they have been shown to reflect accurate positive  and negative  valences respectively .
Two pre-gelled EKG electrodes were attached across the chest and abdomen as they are known to reflect more accurate heart activity than other placements such as the wrists.
Moreover, placing it on the body also reduces movement artefacts during play .
Once participants were rested, comfortable and could move freely, they were asked to relax whilst their baseline readings were recorded for each sensor for one minute.
They were then left to play the Portal game for 30 minutes.
Researchers left the room but was able to monitor the participant from another room using the live stream setup mentioned above.
The streamed view is as shown in Figure 1.
The think-aloud videos were first fully transcribed by the first author.
Beginning with one participant at a time, we followed a pipeline approach to code the data.
The third author generated a set of think-codes that spanned the gameplay first, which were then checked by the first author, and finally verified by the second author.
Conflicts were resolved during weekly meetings and a log of the code evolutions were recorded .
A total of 19 codes were eventually generated, which includes amused, annoyed, impatient, bored, and so on.
The 30-minute gameplay videos for all participants were first viewed to ascertain how far each participant progressed in their gameplay.
Two researchers discussed their own experiences of playing Portal to determine the main game-events in the game up to the maximum progression of any participant.
As mentioned earlier, this was possible with the Portal game because it was designed with recurrent events.
A detailed iterative coding process was then performed using each participant's gameplay video and game-events.
These were refined when necessary, following the same pipeline approach mentioned above.
We ended up with a set of 22 game-events which includes exit initial room, approaching lift , level transition in lift, and so on.
A segment of P5's coded experience timeline.
The gameplay reflects one of the initial levels where P5 enters a new level, performs a small set of actions to solve the puzzle and exits into the lift to transit to the next level.
The game-events on top segregate time-coded thematic regions.
Think-codes and sense-codes generated by the think-first and sense-first approaches lie in the center and bottom rows respectively, sync-ed with the game-events on top.
Note: the time-coded lengths are not drawn to scale.
Before coding the physiological readings, we visually inspected the graphs in tandem with participants' gameplay videos to remove all erroneous readings due to movement and other equipment mishaps.
To generate sense-codes, each signal was first pre-processed by generating one-second time series of average readings.
We then take the maximum peak value within the time period of each game-event and compare it with the baseline ranges for each participant.
Physiological features were hence coded in four categories based on quantitative multiples of the baseline ranges, namely  weak less than one multiple of the baseline range,  medium - between one and two multiples of the baseline range,  strong - greater than two multiples of the baseline range, and  insignificant - less than 0.2 times of the baseline as signals below this value were visually identified to be too noisy.
This process is repeated for the SCR, EMG+ , EMG-  and HR graphs for each participant.
Hence the eventual think-codes consist of SCR weak, SCR medium, SCR strong, SCR insignificant, EMG+ weak, and so on, resulting in 16 codes in total.
We acknowledge that there are multiple ways to account for individual differences but we determined that it was more important that we used a consistent and simple measure for the purposes of our methodological discussions in this paper.
It was also found that games designers prefer to analyze games by thematic regions  .
With a think-first approach, each think-code  was first aligned to the appropriate game-events.
After this, we added the correlated sense-codes.
In other words, we mapped particular experiences reported by the participant during the gameplay to particular events of the Portal game.
However, we found that the timestamps of participants' think-codes in the transcript of gameplay don't often match the actual time when the actual gameplay event took place.
This is because there was often a slight time-lag when participants recounted their experiences of gameplay as they viewed what was actually happening on the recorded gameplay.
So, we carefully read participants' descriptions in the transcripts whilst checking the actual gameplay video in order to correctly match  the appropriate thinkcode with the actual game-event.
Then the physiological graphs were temporally matched to the game-event segments.
We must note that multiple sense-codes exist for a single game-event segment due to the multiple sensors used.
For example, if an interesting experience is reported at a particular point of the gameplay, we then checked what physiological data is captured at that same point in time.
On the other hand, with a sense-first approach, we began with physiological data, aligning them to the game-events temporally, to match the time when the physiological data was captured.
This was based on the assumption that physiological signals happen during or very close to when the stimulus occurred.
Then, the corresponding think-codes were assigned to the appropriate game-events, once again after a similarly careful analysis of the transcripts as mentioned above.
After conducting our analysis using these two approaches, we then visually examined and compared the two bodies of data with respect to our research questions .
Figure 2 is a small segment of gameplay experience made up of primarily two row sections.
The top row section illustrates the data that we analysed for P5 using the think-first approach.
It shows how various codes were aligned to P5's game-events as P5 progressed through the gameplay.
We wanted to find out if there are differences in our findings if we began our analysis in different order, i.e., what would the findings be like if our analysis is `led' by thinkaloud data  and conversely, by physiological data .
Doing so enables us to investigate the differences led both ways  and compare the quality of experience portrayals in the two approaches .
Hence, we analysed the data twice, starting with think-first.
Also, the order of how we aligned the codes depended on whether we began the analysis with a think-first or sense-first approach.
We must again stress that the alignment of codes for the think-first analysis was conducted independently of the sense-first approach.
The two sections were only brought together  in order to compare the correspondences and discrepancies between the two approaches.
This is why many researchers turn to physiological data capture when trying to understand gameplay experiences .
Our finding reaffirms the value of capturing physiological data as it can uncover more features when studying gameplay experiences.
Given the great amount of detailed  data we handled during the analysis, we will only present segments of data to highlight findings we believe to be of interest to the aim of this paper, particularly the important correlations between the think-aloud and physiological data .
Our analysis reveals several key findings, described as follows.
One immediate observation which we found across all participants was that the sense-first approach consistently revealed significant events that were not reported by participants during their think-aloud.
In other words, these events would go unnoticed if the think-aloud approach was the only approach used to understand gameplay experiences.
The number of such extra events varies across participants.
Not all participants were equally verbose during think-aloud sessions.
It also appeared that participants were only able to report significant/memorable events.
Examining P5's coding timeline , we can see that there are already several such events even within a short timespan.
In the three game-event segments starting from 4.12"  we can see that there were multiple physiological activity that were unreported by P5 .
Especially glaring is the fact that there were strong EMG+ signals when P5 approached the lift and travelled in the lift, indicating a strong positive valence, although the participant did not report anything during think-aloud.
One possible explanation for this is that physiological sensors are continuously capturing involuntary physiological responses.
While physiological data appeared to capture more  events not reported by players, the reverse can be also true.
When examining all participants' data using the thinkfirst approach, we consistently discovered interesting experiences reported by participants that were not present when analysing the same data using the sense-first approach.
This means that there were often game-events highlighted by participants during the think-aloud sessions that do not appear to have discernible corresponding physiological responses at the same point in time.
For example, inspecting the consecutive time slices at 3.25"  and 3.52"  for P5 , we see that think-aloud reports from P5 were not accompanied by any associated  physiological data.
At 3.25" , P5 said "well this one  confusing cause it's timed, I haven't used it before".
For game designers, `confusion' is a common red-flag that they would want feedback about so that they can improve their games to reduce  players' confusion.
Of course confusion might be the game designer's desired intention, which means that it is just as important an event to be detected/highlighted when evaluating the game.
This finding is important as it reminds us that we can miss out on potentially interesting  experiences if we only capture and consider physiological data when trying to understand gameplay experiences.
It means we need to be  wary when relying solely upon tools that capture only physiological data and approaches that only consider such data, and  careful when using physiological responses to cue think-aloud responses, in that it can potentially blind researchers from other relevant and important information.
The previous two subsections highlight the potential discrepancies when we try to understand gameplay experience when using only think-aloud data or using only physiological data.
Here we highlight how having the ability to compare thinkaloud data with physiological data can reveal contradictions in the data .
When we examined the participants' gameplay timelines, we sometimes observe that the think-codes and sense-codes of the same game-event do not appear to be related.
In other words, what participants say in the thinkaloud does not match the physiological signals captured.
We illustrate this with a segment of P4's gameplay shown in Figure 3.
The jump through portal from height event that is repeated several times in the timeline is one of the key recurrent events in the game.
The puzzle presented usually involves requiring the character to get over a large cavity to a target platform which is impossible to jump across.
This requires the player to shoot one end of the portal on the wall and find a spot on some ground a large height below the platform to shoot the other end of the portal.
The event starts when the player starts moving the character with as much precision as possible so that the jump is initiated accurately with the hope of landing within the portal below during the drop.
If the character successfully passes through the portal, she would have gained enough momentum to propel her through the cavity to land on the target platform, where this event ends.
Focusing on the first jump through portal from height gameevent at 17.51", P4 reported he felt accomplished, which can be attributed to the fact that for him this gameplay segment represented an advanced puzzle that he was able to solve.
Feeling accomplished is a positive feeling whereas the physiological sensors showed otherwise .
One possible explanation is that there was temporal disparity between think-aloud and physiological data.
The actual jump happens very quickly and at the moment of jumping the player might actually start with some negative feeling of anxiety, fear, etc, due to the height and uncertainty.
When looking retrospectively at the event, it might be that he only noticed the event as a whole, and only remembered he felt 
In fact, there could be other explanations.
People might recount experiences differently  retrospectively and may depend on whom the experiences is recounted to.
This reminds us to  be wary of just relying on only one type of data,  be aware of the problems in trying to infer and reconcile a combined analysis of both types of data, and  continue to pursue/develop other tools/techniques/methods that could help us better understand what actually happens.
Combining think-aloud data and physiological data gives us a more detailed view of people's gameplay experiences.
Being able to examine the corresponding physiological data allows us to reflect more deeply about the contextualised thinkaloud data .
We also have a way to triangulate people's experiences of particular moments of gameplay in time.
For instance, physiological data on its own is decontextualised, consisting of just numerical measures.
However, if there are corresponding player-reports of think-aloud data and a contextualised game-event to reflect with, then we might be able to get deeper insights into the experience.
In Figure 4, we see that P7 was surprised when the character died at 13.22" , where he said "Umm a little bit surprised, cause I didn't know this portal will get me  from here".
From how he expressed it within the context, it might be reasonable to deduce that he was feeling more negative about this event.
This is reinforced by looking at the physiological data  which showed negative valence as well.
In fact, if we look one step backwards, we can even find that this negativity was detected prior to the event .
This comparison across data types allows the designer to reason more fully about the events related to the experience in question.
Again, he verbalized the experience as being surprising "err yeah surprised again".
If we based our interpretations solely upon this think-aloud data, we might have concluded that he was feeling negative again.
Not only did the signals show a slight positive valence, it also showed increased arousals.
One possible explanation is that the recurring deaths motivated P7 to solve this puzzle, changing his negative state to a positive one.
Indeed, if we look further ahead, the next event was that he went through the portal without dying , and also mentioned that he finally realized how to avoid being hit by a lethal orb .
This example shows that interpretations of a player's experience can be better supported when by looking at complementary sense-codes in the temporal vicinity of a particular think-code, and vice versa.
This can provide interesting insights to justify particular design decisions.
Post-game interviews were conducted to obtain feedback on whether the method of collection for both think-aloud and physiological data affected the experiences.
All the male participants indicated that the multiple sensors on their body and the two cameras did not affect their gameplay experience.
Interestingly, it was the  two female participants , who indicated that one of the sensors - the EMG sensors on the face - affected their experiences to a degree.
While this experimental artefact might suggest future investigations on gender influences, we cannot draw any conclusions here.
That is why we asked participants about their gaming history, preferences, and in particular their familiarity with the Portal game.
We had hoped that this would give us further contextual clues when interpreting their data.
In some instances, this might help shed light on some of the anomalies we encounter in the data.
After all, a person's familiarity with a particular game might dampen their physiological responses.
How a person feels prior to the gameplay can affect how they might experience the game.
Playing the game in a laboratory setting might also have an affect.
While the approach we describe advances current efforts to understand gameplay experiences, we suggest that further work is necessary to explore other methods that can add to our methodological arsenal.
We believe that other  qualitative methods to further understand the player's experiences, such as dialogical methods might well complement and add to our efforts to unravel gameplay experiences .
When considered on its own, think-aloud responses contain rich contextual information.
But as we found, the responses must first be synced to the timing of the game events.
However, syncing think-aloud responses with exact gameplay instances are difficult.
On the other hand, physiological signals have high temporal precision  but lack contexts.
As illustrated in our results, when the physiological signals closest in time to a particular think-aloud response are viewed together, obvious relationships often exist.
Exact timings can then be determined to pinpoint where particular experiences occurred, and this can guide actions to improve the design of that particular game event, if necessary.
From our results, an important phenomenon is the relationship between think-aloud responses and physiological signals over multiple game events, i.e., sections of time.
In general, there is a one-to-many relationship between think-aloud responses and physiological signals within temporal vicinity of each other.
This emphasizes the importance of looking at multiple physiological signal instances before and after the think-aloud response instances in time.
However, we now also know that the data will not be always coherent.
Again, this is where we need to delve deeper into the interpretation by considering the nature of the game event as well as the other contextual information of the players' profile as mentioned before.
This provides a rich snapshot of the experiences both spatially and temporally.
Our analysis highlights the inadequacies when relying only on either qualitative or quantitative data.
The discrepancies between individual think-aloud and physiological approaches became obvious when we viewed these datasets together.
However, when combined, think-aloud data can potentially add to our interpretation of physiological data.
In light of think-aloud data and game events, the numerical nature of physiological data is given some contexts.
Conversely, the potential emotional valence represented by the physiological data can add a sense of `feltness' to the fragmented think-aloud data .
Examined together, the combined data can indeed strengthen researchers' or game designers' overall ability to interpret particular experiences of gameplay in time, especially when think-aloud data and physiological data correspond well.
The gaps and anomalies of particular segments of gameplay experiences revealed through analysing the combined data might be seen by some as being problematic.
Although our mixed method can be potentially used to evaluate different game genres, we must note that our experiments were only conducted on a single game.
Care should be taken when applying this method to games with mechanics that differ greatly from Portal's genre.
Our method works best for slower-paced games which have clear episodic regions, though still involving fast reflexes for the gameplay interactions.
The main difference when applying our method to other genres would be the structuring of the game-events,
For the experience analyses to be relevant for design implications, the game-events also need to take design goals into account, as both think-codes and sense-codes are anchored on gameevents.
An example of a different game genre might be Bejeweled , a tile-matching casual game.
In the classic mode, the Bejeweled game is an endless puzzle that does not have clear episodic regions, and the only available player action is to swap a tile in one of four directions, which occurs at every instance of the game.
Defining game-events via player actions would hence not be very feasible for game design.
Instead, game-events might need to be structured based on the feedback provided by the game after a tile is shifted .
A possible future work could be to assess the validity/utility of our method across various game genres.
Several procedural issues also need to be considered when using our described method.
One is the task of synchronizing timestamps of the different types of data, which we have found to be non-trivial.
This is because the capture of the gameplay screen, the participant think-aloud video, and the physiological recordings began at different points of time.
Thus, all the data needed to be synchronized against the gameplay timeline prior to analysis.
While this is not overly onerous, it does require great care when collecting multiple sources of different data.
Furthermore, the task of coding and analysing the sheer amount of combined data can be very time consuming.
In the future, developing an application that can automate the syncing and visualization of multiple data sources would greatly ease the tasks of coding and analysis.
Another procedural issue to note is the intricacies of working with sensor data.
First, we observed artefacts  when capturing baseline recordings.
This was uncovered by viewing the baseline recording videos.
This seemed to be amplified for gaming activities where it is difficult to tell whether if there is a feeling of anticipation while waiting to `get on' with the game.
Second, we also encountered the problem of finding appropriate locations to attach the sensors.
For example we understood that the distal phalanxes of the index and middle finger can produce more pronounced readings for SCR, but they were not possible for gaming activities that involved the keyboard or a controller.
Hence we had to use the middle phalanxes of the ring and last finger, which sometimes felt loose when placed on someone with a slim last finger.
To an extent, these issues can be resolved by an artefact rejection process, which we have also employed, but this required more time.
Hence, we agree with Lacovides et al.
In addition, we suggest the need to properly calibrate, monitor, and reflect how sensors are used during an experiment and consider how this might influence the data captured.
Great care must also be taken to reconcile think-aloud data to the gameplay video, as there were often multiple affective states as well as multiple events that needed to be coded.
In addition, the degree of verbosity and recall differed across participants.
A final limitation we found are issues concerning external validity.
Although we tried to make the environment as natural as possible  we still needed to use conspicuous sensors and video cameras.
On a positive note, most participants did not find them obtrusive nor detrimental to their gaming experiences.
There are definitely opportunities to investigate how such studies can be feasibly conducted in participants' home while playing games on their own computers in familiar settings.
Finally, we list some recommendations for those wishing to use this combined approach to investigate player experiences of video games.
Use both think-first and sense-first approaches in analyses.
As our findings show, using only one type of data to lead the other would result in lost information .
In addition researchers/designers should be careful not to over-rely on physiological signals to cue think-aloud responses, something that might appear to be intuitively useful.
In general, it might be advantageous for researchers/designers to perform multiple passes on multiple sources of data, especially when they are of a different nature .
Use physiological features with think-aloud reports anchored on game events.
As our findings revealed, a much more complete picture of player's experiences can be obtained when physiological data is synchronized to thinkaloud data based on game events.
This way both continuous, instantaneous data and self-report data can be correlated, which as we found, can augment each other.
This also supports the approach implemented in the tool created by Mirza-Babaei et al.
Be wary when analysing combined physiological and think-aloud data.
As we found, think-aloud and physiological data can sometimes give us contradictory signals.
Researchers/designers should be careful when examining them.
Inspecting events surrounding the anomaly in question may help reconcile the interpretation.
Further followup interviews may also help.
This paper described our efforts to combine both think-aloud approach and psychophysiological approach to ascertain if this could offer a better way to how we currently approach the evaluation and understanding of player experiences during video gameplay.
It also presents some reflection on problems that we must be aware of when using these approaches.
We found that there are benefits in combining think-aloud data, physiological data, and game events when analysing gameplay experiences.
While more may not be always better, this study has certainly reflected that, "the whole is indeed greater than the sum of its parts".
This work was supported by the Centre for Human Centred Technology and Design and the School of Software at UTS.
We wish to thank Associate Professor Yusuf Pisan, Codirector of UTS Games Studio, for helping to seek funding, as well as Professor Hung Nguyen, Dean of Faculty of Engineering & IT at UTS, for funding the sensor equipment.
We also wish to thank the anonymous reviewers and coordinators from the CHI committee for their invaluable comments that have helped improve this paper.
Bernhaupt, R. Evaluating User Experience in Games: Concepts and Methods.
Correlation between heart rate, electrodermal activity and player experience in First-Person Shooter games.
A Description of Think Aloud Method and Protocol Analysis.
Fullerton, T. Game Design Workshop: A Playcentric Approach to Creating Innovative Games, 2 ed.
Gagne, A., Seif El-Nasr, M., and Shaw, C. A Deeper Look at the use of Telemetry for Analysis of Player Behavior in RTS Games.
Hazlett, R. Measuring emotional valence during interactive experiences: boys at video game play.
Isbister, K., and Schaffer, N. Game Usability: Advancing the Player Experience, 1 ed.
Leong, T. W., Wright, P., Vetere, F., and Howard, S. Understanding experience using dialogical methods: the case of serendipity.
Mandryk, R. L., Atkins, M. S., and Inkpen, K. M. A continuous and objective evaluation of emotional experience with interactive play environments.
Matias Kivikangas, J., Nacke, L., and Ravaja, N. Developing a triangulation system for digital game events, observational video, and psychophysiological data to study emotional responses to a virtual character.
McCarthy, J., and Wright, P. Technology as experience.
