We report the roles of touch during phone conversations by observing long-distance couples' one month use of POKE in their homes.
POKE enables users to deliver touches through an inflatable surface on the front of the device that receives index finger pressure inputs on the back of another device, while allowing the callers to maintain a conventional phone-calling posture.
After a month of use by three couples, we found unexpected roles of touch in that it supported the couples in developing and sharing their tactile vocabularies by applying POKE during various conversational situations.
Moreover, the findings confirmed the roles that touch play in face-to-face communication.
In particular, POKE was useful for expressing and understanding emotions, resolving conversations smoothly by replacing the words, feeling close to the partner at a distance, and concentrating on the phone conversations.
We conclude by discussing the unused situations, privacy issues, and usable targets to improve POKE as a way of future tactile phone conversations.
For that reason, they have to build intimacy by sharing words and emotions through voice, text, and video channels, all of which are supported by mobiles phones .
In particular, their communication is often supported by a phone call with the speaker on an ear and the microphone near the mouth, because it is one of the most conventional ways  of remote interpersonal communication.
On the other hand, emotional communication in phone calls depends on phonetic features such as amplitude variation, pitch inflections, tempo, duration, filtration, tonality, and rhythm.
Video phones support non-verbal information such as facial expressions and body gestures, but they also introduce other problems of privacy  and require new postures that users use on calls.
Therefore, it is necessary to find private and natural ways to increase the level of emotional communication during conventional phone calls.
We tried to find a way to share tactile messages naturally over conventional phone calls by adding a tactile channel that delivers non-verbal messages privately.
Previous studies rarely presented devices that support shared touches over natural phone calls and did not discuss the roles of touch from a long-term study perspective; instead, they focused on delivering emotions or specific touch behaviors such as kissing or hugging.
In this paper, we present POKE, which is a device that enables callers to share touches during calls .
POKE delivers these touches through an inflatable surface on the front of the device that receives index finger pressure inputs on the back of another device, while allowing the callers to maintain a conventional phone-calling posture.
We report the results of three long-distance couples' one month use of POKE in their homes.
We investigate what roles touches served for the couples during their phone calls.
More specifically, we researched whether POKE served any unexpected roles, and if it supported the roles that touch play in face-to-face communications.
Based on these results, we discuss issues that should be considered to improve POKE as a way of future tactile phone conversations.
Touch is a significant channel for sharing emotional information in interpersonal communications.
It serves important roles when expressing sympathy for another's words, comforting, and persuading others.
In addition, touches are used for acknowledging another at the opening and closing of encounters and determining the order of a conversation .
Although the touch channel plays various emotional and functional roles in interpersonal communications, it is difficult for long-distance romantic couples to build intimacy through tactile communication.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
CHI 2013: Changing Perspectives, Paris, France obtained from long-term uses and the unexpected roles of touch from previous user studies.
In this study, we present the POKE device and found various roles of touch from natural and familiar uses of POKE through a one-month field trial based on lessons learned from previous studies.
As the importance of tactile channel increases in interpersonal communications, studies that design devices to support remote interpersonal communication have been presented often in the HCI field for years.
Several cases developed for this purpose settled on the notion of Mediated Social Touch by Haans and Ijsselsteijin .
One of the first developed cases was a device called InTouch , which supports tactile communication with a remote partner via the movement of three rollers.
More recently, various forms of devices have been developed and studied for remote tactile communication, such as arm-bands , pads , woofers , cups , and jackets .
Although users have long been familiar with the use of phones and keyboards that support remote communication, previous studies lack ways of sharing touches while maintaining the usage behaviors of phones and keyboards.
Examples that applied tactile devices on daily products such as a cup , an arm , or upper body wear  provide a tactile experience in new contexts that differ from existing communication devices.
Moreover, a long period of time might be needed for users to adjust on a new device that differs from previous ways of communication using existing devices.
It is also difficult to replace the act of conversation through current audio and text channels, because remote interpersonal communication still require these channels.
One line of this research has focused on representing specific touch behaviors such as kissing , grasping , tickling , and hugging  or has investigated whether the device can support remote delivery of the emotions .
By contrast, studies have seldom reported the unexpected roles of touch and the roles that touch play in face-to-face communication by observing the long-term use of remote tactile communication devices during daily phone conversations.
Some studies have explored the values of touch over remote conversations, but one such research effort was limited to ten minutes of use in the lab , another used an asynchronous messaging system for two weeks , and a third study primarily focuses on the feedback design and the non-verbal cues represented by the device .
Other studies explored the uses and values of systems that support social connectedness with the user at a remote distance through long-term field trials.
Those systems did not support touches over remote communication, but instead reported that the devices provided reassurance and connectedness with the partner at a distance by sharing each other's awareness .
Using previous studies, we confirmed the need for remote interpersonal tactile communication and explored the possibilities of new tactile-sharing devices that applied touch on daily products and various other forms of devices.
Previous cases, however, do not sufficiently present a natural way of sharing touches while maintaining conventional ways of phone conversations.
We focused on finding ways to let users easily send and receive touches by designing a device for sharing touches during phone calls .
We found improvements to the design of a new POKE device through our previous prototype development  and preliminary use tests in the lab .
From the initial test results, we identified improvements related to touch input and output parts, positioning of the touch input button, and self-checking the touch expressions.
We modified the design of the POKE to reflect these improvements.
Moreover, we considered the aesthetic parts to make the users want to use the POKE in their homes, and we designed the tactile output surface to be changed easily by users when it got dirty or worn.
Finally, we tried to design the hardware robustly for a long-term field trial, and built software systems that can record and store the usage data.
Touch input through POKE is done by the user placing his/her index finger on the back of the device during phone calls as shown in Figure 1.
We selected the index finger, which is easier to move on the surface than other fingers, as the means of touch input because the remaining four fingers are normally used for holding or supporting the device.
Because users have to express touches along with words during phone conversations, we determined that the index finger is the most stable and can be moved naturally.
The pressure intensity, frequency, pattern, and shaking that are transmitted through index finger movements are passed onto the other's person's cheek through the air inflation patterns of POKE's front surface.
We maintained the cheek as the part to feel the touches because it is easier to put the device's surface on the cheek rather than on the palm during phone calls.
The cheek is also easy to use as another touch input, such as when sending back the touches received from the other caller .
POKE delivers touches through an inflatable surface because it is softer  than other mechanical movements or vibration only stimuli and should be safe when in contact with the skin, even if a touch is strong.
We describe POKE's key interaction techniques below.
Instead of vibrations or bells, a user can receive a call by looking at the physical movement of POKE if the other person is making the user's device move up and down by touch inputs .
The movements can be small or large according to the person's touch input intensity and patterns.
This enables users to differentiate the movements for calling depending on the situations .
If the sender shakes his/her finger more than three times while pressing the input button, then the vibration will be delivered on the receiver's cheek through inflation of the surface .
This function can be used when the callers want to indicate extreme expressions that are not sufficiently conveyed via surface inflation only.
We enabled users to reposition the touch input button  on the back of POKE because users' hand sizes are different.
Users can attach the touch input button on the black square pressure sensor  on the 10mm x 10mm boundary of length and breadth .
If the users are not using the device, the button can be placed on the inflatable surface on the front .
There was a need for checking how the touches sent by a person were delivered to the receiver during phone calls .
POKE provides a self-checking function that enables users to make sure the tactile feeling they sent delivers the exact feeling in the right context.
If the user pushes the button down on the side of the device, the touch input is delivered to the user him/herself  so that he/she can confirm the touches before sending them to the other person.
If the user pushes the button up, the touch inputs are delivered to the other person .
When User A is self-checking, User B cannot send any touches to User A.
Touch input is done by using a soft silicone button  that is attachable to the back of the POKE.
We made the button similar to the texture and elasticity of human skin because we wanted to make the users feel like they were touching the other person's skin when they sent touches through the button.
The silicone button is made of silicone  in a 30mm diameter aluminum frame.
We determined the size of the silicone so that users could push and shake the button easily with an index finger.
We selected RTV-rubber type silicone; the durometer value is about 10 degrees, which is similar to the elasticity of human skin.
The silicone cover is 3M Transparent Latex Film Dressing 1626W, which is generally used for wound protection and has a texture similar to human skin.
The back of the silicone button is made of suction cup tape material, so that the users can attach and detach the silicone button and place it where they can easily input touches.
The square pressure sensor  on the back of the POKE detects the finger pressure's intensity and shaking to deliver touches to the recipient through inflatable surface and vibration.
If User A has sent a touch, User B who received the touch can send a touch back by pressing the phone with the cheek .
This gesture can be used simply for answering the touch received or it can be used as a non-verbal behavior by exchanging pokes and poke backs without any certain intentions during the phone conversations.
Touch output is done by the air inflation and deflation of the circular hole , which is covered with latex sheets on the front of the POKE .
The two air hoses that are connected to the bottom of the POKE inject, release, and maintain the air.
Each hose is connected to a mini air pump and solenoid valve inside the case ; operation signals are received from the PCB , which includes an Arduino board according to the person's touch inputs.
The air pressure sensor inside the circular hole controls the inflation height and detects the input through the cheek.
The covers of the circular hole consist of two layers: first the transparent latex film blocks the air when it is injected, and second the latex sheet lays over the latex film to protect the film and to make the inflatable surface durable.
The aluminum top cover  is screwed next to the circular hole to fix the inflated form to be protruded from the center of the circular hole.
The vibration motor inside the hole is surrounded by silicone so as not to spread the vibrations to the device but to deliver them to the cheek only.
The sensors and actuators for the touch input and output are soldered on the two-way PCB  inside the POKE.
They are connected to the controller board and computer through the connector, which is on the bottom of the POKE.
In order to synchronize touch with verbal communication, it was first important to reduce the time of user A's sensor input to user B's air pump output.
We used a 12V air pump with 400mmHg of max pressure that can quickly inflate the surface.
We also recruited participants who have 100Mbps Wi-Fi network environment in their homes.
Before conducting the field trial, in the lab we evaluated whether the touch and voice can be simultaneously delivered to the opponent by creating conditions that we would likely face in the field.
The test results showed that when user A generates a tactile input with voice, user B can receive them well at almost the same time.
The latency time of the audio transmission through Skype  was similar with the sum of the sensor  to the actuator  latency time  and surface inflating time .
We also conducted tests in the participants' homes one week before the trial, and the latency time was similar to the results that were achieved in the pilot test.
During the field trial period, none of the participants complained about delivering touches with voices at the same time.
We developed a logging system  along with the POKE for the field trials in this study.
The system controls users' POKE data with client-server architecture.
Each user's POKE device is connected with a laptop that becomes the client.
Client A's touch input values are sent to the server, and then client B reads the value from the server and sends touch output through the controller board connected to the device.
The logging software installed in the server computer represents the uses of POKE with a graph in real-time and saves all the usage graphs with data files.
The graph  represents the pressure intensity , poke backs, vibrations, and self-checks according to the time .
First, we surrounded the air pump with sound-proof cotton.
Then we placed the air pump in the box  in order to reduce the noise that emanated from the air pump.
Second, we filled the gap between the box and the air pump with cotton wool.
Lastly, we attached sponge supports in the bottom four corners of the box to prevent the noise from spreading onto the hard surface.
Through this process, we were able to reduce the original noise level from the air pump  to 48dB .
Session: Tactile Experiences expected to find various and meaningful roles of touches from the natural uses.
Therefore, rather than conduct short trials with a large number of couples in the lab, we installed the POKE in six homes for three couples for one month.
The sample size and the period of field trial were determined based on the examples recommended from a previous study  that discussed field trial methods.
In this field trial, we focused on finding not only the roles that touches play in face-to-face communication but also unexpected new roles of touches through the POKE.
CHI 2013: Changing Perspectives, Paris, France explain how to use the device.
Then, we tested if their devices exchanged signals through the server.
We conducted weekly interviews with each couple using video chat, and conducted a post-use interview one week after they finished the one-month use.
These post-use interviews were conducted individually.
Weekly interviews were conducted with each couple, and then we conducted additional interviews individually if the questions revealed negative emotional communications or other negative issues related to the other caller.
The first week's interviews included questions related to each couples' history and their biographies.
Overall, the questions included the roles of touch that POKE supported well or not during phone conversations, depending on their mood, situation, and the contents of the conversations.
We also asked about the good and bad aspects of using POKE and its overall usability.
In the post-use interviews, we asked about what the users missed most while using POKE, their usable targets, and the impacts of POKE on their relationship and privacy issues.
The structure of our interview questions were determined based on previous studies .
Three pairs of long-distance couples  were recruited for our study.
We expected that various roles of touches during phone conversations would be found among long-distance couples because they lack intimacy-building interactions, such as physically touching and their communications mostly depended on the phone.
Romantic couples' tactile communication is more active than people who are in formal relationships .
Also, we observed the use of the POKE with their partners consistently for a month so that we could find natural uses after considering the novelty effect.
All of the couples usually have phone calls at night after work as they communicate via text messaging while working.
Four of the six participants were living at home with their family, and two  were living with their roommates in a dorm.
Recruiting was done through a general recruitment bulletin, and we paid $200 per couple for their participation.
Alice is 25 years old and runs a diet club.
Andy is a 27-year-old undergraduate student.
They have been dating for two years and have lived apart from the beginning until now.
Andy lives 134 miles away from Alice and they meet one or two times a month on average.
Their POKE devices were installed on the side table next to their beds.
Bonnie is 22 years old and works as an intern at a life sciences company.
Ben is 22 years old and works at an IT company.
They have been dating for a year and a half and have been apart for a month.
Ben lives 113 miles away from Bonnie and they meet once a month on average.
Bonnie's POKE was installed on the bedside table and Ben's was installed on his desk.
Carol is 21 years old and teaches mathematics.
Charles is 22 years old and works as a researcher at an institute.
They have been dating for six months and have been apart from the beginning until now.
Charles lives 120 miles away from Carol and they meet two times a month on average.
Carol's POKE was installed on her living room table and Charles's was installed on his desk next to his bed.
A POKE device and a laptop were installed in each user's home.
We installed the device at a place where each user could comfortably use it, and we allowed them to move the devices and use any location in their homes where a laptop was connected to a Wi-Fi network.
We asked the participants to initiate an audio-tactile call by using POKE .
During the field trial period, we restricted the use of video and text chat through Skype.
In addition, we provided replacement materials  to the users and taught them how to replace the materials if the inflatable latex surface wore out or got dirty.
The three couples' monthly use real-time data  was saved on the server so that we could check when they used POKE and whether it had any technical problems .
All six POKE devices worked well during the month, but the server computer's network was disconnected for three hours one day, so we had to ask the users to reboot their client software program that day.
We analyzed the results based on the weekly and post-use interviews, and the logged usage data was used to identify the detail situations that users mentioned in the interviews.
All interviews were audio recorded.
Individual and couple interviews, for a total of 600 minutes, were transcribed by our research team.
In addition, the participants' audio-recorded dialog data  was transcribed in sync with POKE usage log graph files   for three weeks.
We checked the details that were conveyed through the interviews with the transcribed log data, and we logged the ways and contexts in which POKE was used.
We found various roles for touches in phone conversations through the participants' natural uses of POKE.
We will first give an overview of the uses of POKE and then describe when the couples were stabilized in using the device.
Table 1 shows how often the POKE was used for the month per couple.
Our server program counted once for the use of POKE when a user released after pressing the touch input button and did a poke back.
Self-checking was not included in the counting.
C1 and C3 used POKE 12 times per minute on average, but C1's talk time was far longer than C3.
Relatively, C2 used POKE much more in a minute  than C1 and C3.
All three couples developed and shared their own tactile vocabularies through POKE, despite our teaching them the basic way of using the device.
This finding was an unexpected role of touch.
Tactile vocabularies that empathized with each participant about the specific words and tactile feelings of POKE were developed naturally by applying POKE during various conversational situations after one to two weeks of use.
All users mentioned that they developed tactile vocabularies and used them consistently.
In particular, Bonnie noted that artificially created vocabularies at first disappeared over time and were replaced by a better-fit representation.
Also a previous study  mentioned that couples' own tactile vocabularies could be developed because these were developed by matching the situation while using the device.
Table 2 shows the tactile vocabularies of the three couples.
The participants noted when and how the tactile vocabularies were used in each conversation and how each vocabulary was represented by POKE.
Based on those interview results, we were able to identify the corresponding dialog in the usage log data that maintains the transcription of the couples' audio conversations.
We were then able to segment the POKE expression into a specific tactile vocabulary that was used in the dialog.
We also could determine the number of times that each tactile vocabulary was used; we only counted the vocabularies if they could be exactly segmented from other touches within the dialog.
The tactile vocabularies that meant "I love you," "laughing gently," and "pestering" were most frequently used by the couples.
Daily numbers of uses and talk times were different according to each couple's calling pattern, contents of the conversation, and emotional status.
However, each couple's average amount of POKE usage/min per week  tended to decrease from the second week and then became similar.
From the weekly interviews, we also confirmed that couples become familiar with the use of POKE during the second week of the study.
As Andy noted at his second week interview, "Now it seems to be stabilized.
The number of uses is different depending on the subject and contents of the conversation."
Alice stated, "I got used to it after using this in several situations during a week.
Now we are using it in the right context and meaning."
Bonnie said, "I could express loving and annoying emotions effectively from the second week use, and the meaningless use of POKE decreased."
Session: Tactile Experiences developed the same tactile vocabulary; there were cases that the meanings were different, but the POKE expressions were the same.
Couples tended to represent onomatopoeia, frequently used words, and slang with tactile vocabularies.
C2 developed "I love you" by touching weakly two times, and they used this at the last moment of every call starting on the second week.
C3 also developed this tactile vocabulary.
C2 made different tactile vocabularies depending on the intensity of laughter; if laughing gently, they expressed it with six times of weak touches, and if laughing aloud, they mapped it with a hard poke and vibration.
Bonnie and Ben of C2 stated that POKE was useful when talking about interesting stories, news, and funny stories with their partner.
However, C3 delivered a poke back as meaning cute annoyance.
C1 represented pestering words, such as "Buy me  ~" and "Play with me~" with a long hard poke with vibration.
On the other hand, there were tactile vocabularies that included slight negative meanings.
For instance, the meaning of "OMG" was expressed with a hard poke and "It's annoying" was expressed with six hard and fast touches.
C2 mapped three hard touches with "What are you doing?"
C3 developed words that were used in their usual phone conversations with POKE.
The words "Let's fight" included playful meanings in their usual phone calls, and it was represented with two to three iterations of vibrations and poke backs.
All participants mentioned that the tactile vocabularies helped them build a bond of sympathy because those were promised representations that only she/he and his/her partner knew.
Ben stated in the third week interview that, "I used tactile vocabularies more than words when laughing or expressing emotions after I got used to the device."
Bonnie noted, "Now, I represent tactile vocabularies unconsciously, and I had more fun and focused conversation with Ben on the phone."
CHI 2013: Changing Perspectives, Paris, France POKE that she was very excited to go somewhere."
Expressions of positive emotions differed depending on if they were acting charming or making sincere love confessions.
For example, Carol noted that she tapped several times when she acted charming to Charles and sent touches on each syllable saying, "`I' `miss' `you'" or mimicked Charles' touch pattern.
On the other hand, she pressed hard on the touch input button for a long time when she expressed sincere love.
All users noted that POKE was helpful to comfort and encourage their partner with touches.
Weak touches were delivered for encouragement and comfort.
Alice told us, "I had a tough day physically, but I felt better when Andy encouraged me by patting me by sending weak touches."
Andy mentioned, "I was in a tense mood because of a job interview, but I felt good when Alice encouraged me to do the interview well by sending several weak touches."
Bonnie said, "I often expressed my annoyance to Ben with hard touches, Ben reacted with POKE and I was comforted that he sent me slight touches while listening to my words.
Usually, he only says the words, but the slight touches that he sent to me felt like he was saying `It's okay, it's okay.'"
Similarly, Carol mentioned, "I grumbled to Charles that the new job is hard.
It was nice that he sent me weak touches; it felt like he was stroking me."
POKE was useful when delivering negative emotions, as well.
Participants delivered their negative emotions differently, depending on mild irritation, dissatisfaction, or very bad and sincere feelings.
Vibrations or hard, fast and continuous touches were delivered.
Carol told us that if she sent a hard poke when she felt bad, Charles noticed that she was angry and said her name tenderly.
Bonnie mentioned that she delivered hard touches several times to express that she was annoyed.
Alice stated, "Andy aroused my attention while sending `You little..!'
Andy told us that if he expressed a dislike with a shudder by sending several vibrations with pokes, Alice understood his feelings well.
All participants noted by the fourth week and in the postuse interviews that their previous phone conversations were short and monotonous; however, they were honest about their emotions and talked more with their partners after using POKE.
In addition, they said this was a good influence on both of them in their current situation because they could not meet often because of the distance.
As Bonnie noted, "I thought a lot about how to express my own emotions through POKE, unlike when using a regular phone.
It was effective for representing my emotions and empathizing with Ben's emotions."
Studies that investigated the roles of touch on face-to-face communication state that touch induces feelings of encouragement and affection  and helps to emphasize the strength of emotions represented from facial expressions and voices .
Also, when the touch channel is added on remote communications, it supports increased joviality and reduces negative emotions .
We expected POKE to be helpful for emotional communication to some extent.
In this study, we found that POKE supported an understanding of the partner's feelings and emotional status and became a means for expressing and delivering emotions during phone conversations.
All users noted that if their partner expressed his/her feelings with POKE, they could understand these feeling better than only hearing voices.
Andy mentioned, "I asked Alice to go somewhere during a call and, she sent me touches with saying `Yeah!!'
POKE served a role over phone calls for all couples in that it helped resolve the conversation smoothly by replacing the words.
This finding relates to the role of touch in face-to-face communications in that touch serves a role of persuading the partner and inducing a positive impact on him/her .
CHI 2013: Changing Perspectives, Paris, France systems.
Wikipedia describes a feeling of closeness as one of the components that determines social connectedness with others; this directly relates to physical intimacy and the emotional connection that one feels to another person.
In this study, four participants  mentioned that POKE supported their feelings of closeness, in particular when exchanging poke backs, receiving a poke when sayings another's name, and pressing the silicone  button.
Andy noted, "Poke back is interesting, Alice's act of answering back with a poke back helps me to feel more closeness with her than only with words.
It was like she rubbed me with her cheek."
Alice mentioned that they usually touch each other's cheeks and abdomens when they meet, and it was like Andy was teasing her playfully by touching my cheek while being right by her side.
Alice and Andy of C1 told us in the fourth week interview that they got this feeling while using POKE, and it was good to feel closeness despite their geographical distance.
Ben stated, "If Bonnie uses POKE while smiling and saying my name, I feel like she is at my side.
It's like she is waving at me."
Bonnie mentioned that pressing the silicone button made her to feel closer to Ben.
We found a specific situation from Carol and Charles's conversations during the second week.
They had an everyday conversation for 12 minutes, but Carol went into a bad mood because Charles was indifferent after she complained to him about not seeing each other more often.
In this situation, Charles sent two weak touches through POKE without saying anything, and then she smiled and her mood improved.
After this, they talked for another 25 minutes, with both of them in a good mood.
Similarly, Bonnie noted, "I whined because we didn't get to see each other often and because of my hard job.
Ben was also tired of working that day, so the conversation put us both in a bad mood.
But after we played by exchanging poke backs several times, the mood became better and we could talk more about other things."
She also stated in the post-use interview that she expressed her negative feelings with POKE indirectly in situations in which it was difficult to speak directly, and so it was good that Ben understood her without having his feelings hurt.
Andy mentioned that POKE was useful when replacing the words that he finds difficult to say.
As he noted in the third week interview, "Alice told me to come to see her in person during one call, but it was too difficult to make the trip because I had to prepare for an interview and the distance was too far.
So I expressed my feelings with weak touches through POKE, and it was good that the direction of our conversation changed smoothly after that."
Bonnie and Ben from C2 told us that they usually expressed "I love you" only through the text messages because they were ashamed to say those words.
Once they developed "I love you" with a tactile vocabulary through POKE, they used it often during their calls.
Ben said, "I do not usually act charming, but it was good to be able to act charming through POKE."
All couples noted that sharing touches through POKE was useful when they had nothing to say or when the conversation was lost or got boring.
Bonnie and Ben of C2 told us that if these situations happened during their calls, they often just mimicked the other's touch patterns or sent a hard poke to get the other's attention.
Ben mentioned, "We usually break the gaps with asking, `What are you doing?'
Carol stated that she normally asks, "Are you there?"
Five participants noted that they could concentrate more on the conversation and their mate's opinion and they could remember the contents of conversation longer after a phone call through POKE.
Andy told us that he felt the conversation in his skin, and he could concentrate more on the words when POKE touched him on the cheek.
He stated "POKE helps me to retain the words in my memory about things that cannot be expressed only with words.
She  also told me that she could concentrate more on the content of the conversation."
C2 and C3 mentioned that they could concentrate more by comparing their experiences with usual audio calls.
As Ben of C2 noted, "I usually did other work while talking on the phone, but I concentrated more on the conversation through POKE."
Bonnie noted, "If he  answers `Yeah~' with POKE, I feel like he is concentrating more on my words because he usually answers just for the sake of it."
Carol of C3 said, "Our usual calls end quickly and are boring, but the time flew by fast and I began to talk longer than usual when I talked with POKE."
The five participants mentioned that they could induce their partners to concentrate on the conversation through POKE.
This finding relates to the role of touch in face-to-face communications and that touch helps to focus the partner's concentration .
As an example, Bonnie often sent touches 
Andy noted that he sent touches rapidly or poked with vibrations to make Alice listen to him when it seemed she was not paying attention to his voice.
Among the previous studies related to remote tactile communications, Wang et al.
Session: Tactile Experiences information, such as body and hand gestures through POKE.
For example, Alice noted, "If I ask him to shake the diet drink well before drinking it, I sent a touch with vibration to express the shaking behavior."
Andy of C1 and Ben of C2 told us that they often sent the act of nodding their heads when they were empathizing and agreeing.
Alice of C1 and Bonnie of C2 said that they felt their partners empathized more with their words.
Similarly, Andy mentioned he tapped twice on the POKE to express tapping on the desk when thinking.
They tended to express their finger and hand gestures or movements that are similar to the tactile feeling delivered by the POKE.
CHI 2013: Changing Perspectives, Paris, France All of the participants told us that their family members and roommates were not bothered while they used it, and using POKE in public places was not an issue for them.
Their answers were simple, and we summarized their two main reasons.
First, they mentioned that the part that delivers touch through POKE is in between their cheek and the device, so that it would not be easily seen by others.
Second, they told us that others do not know the context and content of their conversation and that others could not understand the meaning of touches with POKE unless they had listened to every conversation.
The three couples did not use the tactile function of POKE in similar situations.
Interestingly, those were akin to the unused situations of touch in face-to-face communication.
Overall, they did not use the tactile function in times of fighting, fatigue, or serious situations.
They all mentioned that they knew when their partner disliked using the device, and they did not use it in these situations.
In C1's case, they noted that they did not use the tactile function when having serious conversations about careers or when feeling down or tired.
Alice of C1 told us that she did not use it on purpose and did not use it while concentrating on the conversation naturally.
She only used very weak touches to indicate that she was listening and agreeing.
C2's case was similar to C1's case in that Ben of C2 did not use it on the days that Bonnie told him that she was tired.
Ben said if he receives touches when he feels down, he sometimes moves POKE a bit from his cheek.
Alice mentioned, "I often use it to express my annoyance lightly, but do not use it when I am seriously angry.
In that situation, Andy seems to dislike using POKE so as not to stimulate me even more."
Likewise, Charles stated he did not to use it when Carol was angry.
According to these findings, we asked all three couples in the post-use interview about adding an on-off function in the device to turn off the tactile function in those unused situations.
All three couples told us that it depends on the content and context of the conversations.
Charles mentioned, "I would understand if she turns it off when we are having serious conversations.
However, if she turns off while we are having interesting conversation, I might feel bad or think back to remember if I made some mistakes."
Ben said he might notice that Bonnie had started a serious conversation after she turned off the tactile function for usual talk.
These findings indicate that if touch can be controlled by users on phone conversations, it can provide a possibility to lessen negative roles of touch and support to increase the use of touch in better contexts.
We expected there to be a certain target range for using POKE, as the frequency of tactile communication is high among people who are in intimate relationships.
In individual post-use interviews, we asked the six participants with whom they could have conversations using POKE.
First, we asked whom they could call.
Second, we asked from whom they could receive calls.
We also asked about the range of differences in the use of tactile phone calls using POKE and video phone calls.
For the first question, we got consistent feedback from all six.
They noted that if the targets are lovers, family members, close friends, or close seniors and superiors near their age, they could make the calls.
Ben mentioned that if the recipient was his senior, but close to his age, he could lighten the atmosphere through POKE because the usual calls are more formal.
However, all of the male participants said they would not use POKE if the recipient was the same sex.
On the other hand, female participants told us that they would use it no matter if the recipient was the same sex or not.
This finding relates to a previous study that females are more receptive to touch than males .
Participants mentioned that POKE would be uncomfortable to use if the relationship with the recipient was not intimate.
Bonnie stated, "It would be hard to express my feelings with POKE to them, because I am not usually having emotional conversations with them."
On the other hand, in answer to the second question, all participants noted that they would use POKE if the recipient called them; they would take it because the recipient might feel bad.
For example, Charlie said, "If my boss called me with POKE and I did not receive the call with POKE, he would give me a scolding."
We got interesting results from the comparison questions of usable targets with video telephony.
Five out of six participants mentioned that they would use POKE with more people than video telephony.
The rest stated that the usable targets would be similar with video telephony.
In particular, Ben mentioned that the usable target range of POKE is in between video and audio telephony.
All participants noted that they could easily identify their partner's mood with video telephony, but POKE was more useful when feeling and understanding their partner's emotions.
Session: Tactile Experiences on my face when I am angry.
On the other hand, POKE was good in that I could express these feelings indirectly.
Also, the usable targets of POKE seem to be wider, because the background is exposed on video telephony; with POKE, I can talk regardless of the place."
Overall, we confirmed that the usable targets of POKE according to free will are people who are in intimate relationships in which emotional communication is possible.
However, we expect the usable targets of POKE will be wider than those who use video telephony and narrower than those who only use audio telephony.
In this paper, we have found the roles of touch over phone conversations by observing long-distance couples' onemonth use of POKE in their homes.
We presented a POKE that enables callers to send and receive touches through an inflatable surface of the device and a skin-like touch input button over conventional phone calls.
The results of a trial with the POKE among three long-distance couples showed that it supported their development and sharing of their own tactile vocabularies and supported the roles that touches have in face-to-face communications.
In particular, POKE was useful for expressing and understanding emotions and resolving conversations smoothly by replacing the words.
It also supported a feeling of closeness with a partner at a distance and enabled both partners to concentrate on the phone conversations.
Along with finding the various roles of touch through POKE, we identified the implications by discussing the unused situations, private use and usable targets of POKE.
In our future work, we plan to find roles of touch among people who are in other intimate relationships, such as family members or friends.
In particular, because our findings focused on use by long-distance couples, it would be interesting to compare the roles of touch and family members' or friends' tactile vocabularies with the results we obtained from this study.
We are also planning to redesign POKE with improved mobility  and to discuss the roles of touch and privacy issues outdoors or in places that should be quiet.
