In this paper we show that financial informat ion can be used to sense many aspects of human activity.
Th is simp le technique gives people informat ion about their daily lives, is easily accessible to many at no extra cost, requires little setup, and does not require the manufacture of any external devices.
We will focus on how financial data can be used to show users where they spend their time, when they accomplish certain habits, and what the impact of their activities is on the environment.
We validate our idea by implementing three demonstration applications intended for personal use.
Finally, this paper discusses limitations of sensing using financial data and possible solutions.
Financial transactions typically have a user or system-provided tag, a date, an amount, and a merchant associated with them.
Users are motivated to tag because it enables many powerful features in existing applications.
The meta-data encoded in tags can be combined with other transaction information to extract context, such as the frequency of certain habits and the carbon emissions of a person's activities.
We validate our idea by describing three applications that show individuals reflections of their financial data.
To implement them, we used a publicly available API o f one of these financial managers  as our data source.
Each of our applications aims to illustrate how financial data can be used to tell users more about themselves than just what they spend their money on: 1.
Snoopy is a simp le end-user programming system that shows users when they did certain habits and visualizes how those habits change during the week and over time.
Co2Green is a carbon footprint calculator that converts the dollar value o f certain tagged transactions into CO2 emissions and displays environmental impact over time.
Personal Bubble combines merchant location information with financial information to create a visualizat ion that shows people where they go and how to reduce travel distance when completing daily errands.
Our applications can sense the impacts of a wide range of activities, including arbitrary user-defined impacts.
This may include social activities among friends, travel, home improvement, and entertainment.
Different activities are reflected at different fidelit ies .
Nevertheless, there are some limitations of sensing using financial data.
We discuss these limitations and possible solutions at the end of the paper.
Researchers have been touting the potential benefits of having a complete record of daily activity since Vannevar Bush proposed the Memex, a device that would record informat ion about an individual's activities and support later retrieval of that information .
Recent instantiations of this vision, termed life-logging technologies, have demonstrated the value of passive approaches to capturing a record of a person's activities .
This data can then be used to support a variety of activities such as cueing memo ries , or creating a travelogue .
Life-logging technologies currently require both a significant investment in infrastructure and/or access to unusual hardware.
We propose to change this by leveraging a ubiquitously available, inexpensive source of data: financial transactions.
In today's world, many things we do have some sort of financial impact.
Financial data may show a warped and incomplete record of our activ ities, but it is nonetheless plentiful, more comp lete than many other digital sources of activity information, and readily available.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior sp ecific permission and/or a fee.
The analysis of personal financial data is a well-examined field.
Personal finance managers automatically download transactions from mult iple financial accounts and associate category tags with each transaction to better support reflection activities.
Data mining can be used to create purchasing models for individuals.
For examp le, Cadez, et al.
Such models have been used to recommend products or give other suggestions.
For examp le, A mazon.com reco mmends products similar to items customers have bought in the past and Wesabe.com reco mmends similar vendors users may want to visit.
Moving outside of a focus on purchasing, Intuit, Inc.  has recently received a patent to use transaction information to suggest or represent social information in a social network .
In summary, most past uses of financial data have focused on making predictions about purchasing or visualizing informat ion about purchasing.
Our wo rk demonstrates the potential to move outside of purchasing and leverage the informat ion about human activit ies encoded in financial data.
The remainder of this paper provides examp les of informat ion that can be extracted fro m financial data.
Vali dati on: Our validation is informal, but demonstrates that Snoopy can be used to explore personally relevant activities with real data.
Using about six months of her own data, one author tracked a planned reduction in coffee drinking .
She learned that she rarely drinks coffee on Mondays .
Eating out" was defined as a purchase with the tags `fast-food | restaurant | lunch'.
Figure 2 shows that the author used to eat out more than she ate in, but has begun eating in more, which reflects a change in her location and lifestyle.
Discussion: Snoopy illustrates that it is possible to define habits in terms of financial transactions.
Financial data can be used to show people when they do things, and how their habits change over time.
Our validation illustrates the value of supporting end-user programming: the best way to define a habit is known by the person engaged in it.
Snoopy could be imp roved by the addition of more sophisticated end-user programming techniques .
One of the advantages of financial data is the ease with which users can gather a year or more of historical informat ion for analysis.
But lists of thousands of transactions are difficu lt to interpret, and simp le visualizat ions that show spending by category may not capture everything that a user wishes to know.
Snoopy allows users to define habits in terms of their transactions, shows which days of the week they do certain habits, and visualizes those habits over time.
Many habits such as buying coffee, gamb ling, or shopping too much can easily be derived by looking at tagged purchases.
Application Description: As with all of our applications, Snoopy was written in JavaScript and imple mented on top of the Wesabe API, which allo ws the secure download of a user's transactions , and the Google Visualization API.
After a user loads data from Wesabe, he sees a bar chart of tagged transactions binned by weekday.
The user can explore by selecting any tag or set of tags and viewing a bar chart of that subset of the data .
The user can view the same transactions by date in a timeline view.
While Snoopy demonstrates how financial data can be used to track activit ies, CO2Green tracks the impact of activit ies.
Today, many online carbon calculators can calculate a person's emissions from self-reported information such as dollars spent on gas and kilowatt hours of electricity used.
Different calculators vary in their level of detail, and there is a lack of consistency across calculators .
Consistency is further compro mised because users often do not know answers to questions such as how many gallons of gas their car consumes in a year.
Also, a survey cannot easily be used to calculate an individual's monthly or weekly carbon emissions.
Since there is a strong connection between dollars spent and environmental impact , f inancial data provides an easy way to track carbon emissions over time.
Application Description: Co2Green calcu lates the carbon emissions for every relevant transaction, and then displays these emissions over time.
We used national average data fro m the year 2008 to convert spending dollars for car fuel, natural gas and electricity into carbon emissions .
Once a user loads her data and specifies which tags indicate purchases of auto fuel, natural gas, electricity and airplane flights, she sees a bar graph of the calculated emissions over the last 12 months, grouped by category  .
Un like standard calculators, Co2Green shows how emissions change by week, month or year.
This may help show the impact of season, temperature, and circu mstance on emissions.
Vali dati on: We validated Co2Green in a small user study.
Users were asked to use Co2Green and a typical carbon footprint calculator fro m Zerofootprint.net.
Afterwards they filled out a brief survey comparing the two.
To make the results more comparable, we modified the Zerofootprint.net calculator to only ask questions that could be answered using financial data.
Six users completed the study, their age was between 31 and 40 and their median income was 20-30k.
All were emp loyed full time.
Users, who had all used Wesabe before, reportedly spent about 5 minutes modifying the tags in their data in preparation for using Co2Green.
Users liked the monthly breakdown of emissions provided by Co2Green and they rated it as equal to or slightly lower than Zerofootprint on all usability measures.
However, most users did not feel that Co2Green was accurately representing their footprint.
Discussion: The carbon footprint calculator illustrates how financial data can be used to show users the impact that their activities have on the world.
Financial sensing also provides a low-cost method for determining where people are.
The personal bubble visualizes where individuals spend most of their money .
It also suggests how errands could be combined by finding the shortest travel route for co mpleting mu ltip le purchases in one day.
Application Descripti on: After a user loads his financial data he sees his transactions grouped by day.
He can then indicate the start and end address for a given day .
The application displays the route with the shortest travel distance on a map.
Our implementation enumerates all possible orderings, checking distance using Google Maps API.
Vali dati on: We tested our concept on seven participants ' data.
We found that 64% of all days when purchases were made had 2 or more purchases.
The largest number of purchases users made in one day was 8, and the average number of errands in a mult i-errand run was 2.25.
Our application calculated an average distance reduction of 16% between the optimal route and the least efficient route, for the first author .
Discussion: The Personal Bubble illustrates that spending informat ion can be comb ined with other informat ion  to create more useful applications.
This idea could be expanded.
For example, we would like to create an application that prompts users in real t ime to v isit nearby shops that they may be interested in .
Other data combinations could further enhance context-aware applications.
The applications just presented demonstrate the promise of financial data for enabling users to track activities and their impact over time.
At the same time, financial data suffers fro m certain systematic inaccuracies, privacy limitations, and other constraints.
Here we discuss some problems and possible solutions.
Multiple family members may share a financial account : In the case of a credit card, GPS data could be used to infer which family member actually made a purchase.
Cash transactions are not tracked: While it is becoming increasingly rare to use cash, this could be a real issue for some users.
One possible solution would be to create a "smart wallet" wh ich detects when users take our cash and prompts them to record what they bought.
Financial data is not available in real-time: Merchants often wait days before posting credit card purchases.
The "smart wallet" mentioned before could potentially help.
Tagging requires user effort : As stated in the introduction, today's financial programs have developed sophisticated semi-automated approaches to tagging such as leveraging user history and databases of known merchants and common tags.
These tags are readily available through tools such as Wesabe's API.
Location information is crucial and unavailable: Location is essentially another type of tag, and can benefit fro m similar techniques.
In the future, financial data can be made more powerfu l by co mbin ing it with other types of sensors .
Financial information is personal and private: Privacy and security are an important concern in any application that senses human activity.
The applications described here are intended for personal use, and should be treated with the same level of security as credit card and bank s tatements.
A full analysis comparing our approach to the benefits and risks of corporate analysis of financial data and to other sensing methods is planned for future wo rk.
We also plan to leverage machine learning to infer characteristics about activities by using financial data.
Th is would enable the creation of a more sophisticated version of Snoopy that could take examp les as input and use them to learn rules.
We also plan to examine how sharing informat ion about personal activity with others can be used to motivate people.
One example would be to mot ivate people to reduce their personal bubble by comparing their personal bubbles to others in similar locations.
We have demonstrated the potential for using financial data to sense human activity by the showing when, where, and impact of their activit ies.
Financial data today is available to almost anyone with a bank account and internet connection.
Our applicat ions demonstrate the value of an easy-to-use and truly invisible method for sensing many aspects of human activity.
