Tagclouds support navigation to the underlying items, serving as automatically created tables-of-contents or indices into a block/batch/set of content.
And, much as a table of contents or index can do for a book and a menu of categories can do for a website, they provide a means for users to form a general impression of the underlying set of content and a "gist" of what the book or site is about.
In social software sites, where the tagclouds can represent the terms assigned by or associated in other ways with a person, the tagclouds can provide an impression of that person and his or her interests and expertise .
Despite their increasing popularity, we have seen no experimental studies evaluating the effectiveness of tagclouds.
For example, a recent paper  discusses an algorithm for semantically-clustered tagclouds and provides an example of its use, but does not discuss formal evaluation of its effects on users.
Tagclouds are visual presentations of a set of words, typically a set of "tags" selected by some rationale, in which attributes of the text such as size, weight, or color are used to represent features, such as frequency, of the associated terms.
This note describes two studies to evaluate the effectiveness of differently constructed tagclouds for the various tasks they can be used to support, including searching, browsing, impression formation and recognition.
Based on these studies, we propose a paradigm for evaluating tagclouds and ultimately guidelines for tagcloud construction.
Tagclouds are visual presentations of a set of words, typically a set of "tags" selected by some rationale, in which attributes of the text such as size, weight, or color are used to represent features of the associated terms .
Tagclouds are becoming an increasingly familiar feature of social software sites in which content is categorized through evolving folksonomies.
Examples of such sites include the social bookmarking site del.icio.us , the flicker photo-sharing site , the LibraryThing book recommendation site , and several enterprise-scale systems such as Dogear , Hermes , and Onomi .
In typical usage, Tagclouds are created by mapping a dimension associated with a term in an underlying data to a dimension parameter determining how that term should be displayed.
For example, the prevalence of a term in the set could be represented by its size.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
We are interested in understanding how the various dimensions used to construct a tagcloud affect different tasks.
We believe studies of this type will stimulate the development of guidelines on how to design tagclouds for different settings.
Other studies in this series may include additional display parameters and a reinvention/appropriation analysis of emergent, unanticipated uses of tags and tagclouds.
Sorting: Words can be sorted alphabetically, by frequency or by a predetermined algorithm.
Clustering: Words can be sorted semantically or the users can specify their clustering preferences.
Spatial Layout: Words can be located in sequential lines or in a "bin-packed" cloud such as in the top of Figure 1.
We began with an examination of the influences of tagcloud attributes on low-level cognitive processes , manipulating font size and word location.
All tagclouds had a spatial layout.
The experimental design was a 3x4x2 repeatedmeasures design, with Font Size , Quadrants  and Proximity-to-the-largest-font  as independent variables, and recall as the dependent variable.
Stimuli: Two-hundred and eight words were obtained from the MRC Psycholinguistic Database , with the following characteristics: 5-lettered words, 1-2 syllables, less than 5 phonemes, and a Kucera-Francis written frequency of 2 .
Thirteen words  were randomly sampled and located in predetermined locations in order to appear as a spatial tagcloud.
A tag-per-person analysis for repeat-users of Dogear through April of 2006 reveals a median of 12 tags/person.
Font Weight: The weight or bolding of text to represent frequency of an underlying quantity.
It could potentially be used as a cue that denotes the grouping of items.
Font Size: The size of text as to represent a quantity, such as frequency of underlying items.
Font Color: Including the use of a single color to distinguish items across a single dimension, for example those the user has read or not read, or to represent or different underlying categories.
Each trial started with a blank screen that was shown for 1 s. A tagcloud was then presented for 20 s. In order to eliminate any recency effects, a distracter task followed for 30 s .
The effect of font size was robust and expected; people recall words with larger fonts.
We had expected words whose location was close to the largest font to be recalled more; we thought that attention would be drawn to this word and that participants would start scanning the other words from that starting point.
We did not expect to see an effect of quadrant.
This effect is usually expected on stimuli that require westernized reading .
We believe the tagcloud was too sparse to induce this type of scanning, resulting in an upper-left quadrant effect.
We hope to conduct future studies using eye-tracking devices to explore this hypothesis further..
Each trial started with a blank screen for 1 s. A tagcloud was then presented for 30 s, after which the participants had to describe the principal interests of the "tagcloud owner".
We assumed that this task could be considered a distracter task and eliminate any recency effects.
A recognition task followed that contained targets, semantically related distracters, and unrelated distracters.
In the second experiment we examined the effect of font size and word layout on impression formation and memory.
Experiment 2 augments Experiment 1 by investigating both high-level and low-level processes .
The experimental design was a 5x4 repeated measures design, with Font Size , and Layout  and Single Column List with Frequency Sorting as independent variables, and gist and recognition as dependent variables.
We assigned a score to measure impression formation .
A point was given each time a subject identified correctly one of the categories presented in each tagcloud.
This scoring procedure was performed by two judges.
Stimuli: Forty-four categories, totaling 728 words, were obtained from the Information Mapping Project .
Categories are obtained by the distribution of co-occurrences between a word and some set of content-bearing terms; they were based on the New York Times corpus .
Four categories appeared per Tag; one related to an occupation and the other three were either hobbies or travel locations.
There are additional manipulations to the impression formation task that we wish to investigate before generalizing our results, such as investigating semantically clustered layouts and employing eye-tracking devices to study effects of tagcloud layout on scanning, Finally, we plan to expand our set of tasks and corpus into a standard paradigm for evaluating tagcloud effectiveness in the full range of situations in which tagclouds are used.
For sparse tagclouds, such as in Experiment 1, designers may want to consider the upper-left quadrant as a focal point within the tagcloud.
This recommendation can translate into different options:  locate smaller font words here to compensate for font size, while locating bigger font words in other quadrants;  locate tags that you want to emphasize in this quadrant.
The results from Experiment 2 imply that a simple list ordered by frequency may provide a more accurate impression about the tagger than other tagcloud layouts,.
The effect of font size was again robust and expected; people recognize words with larger fonts.
There was no effect of layout on recognition; the layout of the tagcloud does not assist or hinder the recollection of the tags presented, though it is possible that such effects would be seen with shorter presentation times.
There was a moderate, but statistically significant, effect of layout on impression formation.
The list ordered by frequency resulted in a better identification of the categories present.
The results for the spatial layout were second best behind list layout.
Tagcloud designers can rely on established psychophysical principles in setting basic tagcloud parameters.
These parameters produced results as predicted by perception theory: font size and location affected memory  processes.
Instead, we propose that designers focus on layout, because this variable was shown to affect high-level processes, such as impression formation.
Our proposed paradigm for tagcloud evaluation consists of two-phased trials.
The first phase is a presentation period that displays the tagcloud for a predetermined amount of time.
This amount should depend on predicted tagcloud usage.
We plan on manipulating presentation time to explore situations in which tagclouds are glanced at quickly.
The second phase is an interpretative period in which impressions are elicited.
Our study used open-ended questions to obtain participants' impressions; we believe multiple-choice questions or ratings are also applicable.
The current paradigm presented the phases serially.
We plan on investigating concurrent phases by asking participants to describe their impressions as they view tagclouds; this method will measure layout effects on the time and order in which concepts are formed.
