CoCollage is a placed-based community technology that leverages the power of online social networking to facilitate awareness and face-to-face interactions in a third place.
We adapted standardized measures of place attachment, social networks and psychological sense of community to provide a framework grounded in the social science literature for studying real world adoption of place-based community technologies.
We found the standardized measures of place attachment and psychological sense of community meaningfully predicted likelihood of technology adoption and usage in a cafe.
We discuss some lessons learned from our initial deployment of CoCollage in a real-world setting to support a nascent place-based community.
CoCollage serves both as a physical window into the community, increasing people's awareness of people currently in the cafe through the display, and a virtual window, facilitating awareness and asynchronous interactions among those not currently present.
Cafes and coffeehouses are prototypical third places : semi-public places away from home  and work  where people can gather to enjoy conversation and community with friends and strangers.
These third places facilitate community development by providing their inhabitants with a vehicle for frequent serendipitous interactions, which increase the likelihood of developing interpersonal relationships .
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
This paper describes our exploration of the social space in which we deployed CoCollage and a methodology that is useful to learning more about the psycho-social factors that impact technology adoption and use in such places.
Having established that this methodology is appropriate to understanding the adoption of a new technology, future work may focus on the impact on sense of community and loyalty to the third place.
Our goal in designing the online component of CoCollage was that the online photo sharing and conversation tools would help third place relationships develop through both synchronous and asynchronous interactions .
Members may comment on others' profiles, vote or comment on others' content items, participate in a general "chatter" area, and send public messages directly to the CoCollage display.
A visualization component shows a continuously updated collage of media items on a large screen in the cafe that draws from the pool of all cafe community members, but prioritizes people who are physically present.
An algorithm selects content items to appear on the collage based on the freshness of the content, its popularity in the community, and the frequency with which the users who share content visit the cafe.
Through presence detection - "checking in" by using their machine-readable loyalty cards or clicking on a link on the CoCollage web site while in the cafe - the collage prioritizes the content shared by people who are physically present in the cafe.
The eyeCanvas plasma poster application  was deployed in a cafe, but use by patrons was constrained to finger doodles; while this work yielded interesting insights into interactions and effects, it did not delve into the existing desire for interactions among patrons and its impact on adoption and subsequent community development, which is the primary contribution of this work.
During our early deployment, our primary research goals were to gain a better understanding of the existing cafe community that makes up our prospective user population.
Given the challenge of measuring "community", our intention is also to identify potentially valuable instruments for assessing the impact of place-based community technologies.
In developing measures of sense of community for a placebased community technology, we draw from the long history of community research that has been performed in the social sciences.
Reviews of community research point to several standardized measures of social networks and psychological sense of community , some of which have already been adapted to virtual communities  and to third places .
In their study of customers at a suburban diner in Chicago, they found that people with a lack of social support in some aspects of their lives were more likely to develop supportive relationships in a third place.
These customers subsequently developed place attachment, that is, a bond between a person and a place.
A number of other researchers have explored collaborative sharing around community displays.
The Notification Collage  enabled a small workgroup to share media items on personal and semi-public computer displays; however, there was no notion of "presence" for the semipublic display and the community in which it was deployed was much more closely knit than the community in a cafe.
The C3 Collage  incorporated a notion of presence, showing photos from users' Flickr accounts on a large touch-screen computer whenever their Bluetooth phones were detected nearby, but this, too, was deployed in a workplace with a stronger sense of community than a cafe.
We similarly expect that people will be more likely to adopt a community technology in a third place if they are looking to develop new friendships.
They may also adopt the technology because they already have a sense of community and place attachment.
They may wish to nurture existing relationships and express their sense of belonging by personalizing the physical space.
For our study we adapted the standard network-based inventory approach used by Rosenbaum et al.
We asked people to count the number of people they considered to be friends and acquaintances within the cafe.
We also asked a number of questions to assess whether they were seeking new friendships.
We then adapted questions from Rosenbaum's study  assessing the three dimensions of place attachment - functional dependency, commitment to continue using the cafe, and identification with self - with questions such as "Coming to  is more important to me than going to other cafes".
CoCollage was initially made available to just the staff within our participating cafe for a week of in-situ testing and to gather a critical mass of initial content from an immediately enthusiastic subgroup of the cafe community.
We then opened up the system to all members of the community.
Accounts were restricted to customers who actually visited the cafe by requiring people to use invitation codes printed on cards that were placed in the cafe near the display.
As of this writing, the system has been running continuously in the cafe for five weeks.
During the week we first opened the system to customers, we spent a number of hours over five days stationed at one of the tables in the cafe, recruiting people to complete a paper questionnaire about their existing social network, sense of community, and place attachment for the cafe.
Participants received a $10 cafe gift card in exchange for participation.
We also offered people who independently created CoCollage accounts to participate in an online version of the questionnaire with the same compensation.
69 people completed the questionnaire, 33 male, and 36 female, with an average age of 29.
Of these, 24 respondents had also joined CoCollage.
Most of the participants had completed at least some college  with 23% having a college degree or higher.
23% categorized themselves as students, and 51% as having white collar/professional jobs.
77% of respondents reported visiting the cafe two times a month or more, with 58% at least once a week and 38% a few times a week.
75% reported staying and sitting in the cafe at least sometimes.
The majority who stay and sit report sitting for 15 - 60 minutes.
These numbers are consistent with our observations and the owners' estimates.
We asked respondents to indicate their satisfaction with the cafe on a scale of 1 to 7, where 1 = "not at all" and 7 = "extremely so".
Respondents were generally satisfied with the ambience , their social experiences in the cafe , and believed that the cafe proprietors were interested in building a sense of community .
About 56% indicated at least some interest in connecting more with others in the cafe.
We also found that most people were at least somewhat interested in seeking new friends generally  with 74% of respondents having a score above neutral.
When asked about their existing social network at the cafe, 58% reported having at least one acquaintance at the cafe, with an average of 4.2 acquaintances each.
Only 25% reported having at least one personal friend at the cafe, averaging 2.8 each, and 20% reporting having emotionally  or instrumentally  supportive friends there.
Our measures of psychological sense of community and place attachment showed that while people were fairly neutral in their sense of community , they had a sense of attachment on the dependency  and commitment dimensions , but less so on the identity dimension .
We interviewed the proprietors and conducted several onsite observations at varying times and days of the week to better understand the social context of the cafe.
The proprietors of the cafe are dedicated to developing a strong community among their customers, and have a positive attitude towards technology.
Based on the number of weekly purchases, and the number of people in their loyalty program, they estimated about 400 "regulars" visited once or twice a week.
These regulars constitute the most likely subgroup to become CoCollage users.
Our observations involved logging the times that people entered and exited the cafe, whether they sat down after purchasing a drink, and whom they talked to.
We observed a total of 163 people over 7 hours, 61% male, 39% female, an estimated average of 28 years of age.
We found that at any given time there were about 17 people in the cafe.
23 new people came in each hour, staying an average of 25 minutes each.
64% sat down in the cafe after purchasing their drinks.
Among the 62 people  who entered the cafe with friends, we observed nearly all of them chatting with their friends, 12% of them chatting with a barista, and only two who ever chatted with a person at another table.
These observations highlight why place-based synchronous chat applications do not tend to succeed in third places .
We examined pair-wise correlations to explore which variables had a meaningful impact on adoption of CoCollage.
Consistent with our predictions, a psychological sense of community, the identity dimension of place attachment, and a desire to connect to others in the cafe correlated with technology adoption.
We found that the size of their existing social network in the cafe and their general friend-seeking level did not have a direct meaningful impact.
See correlations in Table 1.
We also found that the size of social network in the cafe, place-based sense of community and place attachment were strongly correlated.
Over the course of the first month of our deployment in a cafe, the user population has grown to about 40% of the target population.
Given the growing interest in the use of technologies to enhance social awareness and interactions in various physical places, we hope others may find our methods valuable in understanding the interplay between technology usage and the psycho-social factors of the third place.
In future work, we hope to report our results on why and how CoCollage affects the awareness, interactions and relationships among members of the cafe community over time.
We expect that continued use of the technology will increase people's sense of community and place attachment, and promote adoption by others.
Developing a sense of virtual community measure.
2.Churchill, E. F., Nelson, L. D. and Hsieh, G. Cafe life in the digital age: augmenting information flow in a cafework-entertainment space.
The notification collage: Posting information to public and personal displays.
Designing for improved social responsibility, user participation, and content in on-line communities.
5.McCarthy, J.F., Congleton, B. and Harper, F. M. The context, content & community collage: Sharing personal digital media in the physical workplace.
6.Oldenburg, R. The Great Good Place: Cafes, Coffee Shops, Bookstores, Bars, Hair Salons, and Other Hangouts at the Heart of a Community.
A cup of coffee with a dash of love: An investigation of commercial social support and third-place attachment.
8.Terveen, L., and McDonald, D.W. Social matching: A framework and research agenda.
9.Wilkinson, D. The multidimensional nature of social cohesion: Psychological sense of community, attraction and neighboring.
Within the first month of our deployment 82 people voluntarily created accounts in the system, which represents about 20% adoption among the "regulars".
We examined some basic usage statistics to answer whether people are using the community features.
The majority of users have uploaded content to share on the CoCollage display , browsed other people's profiles , and browsed other people's content .
Shared images were largely photos of friends, pets, the local urban environment, traveling, and nature.
About half of the pictures shared personally meaningful information about the author.
Between 20% and 30% further added comments to images and profiles, and sent instant messages to the display screen.
We found a significant correlation between the desire to make friends and the number of comments they post on others' profiles  and the number of unique days they have returned to the system .
