Previous studies have investigated audio, visual and tactile driver warnings, indicating the importance of communicating the appropriate level of urgency to the drivers.
However, these modalities have never been combined exhaustively and tested under conditions of varying situational urgency to assess their effectiveness both in the presence and absence of critical driving events.
This paper describes an experiment evaluating all multimodal combinations of such warnings under two contexts of situational urgency: a lead car braking and not braking.
The results showed that participants responded quicker to more urgent warnings, especially in the presence of a car braking.
They also responded faster to the multimodal as opposed to unimodal signals.
Driving behaviour improved in the presence of the warnings and the absence of a car braking.
These results highlight the influence of urgency and number of modalities in warning design and indicate the utility of non-visual warnings in driving.
Several combinations of audio, visual and tactile modalities have been utilized to design driver alerts .
However, there has been no exhaustive research on how all unimodal and multimodal combinations of these modalities perform when situational urgency is varied.
Effective warnings need to aid rather than hinder the driving task when critical events arise, for example when a car in front brakes rapidly.
Therefore, it is essential to compare drivers' performance when exposed to warnings both in the presence and the absence of such events to ensure their effectiveness in different driving settings.
This has not been addressed before and is important so as to extend knowledge on multimodal warning design.
This paper presents an experiment where all combinations of audio, tactile and visual modalities were used to alert drivers in a simulated driving task .
The signals were designed across three different urgency levels, according to existing guidelines .
Situational urgency was varied by manipulating the behaviour of a simulated lead vehicle.
The study aimed to reveal how participants would respond to the presentation of differently urgent signals in the presence or absence of a critical event and how driving behaviour would be influenced by the parallel presentation of such an event.
Multimodal displays are increasingly finding their way inside the car, making the driving experience more and more multisensory .
Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
In summary, the following guidelines can be derived from this work:  Using bimodal and trimodal warnings rather than unimodal ones can cause faster reaction times to critical events;  Using warnings of high designed urgency can speed up reactions critical situations;  Using warnings of medium designed urgency can provide an overall alertness, as well as improved lane keeping and steering behavior when no critical event is present;  Non-visual signals are more effective in visually demanding situations.
There was also no increase in mental workload when the trimodal displays were used.
The studies described above have investigated some of the unimodal and multimodal combinations of warnings.
However, the urgency designed in the warnings was not varied.
Additionally, not all combinations of the audio, visual or tactile modalities were used in warnings.
In our study, all combinations of modalities are used in warnings designed to convey different urgency levels.
A number of studies indicate the usefulness of multimodal displays for providing information related to the driving task.
Ho & Spence  showed that responses to a critical event were more rapid when naturalistic audio cues  come from the direction of the event  and when participants' attention was directed to the appropriate direction through a verbal cue.
Further, according to Ho, Tan & Spence  vibrotactile cues presented from the same direction as an approaching threat  can decrease drivers' reaction times during a simulated driving task, compared to cues presented from the opposite direction.
Using bimodal signals, Ho, Reed & Spence  showed the potential of audiotactile presentation in front-to-rear-end collision warnings, using vibration on the torso and a car horn sound.
These bimodal warnings led to lower reaction times in a simulated driving task compared to the unimodal variants.
Using audio, tactile as well as visual modalities for alerting drivers, Scott & Gray  found that tactile warnings on the abdomen, simulating seat belt warnings, can induce quicker reactions in a critical driving situation compared to sounds and visual warnings on the dashboard.
The signals used in their study were unimodal, so no modality combinations were used.
Murata, Kanbayashi & Hayami  presented a study using some combinations of audio, tactile and visual modalities to alert drivers of an approaching hazard.
The three modalities in isolation, as well as the combinations of audio + tactile, audio + visual and visual + tactile modalities were used .
Results showed that tactile and audio + tactile warnings produced the shortest reaction times to presented hazards.
Oskarsson, Eriksson & Carlander  investigated the use of the trimodal combination when driving a simulated combat vehicle.
The cues used were abstract sound and vibration patterns and a visual pointer to a virtual threat in the simulator.
When responding to the stimuli by turning the vehicle as fast and as accurately as possible and firing at the target, it was found that the use of trimodal combina-
In the aforementioned work, the signals were designed to convey a single level of urgency, usually related to critical events.
However, in a real driving situation, alerts may not always refer to situations that are equally urgent.
The authors defined high priority warnings as requiring immediate action, while medium required no immediate reaction and low priority ones bore no immediate relevance to the driving task.
Audio and tactile modalities were demonstrated as suitable for high priority messages, visual and tactile for medium and audio and visual for low priority ones.
The suggestions were based on measures of speed and steering performance of participants, while response times to the signals were not measured and modality combinations were not tested exhaustively.
Number of pulses and inter-pulse-interval were manipulated for all cues to signify urgency.
Additionally, pitch was manipulated for the audio cues and intensity for the tactile ones.
The main task in this study was visual tracking with different levels of auditory distractions  but no driving task was simulated.
A general trend of higher urgency = faster response was found, indicating that the designed urgency of the cues was successfully perceived.
Vibration cues were also identified more accurately but sound cues more quickly.
Finally, sound cues were reported as easier to distinguish by the participants.
They presented these messages followed by pictures of either hazardous or non-hazardous road scenes, asking drivers to identify whether the scenes were hazardous or not by pressing a button.
Reaction times of drivers to this identification task were shorter and responses more accurate when the speech messages were presented from the direction of the hazard  as opposed to a random direction .
Reaction times were also shorter for informative messages, when the direction of the threat  was uttered in the message as opposed to not specified.
Auditory warnings similar to commercially available ones for collision avoidance, lane departure and curve speed were provided with or without advisory warnings in a driving simulator.
The advisory warnings were visual indicators, graphically showing the distance of the car to a vehicle in front, behind or relative to a curve.
It was found that the presence of warnings did not influence the driving speed or how often drivers moved their gaze off the road.
Additionally, participants drove with higher average lateral deviation from the centre of the lane when no warnings were present, indicating a lower level of vigilance.
In the present study, we examine lateral deviation in greater accuracy and present steering angle measurements for every multimodal warning rather than for a whole condition.
Using audio, visual and tactile modalities, Lewis et al.
Measures of response times were taken with a primary simulated driving task and under two conditions of memory load in a secondary memory task .
Performance was especially improved in the low load task compared to the high one.
Increasing the levels of urgency and the number of modalities used, Politis, Brewster & Pollick  evaluated all unimodal, bimodal and trimodal combinations of audio, visual and tactile warnings to alert drivers of events in three urgency levels.
These were impending collision , low fuel  and incoming message .
Participants were engaged in a simulated driving task and were asked to rate the stimuli in terms of urgency and annoyance, as well as recognise the level of urgency to which each signal belonged.
It was found that participants recognised highly urgent signals most quickly, while increasing the number of modalities used in warnings  caused higher ratings of urgency and lower response times.
Ratings of annoyance were also higher as more modalities were used, but the observed effect of annoyance was lower compared to urgency.
The above studies have investigated the effect of designed urgency in warnings in the audio, visual and tactile modalities.
With the exception of , the warnings evaluated did not involve all the combinations of these modalities in different levels of urgency.
Additionally, in  the response times were gathered during a cue recognition task involving button pressing, with limited ecological validity.
In the study presented here, responses are gathered during a simulated braking event with higher realism.
There have been numerous studies investigating how signal parameters of warnings relate to their perceived urgency.
Edworthy, Loxley & Dennis  showed that higher fundamental frequency, higher speed and larger pitch range can increase the perceived urgency ratings of auditory warnings.
Marshall, Lee & Austria  demonstrated how parameters like higher pulse duration and lower interpulse interval increased ratings of urgency of audio alerts.
Different sound cues were investigated in three driving contexts of varying urgency, namely impending collision, navigation and email messages.
Baldwin  reported how stimulus intensity influenced the ratings of perceived urgency and response times in a simulated driving task.
However, pulse rate was suggested as the most suitable for conveying events of varying urgency, since it did not elicit such high ratings of annoyance compared to the ratings of urgency.
In this study no simulated driving task was present.
Extending the investigation to audio, tactile and visual modalities Baldwin et al.
Pulse rate  was suggested as an effective parameter to vary urgency across these three modalities.
Sound intensity and frequency were effective for audio signals, with word choice and colours for visual ones.
This is addressed in our study by evaluating the cues under different simulated events, namely the front vehicle braking and not braking.
As described earlier, there is interest in investigating how the modality combinations perform in situations of different urgency.
This will provide insight into whether the response to the cues will be affected by events that occur when driving.
In all the studies discussed above, participants' responses were acquired under situations of urgency that did not vary.
Whether they were critical events, such as an impending collision or less critical, such as navigational instructions, all responses were measured only in the presence of these events and not in their absence.
It is important to evaluate the cues under varying levels of situational urgen-
For example, they may be effective in one setting but perform poorly in another.
However, they did not test all combinations of multimodal cues.
They also only tested audio warnings.
Therefore, as also acknowledged in , there remain many questions around the design of multimodal cues for creating messages of different urgency levels and their evaluation in a driving simulator.
We address these questions in this paper.
All warnings lasted 1.5 sec each.
Auditory warnings were additionally varied in base frequency, as suggested in  .Visual warnings were also varied in colour, in line with  .
A C2 Tactor from Engineering Acoustics2 was used for the tactile stimuli, a common device in studies of tactile feedback, e.g.
Tactile stimuli had a constant frequency of 250 Hz, the nominal centre frequency of the C2 - the frequency at which the skin is most sensitive.
Stimulus intensity was kept constant in all modalities, to avoid discomfort, a common practice in studies of both Earcons and Tactons .
Simultaneous delivery of unimodal signals was used for multimodal ones, to create a synchronous effect of sound, vibration, visuals and their combinations.
A set of multimodal warnings was designed to represent three different levels of urgency and tested in a driving simulator.
We tested them across three levels of situational urgency: a lead car braking and a warning presented, a lead car braking with no warning presented and just a warning presented.
The goal was to investigate the effect of the situation simulated on observed driver responses.
As described above, several studies have reported how designed urgency and modality affected response times, for example .
The influence of modalities used in warnings to lateral deviation and steering angle has also been shown in the past, for example in .
Therefore, it was hypothesized that in our study response times and driving behaviour would be influenced by the modalities used in the warnings, the level of designed urgency of the warnings, as well as the situational urgency of the simulated event.
In addition to measuring the response times of drivers to warnings, we also measured lateral deviation and variation of steering angle to give a complete picture of performance.
Lower lateral deviation and variation of the steering angle indicate lower driver distraction .
As in , the Root Mean Square Error  of the vehicle's lateral deviation and steering angle were used as metrics of driver distraction.
The effect of presenting multimodal warnings in the presence and the absence of a critical event on these driving metrics has not been investigated in the past.
The set of warnings used in this study were identical to those in .
As in , three Levels of Designed Urgency  were created to indicate conditions varying in importance.
LH  was designed to signify situations of high urgency, such as an impending collision, LM  situations of medium urgency, such as low fuel and LL  situations of low urgency, such as an incoming message.
All unimodal and multimodal combinations of the audio, visual and tactile modalities were used in the warnings: Audio , Visual , Tactile , Audio + Visual , Audio + Tactile , Tactile + Visual , Audio + Tactile + Visual .
The result was 21 different signals: 7 signals with the above modalities x 3 levels of designed urgency.
Pure tones, colours or vibrations were used in the warnings and were delivered repeatedly as pulses to the participants.
Depending on the level of urgency, pulse rate varied, increasing as signals became more urgent, as in .
Independent of modality, warnings of the same urgency level had the same pulse rate.
A 7x3x3 within subjects design was used for this experiment, with Modality, LDU and Situational Urgency as the Independent Variables.
Response Time , RMSE of Lateral Deviation  and RMSE of Steering Angle  were Dependent Variables.
LDU had 3 levels: LH , LM  and LL .
Situational urgency had 3 levels: Car Braking + No Warning Presented, No Car Braking + Warning Presented and Car Braking + Warning Presented.
There were the following hypotheses:  The observed values of RT will be affected by the Situational Urgency simulated , the LDU of the warnings  and the Modality of the warnings .
The observed values of LatDev will be affected by the Situational Urgency simulated , the LDU of the warnings  and the Modality of the warnings .
The belt was placed by the participants in the middle of the abdominal area and was designed to simulate a vibrating seat belt, similar to .
Visual cues were delivered through coloured circles that flashed in the top central area of the screen, and were sized 400x400 pixels .
The circles did not obstruct the lead car and were designed to simulate the feedback of a HUD.
Figure 1 depicts the setup of the experiment, Figure 2.a a screen from the simulator with the car braking and a visual signal presented and Figure 2.b the waist belt and Tactor.
Participants were welcomed and provided with a brief introduction.
To cover any noise from the Tactor, car sound was heard through the headphones throughout the experiment.
The car sound was an extract from a recording of a vehicle idling, retrieved from the Internet.
Before beginning the procedure, all 21 signals were played once to the participants, always in the following order: A  V  T  AV  AT  TV  ATV for LH, then the same order for LM and then for LL.
In two cases, sound and vibration were slightly adjusted to maintain comfortable intensities.
No specific information about the levels of designed urgency was given to the participants.
The only information provided was that the signals presented were not always designed to convey the same level of urgency.
Next, participants were asked to drive with the simulator for 90 sec, to get accustomed to the experimental setup.
In the main part of the experiment, participants were presented with a driving scene, where they drove a simulated vehicle along a straight rural road and followed a car in front.
Participants were able to steer the vehicle and brake, but did not use the accelerator pedal, since the controlled vehicle maintained a constant speed of about 80 mph.
This speed was chosen so as to exceed the UK motorway speed limit  and create a hazardous driving situation requiring the drivers' attention.
The participants encountered three possible situations during one session.
The first involved the front car braking and a warning presented at the same time .
The second situation involved only the Car braking  and the third only the warning presented .
There were 21 trials for each of the CarStim, Car and Stim conditions .
This resulted in 63 trials, which happened in a random order and were separated by a random interval of any integral value of 8 - 20 sec.
These values were chosen to be similar to previous studies investigating a repeated occurrence of critical events in the driving task, such as  and gave the driver time to settle back into driving before receiving another warning.
Participants were asked to maintain a central position in the lane and press the brake whenever they saw the front car braking, or felt a stimulus presented or both of the above.
The observed values of SteAng will be affected by the Situational Urgency simulated , the LDU of the warnings  and the Modality of the warnings .
They all held a valid driving license and had between 1.5 and 8 years of driving experience .
There were 14 university students and one journalist.
They reported normal or corrected to normal vision and hearing and no injuries around the abdominal area where vibrations were delivered.
The experiment took place in a usability lab, where participants sat on a chair in front of a desk with a 27-inch Dell 2709W monitor and a PC running the simulator software.
In the software a three lane road in a rural area with a lead car was depicted, maintaining a steady speed .
This simulator has been used in several previous research studies, e.g.
As in , safety cones were placed on either side of the central lane, to reinforce lane keeping.
Participants used the Logitech G273 gaming wheel to steer the simulated vehicle and brake.
Participants' inputs were logged with a frequency of 50 Hz.
Sound was delivered through a set of Sennheiser HD 25-1 headphones.
Their LatDev and SteAng were logged from 4 seconds to 1 second before any situation arose, forming their baseline value for driving performance.
They were logged again for 3 seconds immediately after the event to assess the effects on driving.
For both LatDev and SteAng, the RMSE values were then computed from the logged values.
As a result, for each of the 63 trials of one condition, there was one value for each participant's RT, two values for their LatDev  and two values for their SteAng .
Each participant repeated the above procedure twice during the course of a week.
After the second session the experiment was concluded and participants were debriefed.
The experiment lasted about 120 minutes  and participants received payment of 12.
Data for response time were first analysed using a one-way ANOVA with Situational Urgency as a factor.
Planned contrasts revealed that situation CarStim induced significantly shorter RT compared to situations Car and Stim  = 9.85, p < 0.001, r = 0.22, while situations Car and Stim did not differ.
As a result H1a was accepted.
See Figure 3.a for the mean response times across situations.
Data for situations Stim and CarStim, where there was a signal present, were analysed using a three-way repeated measures ANOVA, with Situational Urgency, LDU and Modality as factors.
Mauchly's test revealed that the assumption of sphericity had been violated for Modality, therefore degrees of freedom for Modality were corrected using Greenhouse-Geisser estimates.
Contrasts revealed that while in situation Stim, ATV warnings created significantly quicker responses than AT ones, this effect was reversed for situation CarStim  = 9.04 , r = 0.50, p < 0.05.
Further, AT warnings created significantly slower responses compared to TV ones in situation Stim, but this effect was again reversed in situation CarStim  = 7.43 , r = 0.46, p < 0.05.
These results indicate that Situational Urgency, LDU and Modality all influenced driver responses.
They also show that warnings including visuals did not create as quick responses in situation CarStim.
Data for LatDev were first analysed using a two-way repeated measures ANOVA, with Situation and Time as factors.
Situation had three levels: Stim, Car and CarStim.
Time had two levels: Before Situation  and After Situation .
Mauchly's test revealed that the assumption of sphericity had been violated for Situation, therefore degrees of freedom for Situation were corrected using Greenhouse-Geisser estimates.
Contrasts revealed that while in situation Car values of LatDev were lower after the event compared to before it, but there was no such difference for situation CarStim  = 103.52, r = 0.38, p < 0.001.
As a result H2a was accepted.
See Figure 4.a for the interaction between Situation and Time for LatDev values.
A separate four-way ANOVA test for situations Stim and CarStim  with Situation, Time, LDU and Modality as factors showed no significant results, so H2b and H2c were rejected.
Data for SteAng were first analysed using a two-way repeated measures ANOVA, with Situation and Time as factors as above.
Mauchly's test revealed that the assumption of sphericity had been violated for Situation, therefore degrees of freedom for Situation were corrected using Greenhouse-Geisser estimates.
No other significant findings related to LDU or Modality were present.
As a result H3b was accepted and H3c was rejected.
Results for LatDev and SteAng both show a differential effect of Situation and Time in the driving metrics.
While in situations Car and Stim the metrics improved after a situation arose, this was not the case for CarStim.
This result extends prior work like  by evaluating reaction time across unimodal, bimodal and trimodal combinations of warnings and in varying contexts of situational urgency.
Guidelines related to fundamental frequency of sounds, colour for visuals and interpulse interval for all three modalities used  seem to apply uniformly in the driving task.
These should be considered when designing driver displays, as the resulting warnings elicit quicker responses when designed to be highly urgent.
This is an important conclusion especially as the cues used in this study provided no information on the event they signified.
Future work will explore the influence of using richer multimodal cues than those used here and evaluate whether these benefits will hold also in that case.
Previous studies such as  have looked at the efficacy of informative driver displays, but there is need to evaluate how such cues combine multimodally and what type of information is best delivered in which modality.
Finally, there was a significant decrease in performance when encountering warnings involving the visual modality in situation CarStim.
None of the advantages of ATV warnings over AT ones, TV ones over AT ones and V warnings over A ones were present in situation CarStim.
This indicates that the benefits of visual signals as driver displays can be limited when there is high visual load in the task at hand.
The presentation of a car braking was visual and in combination with visual signals it seemed to damage rather than benefit the response times.
A similar disadvantage of the visual modality was found in .
In , there was also an advantage of audio over visual displays when a visual indicator to a critical situation was provided.
This result extends , where multimodal signals involving visuals created quicker responses, but in absence of any visually demanding events in the driving task.
Horrey & Wickens  also found that response times to a critical event degraded when voice dialling was aided by a head-down display.
Although we used no side task in our study, these results also suggest a cluttering of the visual modality during a visual critical event.
As a guideline, visual warnings should be avoided in road events of high situational urgency, and signals involving audio or tactile modalities should be preferred, as they reduce the visual load of driving.
The results for response times indicate a clear advantage of using warnings in synergy with a critical event in the driving task .
This result addresses the research space highlighted by , providing clear evidence that there is an effect of situational urgency in driver warnings.
While there were no differences in terms of RT for the simple Car and Stim conditions, when these events occurred together in CarStim, there was a pronounced effect in how quickly people reacted.
This also extends the results of Ho & Spence and Ho, Tan & Spence, where spatially predictive audio  and vibrotactile cues , meaning cues that correctly predicted the direction of an approaching threat, resulted in better reaction times compared to their non-predictive variants.
A similar result was also found when combining multimodal audio and visual cues .
In the present study, it became clear that the advantages of providing combinations of audio, visual and tactile cues hold not only when they predict the direction but also the existence of a critical event.
In terms of the modalities used, there was an advantage of multimodal warnings over unimodal ones in terms of RT, since A, T and V warnings were all slower than AT, AV, TV and ATV ones .
This advantage of using more than one modality to alert drivers has been discussed in several previous studies .
However, never before has this effect been shown in all modality combinations and with a braking task, rather than just a button pressing task as in .
In the driving context, there seems to be an additive effect of conveying the same information across more than one sensory channel.
Possible explanations of this effect will be attempted in future work, investigating the fit of human data to known models of multisensory perception, such as the Race Model .
As will be discussed later, this advantage in RT does not necessarily come with a similar advantage in other metrics, such as LatDev and SteAng.
Even so, the benefit of using multimodal signals in the driving task, especially when signifying critical situations, is clear.
The level of designed urgency of warnings was another factor that influenced responses .
Warnings of high designed urgency elicited significantly quicker responses, even with no prior information related to the type or content of the message given to participants.
When asked after each experimental session which properties of the signals in their opinion affected the perceived urgency of a stimulus, participants identified interpulse interval,
The results of LatDev and SteAng showed a differential effect of Situation on the driving metrics.
Situations Stim and Car both led to improved lane keeping behaviour and to less variation in the steering angle .
However, this effect was not present in situation CarStim.
In terms of SteAng, values were significantly higher after situation CarStim arose.
However, the disturbance to the driving behaviour reflected in SteAng was not high enough to also increase values of LatDev .
In any case, for both LatDev and SteAng there was no improvement in situation CarStim.
This result can be accounted to the increased workload created by situation CarStim.
The simultaneous onset of warnings and a critical event may have created a startle effect, similar to the one observed in , where participants' control over the simulated vehicle was poor when critical warnings were delivered.
This also comes in line with some participants' comments, mentioning that situation CarStim was startling.
Along with the observed increase of reaction times to signals including the visual modality, this observation provides evidence for how the increased amount of visual information can affect driving performance.
Although no differences in terms of modalities were found in our study, the findings of Lindgren et al.
The addition of a critical visual event as CarStim in the present study could only have added to this load.
From the results of LatDev and SteAng several conclusions can be derived.
When there is no critical situation demanding attention, multimodal warnings seem to improve drivers' alertness and lead to a better driving behaviour.
The benefit of this effect disappears when there is a visual task demanding immediate action, such as situation CarStim.
Although response times improve when a multimodal signal is presented in situation CarStim, lane keeping behaviour is neither improved nor worsened by the cues.
Quicker reactions are essential in more critical situations, so the benefits of multimodal cues are valuable in this context.
However, lane keeping performance is also essential when there is no imminent critical event, so the benefit of multimodal cues in this case is still present.
Finally, there was a marginally better performance in terms of SteAng for warnings at LM and in situation CarStim .
It appears that warnings of LM aided driving behaviour in terms of SteAng more than the ones of LL or LH.
Combined with the result of intermediate response times achieved by these warnings, they seem a good option to facilitate overall alertness for drivers in situations that require quick but not immediate responses.
Interestingly, these situations, for example low fuel, were the ones that these warnings were designed to address.
Further, the use of visual warnings slowed responses in the critical situation, providing evidence of high load in the visual modality.
This effect was also observed in lateral deviation and steering angle values, where the benefit in driving metrics when there were either warnings or a critical event, was not present when the event arose together with the warnings.
These results extend knowledge of in car warning design by identifying the effect of situational urgency on participant response times as well as driving metrics.
They also verify the benefit of using multimodal displays of varying designed urgency to alert drivers in a context of varying situational urgency, a case not previously simulated.
The evidence of high visual load during a critical event highlights the limitation of the visual modality when encountering critical events in the driving scene.
A unique feature of this study is that it investigates the effect of multimodal displays on driving metrics in detail, evaluating driver responses to each combination of modality and situation.
Assessing these metrics in such detail showed the differential effect of providing warnings to the lane keeping and steering behaviors.
These results indicate the utility of multimodal driver displays when requiring immediate responses and the potential of non-visual warnings to decrease driving workload.
This study investigated the effects of varying situational urgency on the response times, lateral deviation and steering angle of participants in a simulated driving task.
Three situations were simulated: a car braking without warnings, warnings without a car braking and both simultaneously.
The results showed a clear reduction in response times to warnings when the critical event in the driving scene occurred at the same time as a warning.
