At this point, elders relinquish all independence, and must rely on public transportation, formalized care, or a family member to leave one's primary home .
To fight against the inevitable loss of independence, elders often keep driving long after it is safe for them to do so.
Impairments such as decay in vision, hearing, and general mobility issues which restrict range of motion and fine motor skills work to collectively reduce the performance of elderly drivers .
In particular, elders face a decline in the ability to perform secondary tasks while driving, which require attention switching between the primary task of driving and the secondary task of looking at in-vehicle information displays such as instrument panels or navigation displays .
One approach is to investigate the use of automotive user interface technology to help elders drive safely for longer periods of time.
Better sensing and display technologies can be placed in the car to augment the diligence that an individual needs while driving.
This can help audiences like elder drivers with issues such as slowed reaction time and visual acuity.
In addition, instrument panel  display design can be explored to help attract and manage attention, make information easier to interpret, and facilitate the cognitive process of making sense of information and acting accordingly.
In this paper, we explore the premise that dashboard displays can be better designed to support elder drivers, their information needs, and their cognitive capabilities.
To do so, we conduct a study to understand which display design features are critically linked to issues of divided attention and driving performance.
To answer these questions, 32 participants  participated in a dual task experiment, evaluating a total of six displays while performing a simulated driving task.
They were asked to locate and verbally read dashboard information while performing the driving task.
The elder population is rising worldwide; in the US, no longer being able to drive is a significant marker of loss of independence.
One of the approaches to helping elders drive more safely is to investigate the use of automotive user interface technology, and specifically, to explore the instrument panel  display design to help attract and manage attention and make information easier to interpret.
In this paper, we explore the premise that dashboard displays can be better designed to support elder drivers, their information needs, and their cognitive capabilities.
We conducted a study to understand which display design features are critically linked to issues of divided attention and driving performance.
We found that contrast of size and reduced clutter are instrumental in enhancing driving performance, particularly for the elder population.
Surprisingly, our results showed that color elements have a negative effect on driving performance for elders, while color elements and fills slightly improve performance.
We conclude with design implications generated from this work.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
The results of our study demonstrated that our designs caused variations in driving performance that were greater in elder than in younger drivers.
There was a significant impact of clutter, affecting how both elder and younger drivers managed their attention.
The speedometer designs in the central panel had the most distinct results in affecting driver performance and attention management.
Elder drivers performed better and had shorter glance times using the speedometers in the low clutter designs.
Therefore, we can conclude that dashboard displays can be better designed to support safer driving in the elderly population.
In what follows, we discuss related work on driving performance, icons, visual design features, and in-car information displays.
Then we present the methods and findings from our study.
We conclude with design implications that can be used to guide instrument panel display designs.
Adding dynamic color to displays has eliminated the significant age-related decrease in reaction time seen when displays had no color .
As noted in , advanced automotive displays or UI technologies have the potential to improve safety and mobility if designed in accordance with the sensory/cognitive abilities of older drivers.
We believe redesigning car dashboard displays can help increase elder drivers' visual search speed and decrease attention demands, and result in safer driving.
Finding information on a visual display is a visual search task.
The perceptual psychology literature has identified two types of visual search tasks: a top-down task, which is goal-driven and implements cognitive strategies; and bottom-up tasks, which are thought to work on raw sensory input, shifting attention to salient items in a visual field .
Typically, bottom-up processes are thought to act early on in the visual perception process, generally within 100 milliseconds.
Attentive driving can be hindered when performing secondary interactive tasks, including eating or smoking, communicating with others, or using in-vehicle devices.
In particular, in-vehicle information displays at times demand a driver's visual attention, causing significant issues of divided attention.
To succeed in both safe driving and effective interaction, drivers have to manage their eye-offroad timings, patterns and frequency.
Human factors studies have shown that an average of 2.7 glances and a total of 4.1 seconds fixation time on a display are the maximum safely allowed when driving at 30km/h .
A driver takes approximately 0.78 seconds and 1.26 glances to read a speedometer .
Rockwell's two-second rule states that drivers should not take their eyes off the road for longer than a two-second interval .
Fortunately, we find that visual attention demands can be positively impacted by the visual design of the instrument panel .
For example,  used abstraction as a design strategy to minimize the complexity of route map visualizations in a navigation system, reducing fixation time and number of glances.
Within bottom-up mechanisms, the concept of pop-out is important .
Pop-out is the drawing of attention to an object, which occurs when an item in the visual field is somehow distinctive.
This is done by using highly contrasting design variables, as shown in Figure 2.
A range of design factors can cause pop-out effects, including color, brightness, and movement .
Interestingly, the literature shows that size does not create a pop-out effect .
We can replicate the same visual search phenomena when searching for information in a dashboard display using the design features of clutter, contrast of size and color.
When a driver searches for information, she will generally know what she is looking for.
A top-down search will be invoked, and will be modified by particular design features that are the target of the user's search.
For example, if the target of the driver's search has a pop-out effect, information will be discovered quickly.
If other aspects of the display feature pop-out, they will hinder the driver's search for information.
Visual design is informed by research in many areas: cognitive science, human factors, and semiotics, among others.
Research has explored identification and/or search speeds of text , color , high-symbolism icons , and combined text and high-symbolism pictures .
Visual search studies, on which many of the findings are based, are not representative of the dual-task paradigm that occurs during driving and that was used in our study.
Other research explores how individual design features holistically contribute to a design.
Color as a design feature has been shown to result in faster search times compared to design features such as size, brightness, and geometric shape .
Another study showed that the discriminating effects of color lessen with learning .
Other research confirms that text can be processed faster than pictures ,
From a rich body of empirical work, icon design guidelines have been created for in-vehicle usage  and public information .
Both sets of guidelines stress the importance of universal interpretability by using highsymbolism and simple drawings, because they assume viewers will have little or no training with the icons.
A body of dual-task research exists has examined interfaces for safety-critical situations, such as flying and driving.
One dual-task study showed that finding items on a secondary display may not significantly hinder a primary task .
Other research has focused on icon-function relationships, exploring the relationship between visual design, complexity, and interpretation of particular designs.
However, this work does not explore how a display might best convey information for a secondary task.
This leaves open the exploration of designs and renditions that may use design features like contrast, color, and abstraction to quickly convey information.
From the literature, we can understand that the goal of minimizing complexity on a visual display is important.
We also know that bottom-up search happens within 100ms of attending to a visual display.
For this reason, we sought to design features that supported bottom-up processes, so that the driver's eye would be naturally directed to changes on the screen.
Our designs explore clutter as a design strategy; increased clutter means there are more interface elements that can convey information, while decreased clutter means that there is less competition for user attention.
Our designs also explore the impact of contrast in size and color as design variables.
The details of particular design features relative to one another are important.
To uncover them, we embarked on an iterative, user-centered design process to design the displays for our study.
For the study, we designed six different car dashboard displays based on two design types, Low Clutter and High Clutter, and two design features: contrast in size and color .
To design the dashboard displays, we undertook an iterative, user-centered design process, which included interviews with elder and younger drivers, an expert interview with a driving rehab specialist, and a design and feature analysis of 36 existing dashboard designs on competitive car models.
From this, we identified a set of design features for the focus of our study.
A first round of designs was sketched by hand and evaluated by the driving specialist.
From there, the set of features was narrowed to the final list and static designs were created using Adobe Illustrator.
We then identified a set of interaction features for each dashboard 
Because we view designs holistically, it is impossible to predict how individual design features such as color or size might directly affect performance on an experimental task.
This difference will be greater for elder than younger drivers.
Designs using color will have faster interpretation time than designs using contrast in size.
We presented a Java-based driving simulation game with two vertically separated areas of focus: a primary driving task display in the upper section and our dashboard displays in the lower section .
The screen resolution of the dashboard display section was 1024  512 pixels.
The driving display featured blue coins arranged along a grey curve representing a road.
Participants manipulated a red dot  in this scene using a Bluetooth-based Wii steering wheel controller.
As shown in Figure 3, a runtime timestamp and coin collection score can be seen on the top left and bottom left side of the task display screen, respectively.
To assess where drivers were looking, their gaze was tracked using a Smart Eye Pro 5.5 contactless gaze tracker .
The secondary display section showed dynamic images of the dashboard display.
Our experiment featured six designs, using two clutter types, contrast in size, and variation in use of color .
Each display consists of five dashboard components: speedometer, fuel gauge, clock, odometer, and tachometer.
The HC dashboards combined speedometer, clock and odometer in a central panel, and fuel gauge and tachometer in a peripheral panel.
The LC dashboard featured only the speedometer in the central panel.
The game incentive to collect coins was included to keep participants focused on the primary task of driving, rather than focusing on the dashboard.
Drivers attempted to collect coins while maintaining the car's position in the center of the road.
Five voice commands prompted for information twice in a counter-balanced order .
Participants verbally reported the answers, referring to the dynamically updating dashboard display.
For simplicity, we employed a top-view representation of a car in our driving task, rather than a driver-view representation.
Elder participants were recruited through a lifelong learning institute at two local universities.
We recruited younger participants through bulletin board ads placed around the university campus and in the local community.
Participants provided demographic information and participated in an eye profiling and gaze calibration task, which took between 15 and 20 minutes.
All 18 elder participants reported having more than 30 years of driving experience.
78% did not report any impairment and three elders who reported visual or hearing impairments were excluded from the task performance/gaze analysis.
None of the younger participants reported any impairment.
Using a high-pass noise filter combined with linear interpolation, we calculated gaze dwell-on time, indicating how long a subject's gaze remained on the dashboard display and on each of the dashboard components during our driving task, and gaze drop-by frequency that indicates how many times a subject's gaze was drawn to the dashboard display section and each of the dashboard components during our driving task.
For each test, we obtained a full dataset consisting of three output files: a driving log file, a gaze log file, and a video.
Our automated measures for the primary task included lane deviation , measuring the average distance from the center of the road, and missed coins , measuring the total number of coins that drivers failed to collect during the experiment.
Our measures for the secondary task were collected using a video recording, with the timestamp on the driving display used to integrate the log of the automated measures and the recording.
Auditory commands and participant answers were also time-coded.
Our measures included response time , time from when the voice command was announced to when the participant began to utter an answer, and answer duration , time from the moment the participant begins responding until the time the answer is completed.
These measures indicate how quickly participants searched the dashboard display and how long it took them to comprehend the visual designs and communicate the results.
We also analyzed time-on-task by adding these two measures.
To create a measure of divided attention, we measured eye gaze movements and calculated eye-off-road times.
Each participant filled out initial, interim and post-test questionnaires.
An initial questionnaire surveyed participants about their driving patterns and general opinions about dashboard design properties.
After each driving test, an interim questionnaire captured participants' subjective evaluations of the design.
Participants rated each instrument panel in each dashboard display using a 6-point Likert scale.
A post questionnaire captured comparative preferences for the dashboards.
The initial survey queried drivers about the relative importance of the instrument panels and what aspects of dashboard displays they felt could be improved.
In terms of the dashboard display design, both elders and younger drivers rated the speedometer to be of primary importance to the driving task , followed by the fuel gauge .
The tachometer was chosen as the least important instrument .
Both groups selected the odometer and tachometer as the most difficult to find quickly.
When asked what features of dashboard displays were most ripe for improvement, elder participants selected lighting brightness  and display contrast , followed by font size .
The primary task was evaluated by two measures: missed coins  and lane deviation .
We found significant performance measures for both, between the two age groups.
In coin collecting performance, we found no significant impact either by clutter type or by color .
In lane deviation performance, elders showed 1.15 times larger lane deviations when using the color-added designs  than when using the no-color designs  .
Interestingly, however, when examining only the use of color elements and background fills together , elders' lane deviation performance was NOT significantly different from when they used the no-color designs .
To summarize, younger participants performed better than elder participants on the primary driving task.
Given the lane deviation results, one important implication is that dashboard display designs may draw attention away from driving safely, and that this effect is larger for elder drivers.
To explore this issue further, we examined the participants' secondary task performance and gaze movement.
The peripheral panel of the LC dashboards slowed the speed of responding to the prompt; here, participants' AD was 0.44s longer for the peripheral panel .
In other words, when using LC dashboards, RTs were generally faster across the panels overall and significantly faster for the central panel; ADs were shorter for the central panel, as expected, but they were significantly longer for the peripheral panel.
Given these results, when glancing at the dashboard display, drivers may strategically manage their attention to ensure that they can continue to drive safely.
This strategy may differ significantly depending on whether they are interacting with the central or peripheral panel.
To explore this further, we examined the impact of the dashboard design factors.
In particular, when comparing high clutter and low clutter displays, we found that elder participants spent significantly different amounts of time attending to the central and peripheral panel zones.
The average ratio of time spent on central vs. peripheral panels was closer to 0.5 for the LC dashboards, but closer to 1.0 for the HC dashboards .
We interpret this to mean that elders changed their strategy for answering questions when using the LC and HC designs.
To summarize, both elder and younger participants' secondary task performance was influenced by dashboard components and panels within the designs.
LC dashboards with high contrast of size yielded a mostly faster response time for the secondary task, particularly in the central panel and particularly for elder drivers.
Secondary task performance was measured by time on task, time to answer , and answer duration .
There were no significant differences between younger and elder participants in secondary task performance over all dashboards .
However, we found design-specific differences in both age groups.
Clutter type and contrast of size had an impact on RT and AD in some of the designs.
Faster average RTs were also found for the other dashboard components when using LC dashboards.
Despite these results, participants had longer ADs when using LC dashboards, spending 0.26s more in reading information from the displays .
To understand this discrepancy, we conducted a post-hoc analysis by grouping the dashboard components into two panels: central and peripheral.
Our gaze analysis measures included gaze dwell-on time and gaze drop-by frequency; these measures represent how long and how often participants took their eyes off the road.
Using gaze tracking data, we analyzed attention switching between the driving game and the dashboard display.
We found that clutter type, panel, and contrast in size all had a significant impact on both gaze dwell-on time and gaze drop-by frequency for the dashboard display.
When analyzing by panel, on average our participants spent 7.08s and 8.59 glances looking at dashboard components in the central panel and 4.47s and 6.302 glances for the peripheral components.
In conclusion, clutter type was more important than age factor in having an effect on gaze drop and gaze dwell time, although the degree of impact on gaze was greater in elder drivers.
LC designs yielded a smaller gaze dwell-on time and lower gaze drop-by frequency  over all participants, for both the central and peripheral panels , but especially in the central panel.
Contrast of size did not cause a significant difference in primary task performance for younger participants.
However, across all participants, secondary task performance and gaze movement varied depending on which contrast of size they saw in the design .
Across all participants, both RT and AD in interacting with central panels were significantly shorter when using high size-contrast designs.
Particularly for elder drivers, high size-contrast yielded a faster response time.
We also found that contrast of size had a significant impact on both gaze dwell-on time and gaze drop-by frequency for the dashboard display.
The lower potential for needing eyesoff-road, owing to large size contrast was clearly exhibited in the central panel.
Color as a design variable caused interesting effects on elder and younger drivers.
Elder participants were 0.44s faster in response time  for a dashboard component in the peripheral panel using the dashboards with background color fills .
However, color did not have any significant impact on gaze movements for elder participants.
Younger participants took on average about a second less to look at a peripheral component when using any of the colored dashboards .
Color did not cause any significant difference in either primary and secondary task performance for younger participants.
This is in keeping with the findings in , which state that elders will have significantly better performance when using a dashboard display with color.
In our study, we created six dashboard display designs using differing levels of clutter, contrast of size, and color elements and fills.
Our experiment strove to understand the performance of these designs holistically, but in order to do so, we hoped to understand the relative strength of individual design features.
In general, both younger and elder drivers performed better using the LC, high contrast in size designs.
Older drivers exhibited a greater variability in the measures of performance with different designs.
In particular, the design of the speedometer panel in the LC designs -- using high contrast of size and no color -- resulted in the best performance measures for all participants.
Our first prediction, that clutter type would impact a design's effect on driving performance more than other design features, was partially supported.
When using LC dashboards, drivers responded more quickly to the prompts for information generally faster across the panels overall and significantly faster for the central panel.
Answer durations were also shorter for the central panel, as expected, but they were significantly longer for the peripheral panel.
Our second prediction, that low clutter designs will require less fixation time and, therefore, less response time in answering a prompt for information, and would be greater for elder than younger drivers, was supported.
When driving with the LC dashboards, participants looked at the elements on the dashboard less , and answered questions more quickly.
Our third prediction was that color would cause a greater draw in attention than contrast of size, particularly for elder drivers.
This prediction was made based on literature stating that color, not size, created an attraction of attention , and that color had been shown to assist in comprehension of driving displays in the elder population .
We believed that designs using color would have faster interpretation times than designs using contrast in size, and that designs using contrast in size plus color would communicate information quickly and have the greatest effect on elders' driving performance.
This prediction, surprisingly, was not uniformly supported.
The contrast dominant dashboards mostly performed better than the color dominant dashboards, especially in the central panel.
It indicates that size-contrast was more dominant than color in improving performance.
An interesting detail to note is that our color designs resulted in shorter than average glance durations.
The literature cites 1.6 seconds threshold for in-vehicle glances , and our color displays averaged 0.84 seconds.
Most of our results show that the designs using high contrast of size provide the best results in secondary task performance and gaze durations.
In addition, we also found some evidence that participants were affected by color fills in elements or background.
One question we hoped to answer is which design feature, contrast of size or color, contributes to better performance.
For the primary task, elder participants had better driving performance with the first combination than the second combination .
Adding color to the high size-contrast dashboards reduced the legibility of the design for elders.
The third combination also resulted in a longer gaze dwellon time than the other dashboards, especially for the central panel .
To summarize, size-contrast appears to be more dominant than color in improving performance.
In post-task questionnaires, all participants were asked about familiarity with the question "Which dashboard most looks similar to your dashboard?".
We also saw differences in the behavior of younger and elder drivers in interacting with the different designs.
Elders had larger performance improvements with the LC designs, particularly with the speedometer design that featured high contrast of size.
Elder drivers spent significantly different amounts of time attending to the central and peripheral panels depending on the types of clutter.
We believe that this indicates that elders developed different strategies for responding to prompts for information using the two designs, so that they could maintain good driving performance over all designs.
Color as a design element, however, did not uniformly improve elders' performance in driving.
Designs with color elements-only especially caused larger lane deviations in elder drivers.
Our design implications from this work are fairly straightforward, and generally follow the principles of good information design .
When designing dashboards to support elder drivers, the following considerations should be made: Low clutter.
Simple, low clutter designs should be used for the whole dashboard.
Ample "white space" is needed, particularly between individual features of the dashboard.
Reserve maximum contrast of size for the center panel, in particular the speedometer, since this feature is what elder drivers reference most often when driving.
Use color for elements plus background fills, rather than for elements only.
While the literature describes an increase in driving performance in elder drivers with the use of color, our findings do not uniformly support this work.
Our research showed that contrast of size had more of an effect than color in increasing the performance of a design.
For elders, designs with color and fill performed about the same as designs with no color.
More research is needed to understand how color can help to make a dashboard display more legible in different lighting conditions.
Our future work will expand upon our renditions of high performing designs, placing them in the context of a real dashboard, rather than a lab, to test performance of legibility combined with human factors issues such as gaze distance, posture, and even driver fatigue.
Baldassi, S., & Burr, D. C. "Pop-out" of targets modulated in luminance or colour: the eVect of intrinsic and extrinsic uncertainty.
Designing in-vehicle technologies for older drivers: Application of sensory-cognitive interaction theory.
Ball, K. and Owsley, C. Increasing mobility and reducing accidents of older drivers, in K. W. Schaie and M. Pietrucha , Mobility and Transportation in the Elderly  , 213-250.
Ball, K., Owsley, C., Stalvey, B., Roenker, D.L., Sloane, M.E., & Graves, M. Driving avoidance and functional impairment in older drivers.
In: Organization and Representation in Perception, Beck J, ed.
Relative comprehensibility of pictorial information and printed words in proceduralized instructions.
In-vehicle display icons and other information elements: Volume I: Guidelines, Federal Highway Administration, 2004.
Invehicle display icons and other information elements: Literature review, Federal Highway Administration, 1998.
Research for evaluating visual display codes: An emphasis on colour coding.
In Easterby, R. and Zwaga, H. eds.
Information design: The design and evaluation of signs and printed materials, John Wiley & Sons , 209-228.
No longer being able to drive is a significant marker of loss of independence.
In this study, we sought to understand how the instrument panel  display can be designed to help attract and manage attention in elder drivers, resulting in safer driving performance.
Our dual-task study revealed which design features helped to increase driving performance and reduce eyes-off-road time.
We found that contrast of size and reduced clutter are instrumental in enhancing driving performance for the elder population.
Green, P. Visual and Task Demands of Driver Information Systems.
The University of Michigan Transportation Research Institute, Technical Report UMTRI-98-16.
Hakamies-Blomqvist, L., Siren, A. and Davidse, R. Older drivers - a review.
VTI rapport 497A, Swedish National Road and Transport Research Institute, 2004.
Ito, T. and Miki, Y. Japan's Safety Guideline on InVehicle Display Systems in Proceedings of the Fourth ITS World Congress.
A brief outline of the textion theory of human vision.
Simulated augmented reality windshield display as a cognitive mapping aid for elder driver navigation.
Kumar, M. and Kim, T. Dynamic speedometer: dashboard redesign to discourage drivers from speeding.
Studying the effectiveness of MOVE: a contextually optimized invehicle navigation system.
Mayer, D. and Laux, L. Evaluating Vehicle Displays for Older Drivers.
AAA Foundation for Traffic Safety, 1992.
McDougall, S., de Bruijn, O. and Curry, M. Exploring the effects of icon characteristics: Concreteness, complexity and distinctiveness.
McGehee, D. V. New design guidelines aim to reduce driver distraction.
Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Bulletin, Vol.
Monash University Accident Research Centre.
The Elderly and Mobility: A Review of the Literature.
Sponsored by Swedish Road Administration , Report No.
Spare Visual Capacity in Driving Revisited: New Empirical Results of an Old Idea in Vision in Vehicles II.
Interrelations of age, visual acuity, and cognitive functioning.
Somervell, J., McCrickard, D.S., North, C. and Shukla, M. An evaluation of information visualization in attention-limited environments.
In Transportation in an Aging Society: A Decade of Experience.
Treisman, A.M. and Sato, S. Conjunction search revisited.
Selection for perception for selection for action: A reply to Van der Heijden.
Feature binding, attention and object perception.
University of Michigan Transportation Research Institute.
The assessment of older drivers capabilities: A review of the literature.
Interim report for the GM/US DOT project entitled: Improvement of Older Driver Safety through Self-Evaluation, Report No.
VICS Promotion Council, VICS Promotion Council Safety Committee Report on Information Display.
Visual Attentional Demand of an In-Car Navigation Display System in Vision in Vehicles II.
Visual and manual demands of in-car controls and displays.
Developing effective symbols for public information.
