This paper first reviews previous work on shared drawing support to clarify the design goats.
We then examine three metaphors that fulfill these goals.
The design requirements and the two possible system architectures of ClearBoard are described.
Finally, some findings gained through the experimental use of the prototype, including the feature of "gaze awareness", are discussed.
INTRODUCTION A whiteboard  is probably the most typical shared workspace in an ordinary face-to-face meeting.
1 shows a snapshot of a whiteboard being used in a design session.
Participants are concurrently drawing on and pointing to the whiteboard, while speaking and gesturing.
In a design session, the participants' focus can change dynamically.
When we discuss concrete system architectures, we intensively use a whiteboard as a shared drawing space by drawing diagrams, marks, and pointing to them.
The whiteboard serves as an explicit group memory that each participant can see, point to, and draw on simulmneously .
On the other hand, when we discuss abstract concepts or design philosophy, we often concentrate on the partner's face while talking.
In face-to-face conversations, mutual gaze , facial expressions and gestures provide a variety of non-verbal cues that are essential in human-human communication .
Permission to copy without fee all or part of this material is granted provided that the copies are not made or distributed for direct commercial advantage, the ACM copyright notice and the title of the publication and its date appear, and notice is given that copying is by permission of the Association for Computing Machinery.
When we design a medium to support these activities, it is not sufficient to simulate the whitebodrd function only, the simple video phone function only, or even both functions.
It is necessary to integrate a virtual whiteboard with t%ce-to-face communication channels .wumle.ssly so that users can switch their focus smoothly from one to another according to the task contents .
In a face-to-face meeting, the room is perceived as a contiguous space: there are no physical seams between the whiteboard and the participants.
By simply moving their eyes or heads, participants can look at both other participants and the whiteboard.
In order to solve these problems, this paper presents a novel shared drawing medium, ClearBoard.
ClearBoard realizes both  seamless shared workspace and  eye contact.
ClearBoard is designed to support realtime and remote colTherefore, it can be called a laboration by two users.
This paper first reviews previous work on shared drawing support and clarifies the goals of this research.
We then examine three metaphors that fulfill these goals.
The design requirements and system architecture of ClearBoard prototype are described.
Finally, some findings gained through the experimental use of the prototype are discussed.
3, there have been several systems proposed to support face-to-tlce conversations and shared drawing activities.
However, there has been no system that fulfills both of the following two requirements:  a contiguous space that includes both shared drawings and user image, and  eye contact.
Video Tunnel Video Tunnel  is a kind of video phone developed in EuroPARC for a computer-controlled video network.
It supports eye-contact between two speakers using the wellknown half mirror technique.
Lack of eye corztact has been another problem of existing desktop video conference systems.
People feel it difficult to communicate when they cannot tell if the partner is looking at him or her.
Eye contact plays an important role in face-to-face conversations because "eyes are as eloquent as the tongue."
2 illustrates these two problems: seams between windows and the lack of eye-contact in a shared screen of TeamWorkStation .
THREE METAPHORS FOR SEAMLESS SPACE In order to design groupware that achieves the two goals of  contiguous  space, and  eye contact, we first investigated the following familiar metaphors, and clarified their problems.
Video Draw VideoDraw , developed in Xerox PARC, is a pioneering work that supports shared drawing activity using video.
It allows a user to draw with a whiteboard marker directly on a transparent sheet attached to the video screen that shows the drawing surface image of the partner.
For face-to-fiace conversations, VideoDraw provides users with another screen.
Commune Commune  is a shared drawing tool based on a digitizer and multi-user paint editor developed in Xerox PARC.
It is used with another screen for face-to -face conversation as VideoDraw.
VideoWhiteboard VideoWhiteboard  developed in Xerox PARC, utilizes the shadow of users to convey the gestures of collaborators.
Since the marks on the wall-size screen and the shadow of the user are captured by a single camera, it provides remote collaborators with a virtual space in which the marks and the shadow of drawing gestures are contiguous.
However, because only shadow images are sent, no facial expression is conveyed.
TeamWorkStation TeamWorkStation  developed by the authors at N'IT enables the simultaneous use of heterogeneous tools such as computer tools, printed materials, handwriting and hand gestures in a shared drawing space, Facial images are displayed in different windows on the same display.
ClearFace on TeamWorkStation ClearFace  developed by the authors lays translucent Eacial images over shared drawing images to utilize the limited screen space more effectively.
However, as with TeamWorkStation, the facial images are not contiguous with the drawing space.
The advantage of this metaphor is that all the participants can share the common board orientation.
However, because two p~ticipants share the same space in front of the whiteboard, it is hard to implement a mechanism that can coordinate the use of this shared space.
The only way we found of realizing this metaphor is to employ "virtual reality" technology.
However, we do not think it is a good idea to force users to wear awkward head-mount displays and special gloves and a suit just to share some drawings.
This solution lets users dive into a computergenerated virtual world which definitely increases cognitive loads.
This metaphor is quite suitable for face-to-face communication because two participants can easily see t%dchother's face.
However, it is hard to give users a natural sense of sharing the same space over the table.
In order to overcome the problems in metaphors  and  while utilizing their advantages, we devised the new metaphor  as the foundation of our groupware design in September 1990.
1 VideoDraw  and Commune  took the human interface close to this metaphor letting users share a common orientation.
However, physical seams ex i steal between the separate screens, one for the partner's facial image and the other for shared drawings.
2 VideoWindow  and VideoWhiteboard  are close to this metaphor.
However, as described in Fig.
Metaphor  does not produce arw confusion or conflict about shared space use, sin~e each pa~ticipant's space is isolated from the other partner's space by a transpment glass window.
This metaphor has the following advantages.
First, as with the table metaphor , participants can see the partner's face easily, Second, since the partner's face and drawings are closely located on the board, switching the focus between the drawing and the partner's face requires less eye movements than  or .
One problem of this metaphor is that participants can not share the common orientation of "right" and "left" of the drawing space.
However, this problem can be easily solved in implementing the prototype by mirror-reversing the video image.
We chose this metaphor  as the base for pairware design because of its simplicity and the advantages described above.
We coined the name "ClearBoardr' for the pairware based on this metaphor .
There can be several technical approaches to implement this ClearBoard concept.
In the following section, we discuss two possible implementations of ClemBoard.
Requirement  is important to provide both users with a common orientation of the drawing space.
Especially for words, the partner must be able to read the text in its correct orientation.
The strict implementation of the transparent glass metaphor does not allow this.
In order to realize a ClearBoard prototype that satisfies all these requirements, we investigated two alternative' system architectures based on different techniques.
In order to take a frontal image of a user who is drawing on a screen, it is necessary to take his or her image through the screen by a video camera placed behind the screen.
A liquid crystal screen, which can be rapidly switched between the transparent and light scattering s~ate by the application of a suitable control voltage, can be a key device to fulfill this requirement.
5 illustrates the system architecture of ClearBoard based on this technique.
Design Requirements In order to implement a ClearBoard prototype which supports remote collaboration, we identified the following three design requirements.
The video tunnel architecture based on half-mirrors satisfies of a half-silvered requirement .
In state , the screen works as a rear projection screen on which the image of the partner and his or her drawing is displayed.
In state , the user's image is captured by a video camera located behind the transparent screen.
The timing of image capture and image display is synchronized to the switching of liquid crystal display states.
This technique was demonstrated by Shinichi Shiwa  at NTT in order to enable eye contact without any shared drawing support consideration.
This architecture can be utilized to implement the ClearBoard concept if users are allowed to draw directly on the screen.
The transition frequency of the liquid crystal screen depends on its size.
High frequencies, which decrease the physical load on user's eyes, are hard to achieve with large screens.
Flickering images can be a serious disadvantage.
The high cost of the liquid crystal screen is another drawback.
Because of these shortcomings, we devised the next solution, which we refer to as "Drafter-Mirror architecture".
We call it "Drafter-Mirror" because it looks like a drafter  and it uses a half-mirror technique to enable eye-contact.
Each Drafter-Mirror terminal is equipped with a tilted screen, a video projector and a video camera.
The screen is angled back at about 45 degrees and is composed of a projection screen, a polarizing film and a half-silvered mirror.
Video feedback between the two cameras and screen pairs is prevented by a polarizing filter on each camera lens and a nearly orthogonal polarized filter that covers the surface of each screen, Users can write and draw on the surface of the screen using color paint markers.
The video camera located above the screen captures the drawings and the image of the user reflected by the half-mirror as a continuous video image.
This image is sent to the other terminal through a video network, and projected onto the partner's screen from the"rem.
The partner can draw directly on this transmitted video image.
Because of this architecture, the video camera captures double hand images, one being the direct image, and the other being the image reflected by the half-mirror.
The image of the user and his or her drawings is projected on the partner's screen so that both users can shared common orientation of the drawing space.
The drawing image captured by the camera is trapezoidally distorted due to perspective because the screen is at an angle.
In order to support shared drawing on the screen, the drawing image must be recreated with the original shape and size on the partner's screen.
In the current implementation, the distortion is offset by the opposite distortion caused by projecting the image onto the tilted screen.
In order to give a suitable distortion rate, the camera and the projector should be symmetrically arranged with respect to the screen.
EXPERIMENTAL USE OF CLEARBOARD-1 We implemented the prototype of a Drafter-Mirror system in November 1990.
Since then we have used this prototype in experimental sessions such as icon design, direction of the routes in a map, and discussions about diagrams for this paper.
We informally observed the use of ClearBoard-l by ourselves and our colleagues.
9 shows the appearance of the Drafter-Mirror prototype in one of the experimental sessions.
We realized that users can easily achieve eye-contact when needed.
This is because the partner's face and drawings are closely located on the board.
Easy eye contact even in drawing-intensive activities increased the feeling of intimacy.
We observed that users often worked collaboratively to coordinate the limited shared drawing space.
For example, when a user started drawing over some part of the partner's drawing, the partner often voluntmil y erdsed his or her drawing from the screen.
Unlike ClearFace , users do not hesirdte to draw over the image of the partner's face.
In ClearFace, the p~tner's image was mixed with the drawing image behind it, and users found it difficult to draw over the facial image.
In ClearBoard, we assume that users recognize the partner behind the drawing on the glass board, and thus feel no difficulty drawing on the board in front of the partner.
The transparent glass window metaphor seems to make users sensitive to the distance between the drawing and the partner.
Even with this overlapped image, users did not report having trouble distinguishing drawing marks from the video background.
Gaze Awareness The most novel feature of ClearBoard, and the most important, is that it provides precise "gaze awareness" or "gaze tracking."
A ClearBoard user can easily recognize what the partner is gazing at on the screen during a conversation.
A separate psychological experiment has determined that the of success of this game depends heavily on the points-of-view the players .
It is thus advantageous for the collaborative players to know what the partner is gazing at, Through this experiment we confirmed that it is easy for the players to say which side of the river the partner is gazing at and this information was quite useful in advising each other.
10 shows a snapshot of one such experiment.
User A is gazing at side X of the river, and user C is looking at the face of user A to read his gaze.
ClearBoard-l is the first system that provides distributed users with the capability of gaze awarene.~s.
Problems of ClearBoard-l Through the experimental sessions using this prototype, found the following problems.
Gaze awareness lets a user know what the partner is looking at, the user's face or anything else on the shared workspace.
If the partner is looking at you, you can know it.
If the partner is gazing at an object in the shared workspace, you can know what the object is.
Eye contact can be seen as just a special case of gaze awareness.
We think the notion of gaze awareness will be an important goal of the next generation of shared drawing tools.
Since the screen is tilted, the bottom edge is about 40 cm further from the camera than the top edge.
In the current prototype, the camera focuses at the center of the screen, so that the user's face and the edges of the screen are slightly out of focus.
The quality of the projected video image is not as sharp nor bright as an ordinary computer screen, Because half-mirrors and polarizing fiims are used, the screen image of Drafter-Mirror architecture i's inevitably darkened.
10, each user "sees" two hands for each actual hand with this arrangement.
At first glance, a few users said they were disturbed by this.
However, they got used to it soon and had no further complaints.
However, if we use the appropriate computer input technologies, it will be easier to record and print the work results.
4 The "river crossing problem" is a puzzle to get group A members and group B members across a river using a boat.
The boat can hold only two members at a time, and must have at least one member in it to cross the river.
The number of group A members must be larger than that of group B members on both banks.
We played the puzzle on ClearBoard drawing the river on it and using some pieces of sticky paper  to represent the members of each group.
CONCLUSION This paper has presented a novel shared drawing medium, ClearBoard.
ClearBoard realizes  a seamless shared drawing space and  gaze awareness to support realtime and remote collaboration by two users.
We devised the key metaphor of ClearBom-d: "talking through and drawing on a transparent glass window."
We compared and this metaphor to the traditional concepts of whiteboard table.
We implemented a prototype of ClearBorwd based on the "Drafter-Mirror" approach and confirmed that the prototype fulfills the two goals.
In addition, through the informal use of ClearBoard-l, we By found its most important feature to be gaze awareness.
We are planning to conduct empirical studies to understand the effects of gaze awareness in collaborative problem solving.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS We thank Naomi Miyake at Chukyo University and Isamu Yoroizawa at NTT for their insightful comments on the ClearBoard concept and experiments.
Thanks are also due to William Buxton at the University of Toronto, Jonathan Grudin at the University of California, Irvine, and John Tang at Sun Microsystems for their thoughtful comments on this paper.
We thank Kazuho Anta for his technical advice.
We express our appreciation to Shinichi Shiwa for introducing his work on eye contact using the liquid crystal technique.
We also thank Takaya Endo and Gen Suzuki for their encouragement and support for this research project.
Bly, S. A., and Minneman, S. L. Commune: A shared drawing surface, In Proceedings of Conference on Office Information Systems , ACM, New York, 1990, pp.
Buxton, B., and Moran, T. EuroPARC's Integrated Interactive Intermedia Facility : Early Experiences.
In Proceedings of IFIP WG8.4 Conference on MultiUserInterfacesandApplications , North Holland, Amsterdam, 1990, pp.
Buxton, B. Telepresence: Integrating Shared Task Space and Personal Spaces.
In Proceedings of The Potential of Team and Organizational Computing , Software Engineering Research Center, Utrecht, 1991, pp.
Fish, R. S,, Kraut, R. E., and Chalfonte, B. L. The VideoWindow System in Informal Communications.
In Proceedings of Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work , ACM, New York, 1990, pp.
Point of view in problem solving, In CHIP Technical Report No.
105, University of California at San Diego, 1981, Ishii, H. TeamWorkStation: Towards a Seamless Shared Workspace.
In Proceedings of Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work , ACM, New York, 1990, pp.
Ishii, H., and Anta, K. ClearFace: Translucent multiuser interface forTeamWorkStation.
In Proceedings of European Conference on Computer-Supported Cooperative Work 1991 , 1991, pp.
Ishii, H., and Miyake, N. Toward an Open Shared Workspace: Computer and Video Fusion Approach of TeamWorkStation.
Communications of the ACM, December 1991, pp.
Lakin, F. A performing medium for working group graphics.
In Computer-Supported Cooperative Work: A book of n%ddings.
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, San Mateo, California, 1988, pp.
Managing a trois: A study of a multi-user drawing tool in distributed design work.
In Proceedings of ACM SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM, New York, 1991, pp.
Shiwa, S., and Ishibashi, M. A Large-Screen Visual Telecommunication Device Enabling Eye Contact.
In Digest of technical papers of Society for Information Display International Symposium 1991, 1991, pp.
Tang, J. C., and Minneman, S. L. VideoDraw: A video interface for collaborative drawing.
In Proceedings of ACM SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM, New York, 1990, pp.
Tang, J. C., and Minneman, S. L. VideoWhiteboard: Video shadows to support remote collaboration.
In Proceedings of ACM SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM, New York, 1991, pp.
