This work explores the role of communication technologies during romantic couple conflict, and the impact that selfesteem has on behavior, preferences for communication channels, and attitudes about mediated communication during conflict.
Results revealed that lower levels of selfesteem and communicating via text messaging  were associated with increased distancing and perceived partner distancing behaviors.
Lower levels of self-esteem and using mediated communication were also associated with a greater likelihood of thinking that a conflict had a negative impact on the relationship.
Yet, there was no evidence to suggest that individuals with lower levels of self-esteem exhibited more negative behaviors and perceptions in text-based communication than in FtF communication.
In addition, lower levels of self-esteem were associated with increased use of and preferences for text-based mediated communication over FtF communication during conflict.
Overall, this study suggests that both self-esteem and communication channel impact the nature of romantic couple conflict.
Recent studies indicate, however, that couples use a host of communication technologies for managing conflicts .
Given the myriad differences between mediated and FtF communication, communication channel likely influences the nature of romantic couple conflict.
In addition, it is important to remember that individuals utilize and experience communication channels in different ways.
For instance, imagine that you texted your partner but your partner took a while to respond.
You may conclude that there is a reasonable explanation for the delay, but another individual might immediately think the worst of their partner.
This example highlights the fact that CMC can be more ambiguous than FtF communication since communicators are not co-located and certain nonverbal social cues like facial expressions, body language, and tone of voice are not typically transmitted .
This ambiguity may be particularly salient for individuals who are prone to negative interpretations.
In fact, being biased toward negative interpretations of a partner's communication and behavior is a key attribute of individuals with low self-esteem .
Self-esteem is a trait that plays a significant role in romantic relationships, particularly in threatening contexts like conflict, with lower levels of self-esteem being associated with a number of harmful relational behaviors .
While LSEs' insecurities may cause them to prefer using technology during conflicts in order to distance themselves from potentially hurtful behavior, it may be that individuals' negative biases are actually heightened when communicating through technology, since there is more room for interpretation of a partner's behavior.
The goals of this paper are to understand how self-esteem and communication channel impact the nature of couple conflict.
More specifically, we aim to investigate how selfesteem and communication channel impact one's behavior and perception of one's partner's behavior during conflict, perception of how the conflict impacts the relationship, and overall preferences and experiences during conflict with one's romantic partner.
These investigations will increase our understanding of how technologies impact relational partners' abilities to communicate and carry out relationship work.
Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
In addition, Coyne and colleagues found that using text messaging to discuss serious issues or broach a potentially confrontational topic with one's partner was associated with increased levels of negative communication in the relationship overall .
Using CMC is typically thought of as a convenient way to avoid or ignore one's communication partner in facethreatening situations like conflict , since lack of immediacy and reduced cues provide more opportunities for ambiguity.
Studies have also found that relational tensions can arise about the use of technologies themselves .
Scissors and Gergle, however, found that there were both benefits and drawbacks to using CMC during couple conflict .
They also found that while some individuals preferred to use CMC during conflict, others preferred FtF communication .
Yet, this study was based on interviews and did not systematically explore attitudes and behaviors in mediated couple conflict, nor did it uncover what personality variables might be associated with the variance in preferences for technology during conflict.
Previous research has demonstrated that LSEs tend to have trouble in their romantic relationships .
LSEs are biased toward negative interpretations of their partners' behavior and are sensitive to feelings of threat and rejection.
A key component in how LSEs function in their close relationships has to do with how they interpret communication and behavior from their partners.
Murray and colleagues found that LSEs "read too much into problems" with their partners, interpreting the problems as signs of fading feelings or commitment , p.256.
Furthermore, LSEs over-interpret their dating partners' negative moods, internalizing responsibility and hurt feelings when the cause of the mood was actually ambiguous .
This line of work suggests that LSEs tend to overanalyze situations with their partners, and tend to believe the worst in ambiguous situations.
When faced with potential threats, LSEs distance themselves from or behave badly towards their partners in order to derogate the relationship and preserve their sense of self .
In fact, LSEs' "oversensitivity to rejection manifests in defensive behaviors that ... undermine the well-being of the relationship" , p.232.
These "distancing behaviors"  can be harmful to relationships.
Alternatively, individuals with high selfesteem  tend to be less sensitive to relationship threats and actually draw closer to their partners in these situations .
The fact that they feel self-assured likely helps HSEs to diminish threats or signs of rejection in order to focus on the positive aspects of the relationship.
It is unclear, however, how common these distancing behaviors are across different communication channels.
As computer-mediated communication and other text-based technologies proliferated, scholars began to examine technology's role in couple conflict.
A 2010 study found that nearly two-thirds of participants had used a mediated channel , social network sites , email during a conflict with their partner, with text messaging and phone being the most common .
Moreover, a 2013 market research report found that 30% of 16- to 24-year-olds and 12% of adults in the UK felt it was acceptable to have an argument via private text-based communications .
Another study demonstrated that, in some cases, individuals make more positive partner attributions when communicating about a conflict via CMC than when communicating FtF .
Yet, there are also drawbacks to using CMC during conflict.
For instance, Burge and Tatar found that couples discussing a conflict via mediated communication  may experience significantly lower mood states than couples who communicated FtF .
A handful of studies have investigated the connection between self-esteem and CMC in relationships.
Ehrenberg and colleagues found that lower levels of self-esteem were associated with increased time spent using IM and stronger IM addictive tendencies, though these results were not detected for text messaging and talking on the phone .
In a 2004 study, Joinson found that, in hypothetical situations involving interpersonal risk or face-threat , LSEs showed a stronger preference for email and weaker preference for FtF communication compared to HSEs .
Since LSEs are more sensitive to negative feedback, it may be that the separation CMC provides acts as a "buffer"  that makes LSEs feel more secure in threatening situations.
In addition, the distance and visual anonymity that CMC provides likely makes it easier for LSEs to enact their self-protection strategies.
Although these findings suggest that LSEs are drawn to mediated communication in risky interpersonal situations, the current work expands on Joinson's study by specifically looking at conflict and by exploring additional channels  along with the previously explored channels .
We also analyze actual situations with relational partners, as opposed to hypothetical scenarios.
In another study of individuals in dating relationships, increased frequency of text messaging was associated with more positive relationships for highly avoidant participants but not for less avoidant participants .
These findings suggest that the use of text-based communication may lead to positive relational outcomes for people who feel insecure in their relationships.
This work, however, did not focus specifically on self-esteem or conflict.
It may be that given the heightened emotional states, feelings of threat, and potential impact of a conflict on the relationship that these findings may be different in the context of conflict communication.
Since text-based communication does not require individuals to be co-present, it may be easier to disengage from conversation in text-based CMC than in FtF communication.
The increased ambiguity of CMC may make individuals feel more distant from their partners, even if their partners are not purposefully avoiding them.
This suggests that conflicts that occur in CMC may be experienced as more negative than conflicts that occur FtF.
Given that LSEs are prone to interpreting their partners' communication and behavior negatively in ambiguous contexts, it stands to reason that the more ambiguous the context, the more room for interpretation.
And since text-based communication transmits fewer social cues  that help individuals interpret communication, we argue that LSEs' biases will be heightened in CMC.
In other words, the effects of self-esteem on various behaviors and interpretations should be stronger in CMC than FtF.
In fact, Walther's Hyperpersonal model of communication posits that, in CMC, all individuals are prone to "making exaggerated attributions based on limited information" , p.216.
Walther theorizes that individuals "decode textbased cues" and "encode relational messages" in the process of forming an impression of their communication partner and managing their relationship, and that they may do so in biased ways , p.67.
Therefore, although mediated environments might lead LSEs to focus more strongly on the negative, the lack of nonverbal cues may help to further bolster HSEs' ability to ignore relationship threats and focus on their partners' past caring actions.
In addition to exploring participants' distancing behavior, we also examine the perceptions participants have of their partners' distancing behavior.
Because LSEs are more likely to have negative interpretations of their partners' behavior, and because mediated communication makes it easier to avoid communicating with one's partner we predict: H2a: Lower levels of self-esteem will be associated with a greater likelihood of perceiving partner distancing behaviors.
H2b: Partner distancing behaviors will be more likely to be perceived in text-based CMC than in FtF communication.
Because mediated communication has more room for interpretation than FtF communication, which may enhance biases, we predict: H2c: Lower levels of self-esteem will be more strongly associated with perceiving partner distancing behaviors in text-based CMC than in FtF communication.
We also examine how conflicts impact participants' subsequent impressions of their relationships.
Because LSEs are biased toward negative interpretations, we predict: H3a: Lower levels of self-esteem will be associated with more negative assessments of the conflict's impact on the relationship.
Though previous research findings are mixed, because using CMC during conflict is associated with multiple negative outcomes , we predict: H3b: Conflicts in mediated communication will be associated with more negative assessments of the conflict's impact on the relationship than will FtF conflicts.
Because LSE's negative interpretations may be stronger in more ambiguous communication channels, we predict: H3c: Lower levels of self-esteem will be more strongly associated with negative assessments of the conflict's impact on the relationship for conflicts in mediated communication than for FtF conflicts.
Because LSEs are more likely to distance themselves from their partner under threat, and because mediated communication may make it easier to avoid communicating with one's partner, we predict: H1a: Lower levels of self-esteem will be associated with increased distancing behaviors during conflict.
H1b: Distancing behaviors will be more likely to occur in text-based CMC than in FtF communication.
If participants never engaged in a conflict where technology was used, they reported on the most recent conflict that occurred during FtF communication.
They were then asked a series of questions about the conflict, including questions about which technologies were used and when, their behaviors and their partner's behaviors during the conflict, what channel was used during attempted conflict resolution, whether the conflict was resolved, and how they perceived the conflict impacted the nature of the relationship.
Finally, participants filled out a series of questions about their attitudes and preferences regarding the use of CMC during conflict with their partner.
Participants  were students and community members of a Midwestern, midsized university and were recruited via flyers and listservs.
Some participants  were from a student subject pool, for which they were required to participate in research for course credit; 74% were non-subject pool participants.
Seventy-three percent of participants were female .
The majority  of participants' partners were of the opposite sex and 8 participants' partners were of the same sex.
Individuals were prevented from participating if they had never been in a romantic relationship.
Eighty-six percent of participants reported on a current relationship and 14% reported on a past relationship.
Thirty-one percent reported on a long-distance relationship and 69% reported on a non-long-distance relationship .
In addition, 86% were not cohabitating with their partners and 14% of participants were cohabitating.
All items were scored on a scale of 1  to 7  unless otherwise indicated.
Participants completed a 10-item version of the Rosenberg self-esteem scale , which included items like "On the whole, I am satisfied with myself" and "I take a positive attitude toward myself" .
Participants completed Rusbult et al.
Distancing can take many forms .
We were interested in two types of distancing behaviors salient in mediated communication: delaying and ignoring.
We asked participants two yes/no questions for each communication channel that was used during the conflict: "When communicating via  ..." "did you purposefully delay your responses?"
Participants were asked two yes/no questions for each communication mode that was used during the conflict: "When communicating via X ..." "did you feel like your partner was purposefully delaying his/her responses?
Perceived Impact of Conflict on Relationship.
Participants completed a 3-item scale measuring the conflict's impact on relational quality : "After this conflict, did your relationship become ..." "more distant  or closer ?
They also completed a 4-item measure of the conflict's damage to the relationship: "The initial argument about this topic ..." "was very damaging to our relationship"; "was not at all damaging to our relationship" , "had a severely negative impact on our relationship", "had almost no negative impact on our relationship" , .
Participants completed an online survey and were asked to report on a current romantic relationship.
If they were not currently in a romantic relationship, they could report on a past romantic relationship.
Upon completion, participants were either awarded course credit  or a virtual $10 Amazon gift card.
Participants filled out a series of questions about themselves and their relationship.
Then, participants were asked to describe the most recent conflict they had with their partner in which a communication technology such as texting, email, or IM was used to communicate in some capacity.
A series of questions was created to understand participants' preferences and behaviors during conflict with their partner overall, not just during the incident on which they mainly reported: "When having a conflict with my partner, I would rather communicate with my partner via mediated communication than in a FtF setting", "When having a conflict with my partner, I tend to avoid FtF communication in favor of communicating via mediated communication", "When trying to resolve a conflict with my partner, I tend to communicate FtF rather than through a mediated communication", "When trying to resolve a conflict with my partner, I prefer to communicate FtF rather than through a mediated communication", "When having a conflict with my partner, it is easier to say what I really feel via mediated communication than in a FtF setting", and "There are certain types of fights or conflicts that should never be discussed via mediated communication".
Using technology during conflict was fairly common.
Participants were asked whether a communication channel was used during conflict in the past six months.
Participants also reported on a specific conflict incident.
Of all specific conflict incidents, 63% of participants used FtF communication, 22% used IM, 13% used email, 15% used SNS, 40% used cell phone, 57% used text messaging, and 8% used another communication channel.
To test hypotheses about distancing and perceived partner distancing behaviors, we conducted four mixed effects logistic regression models, one for each of the four items measuring distancing and perceived partner distancing behaviors, with self-esteem and communication channel as the main independent variables.
This approach allowed us to address the dichotomous nature of the distancing behavior variables.
This approach also allowed us to account for the fact that some participants used multiple channels during a conflict and reported on distancing and perceived partner distancing behaviors in each channel that was used.
To clarify, the "channel" variable does not represent individuals who only used FtF or only used a form of CMC, but rather individuals who used FtF or CMC at some point during the conflict episode.
To test hypotheses about the perceived impact of the conflict on the relationship, we conducted two standard OLS regression models, one for relational quality and one for damage to the relationship, with self-esteem, communication channel, and whether or not the conflict was resolved as the main independent variables.
To test hypotheses about preferences and overall behavior during conflict, we conducted six regression models, one for each of the items detailed in the Measures section, with self-esteem as the main independent variable.
In all models, we included three control variables: relationship satisfaction, current/past relationship, and longdistance/non-long-distance relationship.
We asked participants who used a certain channel during the conflict whether they purposefully delayed their responses, purposefully ignored their partners, thought their partners purposefully delayed their responses, or thought their partners purposefully ignored them when communicating in that channel.
Both purposefully delaying responses and ignoring one's partner were more common in mediated communication than in FtF communication, with IM, text messaging, and email being the most common channels in which participants delayed their responses and ignored their partners .
Delaying responses was almost twice as common in IM, text messaging, and email as it was in FtF communication and ignoring one's partner was more than twice as common in text messaging and email than it was FtF.
Thinking one's partner delayed his/her responses or ignored him/her was also more common in several mediated communication channels than it was in FtF communication .
Since FtF and text messaging were the two most commonly used channels during conflict , we explored the role of text messaging vs. FtF  and self-esteem on distancing behavior.
There was also a main effect of communication channel, such that individuals were 2.81 times more likely to report purposefully delaying their responses  and 3.81 times as likely to report purposefully ignoring their partners in text messaging than in FtF communication  .
For perceived partner distancing behavior, participants were 3.38 times more likely to report that their partner purposefully delayed his/her responses in text messaging than in FtF  and 2.88 times more likely to report that their partner purposefully ignored them when communicating via text messaging than when communicating FtF  .
Self-esteem was not significantly associated with thinking one's partner purposefully delayed his/her responses but was significantly associated with a greater likelihood of thinking one's partner purposefully ignored him/her .
In all four models, none of the control variables  were significant predictors of the DVs.
In addition, while we expected to find that self-esteem would have a greater influence on distancing and perceived distancing behaviors in text messaging than it would in FtF communication , we found no evidence to support these hypothesized interactions.
How are self-esteem and communication channel related to how participants view the impact of the conflict on the relationship?
In these models, we operationalized channel as "resolution channel" , since the last channel used may be more likely to impact participants' impressions of the conflict.
In addition, since all of the mediated channels represent a type of reduced-cues environment, we grouped text messaging, IM, email, SNS, phone, and other  into "mediated communication" for resolution channel, making resolution channel a binary variable comparing mediated to FtF communication.
When it comes to overall experiences with their romantic partners, self-esteem seems to influence both attitudes and behaviors regarding the use of different communication channels during conflict.
Lower levels of self-esteem were associated with a preference for mediated over FtF communication during a conflict with their partner , even when accounting for relationship satisfaction, distance, and recency of the relationship .
In addition, when it comes to behavior, lower levels of self-esteem were associated with a greater likelihood of avoiding FtF communication in favor of communication via mediated communication during a conflict, supporting H4b.
Relationship satisfaction was also a significant predictor of avoiding FtF during conflict, such that lower levels of relationship satisfaction were associated with a greater likelihood of avoiding FtF in favor of CMC.
We also looked at preferences and behavior for a specific stage of conflict: conflict resolution.
For conflict resolution, higher levels of self-esteem were associated with a greater likelihood of preferring to communicate FtF over textbased communication, lending further support to H4a.
Higher levels of relationship satisfaction were also associated with a greater likelihood of preferring to communicate FtF over mediated communication during conflict resolution .
However, self-esteem was not significantly associated with behavior  during conflict resolution.
People in current relationships and people in non-longdistance relationships were more likely to tend to resolve conflicts FtF  than people in past relationships, and people in long-distance relationships .
We asked two additional questions to further understand individuals' preferences and attitudes about using CMC during conflict with their partners .
Individuals with lower levels of self-esteem were more likely to agree that it is easier to say what one really feels via text-based communication than FtF during conflict with one's partner.
Higher levels of self-esteem were also associated with a greater likelihood of agreeing that "There are certain types of fights or conflicts that are better discussed via a mediated communication".
Participants in non-long-distance relationships were also more likely to agree with this statement than those in long-distance relationships.
We conducted two standard OLS regression models, one predicting the conflict's impact on relational quality and one predicting the conflict's damage to the relationship.
Results revealed that conflicts where resolution was attempted FtF were more likely to be associated with a perceived increase in relational quality than conflicts where resolution was attempted in mediated communication , supporting H3b .
However, no relationship was detected between self-esteem and ratings of the conflict's impact on relational quality.
Resolution channel did not significantly impact perceptions that the conflict was damaging to the relationship.
Lower levels of self-esteem, however, were associated with higher ratings of a conflict's perceived damage to the relationship , supporting H3a.
In both of these models, we found no evidence to support the hypothesized interactions of self-esteem x resolution channel.
Higher relationship satisfaction, reporting on a current relationship , and thinking the conflict was resolved were associated with higher ratings of the conflict's impact on relational quality and lower ratings of the conflict's damage to the relationship .
In addition, participants reporting on a long-distance relationship reported higher ratings of the conflict's impact on relational quality.
Results revealed that, in many cases, both communication channel and self-esteem were associated with behavior and communication technology preferences in the context of romantic couple conflict.
When it comes to one's own behavior, lower levels of self-esteem were associated with increased distancing behaviors - purposefully delaying one's responses and ignoring one's partner.
This verifies existing literature about self-esteem in romantic relationships.
Yet, interestingly, we did not detect an interaction effect; lower levels of self-esteem were not more strongly associated with distancing behaviors in text messaging than they were in FtF communication.
Given that text messaging is a more ambiguous channel than FtF, it is surprising that LSEs' interpretation biases are not heightened in text messaging.
In addition, lower levels of self-esteem were associated with an increase in perceiving that one's partner purposefully ignored them, though self-esteem was not associated with perceiving one's partner purposefully delayed his/her responses.
Perceived partner distancing behaviors  were more common in text messaging than FtF.
These are novel findings, suggesting that individuals are more likely to perceive distancing behavior from their partners in mediated communication vs. FtF communication.
Perceived distancing behavior may have been more common in text messaging than in FtF because it may be easier to delay one's responses or ignore one's partner via text .
And, if more partner distancing is exhibited, it makes sense that more partner distancing will be perceived.
However, the current findings only reflect perceptions of partner distancing behavior and not the actual amount of partner distancing behavior that occurred.
It could be that individuals perceive distancing behaviors when they do not actually occur, or fail to perceive distancing behaviors when they do actually occur.
Therefore, it may be that the increased room for interpretation in text messaging, rather than actual partner behavior, is driving the results.
Taken together, results suggest that using text messaging during a conflict can be potentially harmful, as doing so is associated with increased distancing and some perceived partner distancing behaviors.
Yet, using texting is no more harmful to LSEs than it is to HSEs.
Or, put another way, using texting is not more helpful to HSEs than it is to LSEs when it comes to distancing behaviors.
When it comes to perceptions of how a conflict impacts one's relationship, findings were mixed, but self-esteem was associated with ratings of perceived increased relational quality , and communication channel was associated with lower ratings of perceived relational damage .
It may be that the differences in immediacy and physical proximity between mediated and FtF communication are more closely related to perceptions of relational quality  while the negative biases associated with lower levels of self-esteem are more closely related to perceptions of damage or harm.
Yet, evidence does suggest that both self-esteem and channel are related to how one projects the effect of the conflict on the relationship.
Again, LSEs' perceptions of how the conflict impacted the relationship were not more negative in mediated communication than they were in FtF communication.
It may be that self-esteem is a strong trait that manifests across communication channels.
Or, it is possible that, while CMC provides more room for interpretation than FtF communication, it does not provide so much more room that LSEs' interpretations are further altered.
We also found that lower levels of self-esteem were significantly associated with preferring text-based mediated communication over FtF communication during both conflict and conflict resolution .
But do LSEs report using mediated communication over FtF communication during conflict?
Findings here are mixed, providing partial support for H4b.
While lower levels of self-esteem were associated with greater likelihood of actually avoiding FtF in favor of CMC during conflict, selfesteem was not significantly associated with a greater likelihood of using mediated communication when trying to resolve a conflict with one's partner.
While responses to these two items were significantly positively correlated , it may be that even though LSEs prefer CMC, they may fight against those preferences and actually choose FtF communication for resolution, since individuals tend to feel that FtF is the most desired resolution channel .
Or it might be that their partners' prefer FtF communication and those partner preferences are driving what actually occurs during the conflict.
Although we have been discussing FtF as a better channel for conflict communication, lower levels of self-esteem were associated with agreeing that it is easier to say what one really feels via CMC than FtF during a conflict.
That LSEs feel more comfortable expressing themselves through mediated communication is a clear benefit to using mediated communication during conflict, since withholding the expression of a conflict can be harmful in a relationship .
Along these lines, LSEs also have a more accepting attitude about using CMC during conflict.
So, instead of having a preference for CMC during conflict but feeling like it is inappropriate, it seems that LSEs prefer mediated communication and also feel that it is an acceptable form of communication.
LSEs might prefer mediated channels during a conflict for a number of other reasons.
The increased distance and fewer cues might make LSEs feel safer from negative feedback.
They might also feel they can dampen negative interpretations in CMC since they do not have to interact directly with their partners.
Or, LSEs may subconsciously seek situations in which they have more room to convince themselves that their biases are true.
HSEs are less likely to prefer CMC, perhaps because they do not have these selfprotective motivations and thus less need for ambiguity.
Overall, findings suggest that individuals with lower levels of self-esteem have a preference for CMC in multiple aspects of conflict communication, whereas individuals with higher levels of self-esteem have a preference for FtF communication during conflict.
These preferences seem to reflect the increased levels of comfort and/or control that CMC provides.
In some cases, using CMC might be helpful for LSEs.
For instance, LSEs find it easier to say what they really feel.
There are several limitations to this work.
First, the sample included undergraduate students and was a relatively young sample.
Second, because of our study design, we are unable to comment on the causal nature of the relationships between self-esteem, communication channel, and the various dependent variables we explored in our models.
Third, because individuals were reporting on past experiences with their partners, responses may be influenced by memory biases or by one's current mood toward one's partner.
In addition, because participants reported on the most recent conflict where technology was used, the results on how often certain mediated channels were used are likely inflated, and should be interpreted within the constraints of the study design.
Finally, it is important to note that this data reflects individuals' perceptions of partner behavior and of a conflict's impact on their relationship, rather than actual partner behavior or actual impact of a conflict on the relationship.
The key insight for designers and users of interpersonal communication technologies is to consider the potential benefits and drawbacks of using text-based technologies during important or sensitive conversations.
Although using text-based CMC is associated with more distancing and perceived distancing behaviors, it also allows individuals with lower levels of self-esteem to feel more comfortable saying what they really feel during conflict.
Designers could incorporate features that minimize negative behaviors and encourage positive behaviors.
Also, this work can provide insight into what types of individuals choose textbased CMC during interpersonal conflict with close relational partners, which can in turn inform how designers provide customization options for users.
This study demonstrates that both self-esteem and communication channel impact behaviors, perceived behaviors, and perceived relational consequences in romantic couple conflict.
However, communication channel does not exacerbate biases stemming from individual difference variables, suggesting that, for individuals with lower levels of self-esteem, using text-based CMC during conflict is no better or worse than communicating FtF.
Yet, individuals with lower levels of self-esteem do have a preference for CMC over FtF in multiple aspects of conflict communication.
Overall, CMC does seem to provide room for negative interpretation during couple conflict.
