Posted at the Zurich Open Repository and Archive, University of Zurich ZORA URL: https://doi.org/10.5167/uzh-89254 Originally published at: Shrinivasan, Yedendra B; Jain, Mohit; Seetharam, Deva P; Choudhary, Abhishek; Huang, Elaine May; Dillahunt, Tawanna; Mankoff, Jennifer .
Deep conservation in urban india and its implications for the design of conservation technologies.
Rapid depletion of fossil fuels and water resources has become an international problem.
Urban residential households are among the primary consumers of resources and are deeply affected by resource shortages.
Despite the global nature of these problems, most of the solutions being developed to address these issues are based on studies done in the developed world.
We present a study of energy, water and fuel conservation practices in urban India.
Our study highlights a culture of deep conservation and the results raise questions about the viability of typical solutions such as home energy monitors.
We identify new opportunities for design such as point-of-use feedback technologies, modular solutions, distributed energy storage, harnessing by-products and automated load shifting.
As a result, there is little information about whether or how those results might be applicable to other geographies, cultures, and socioeconomic groups.
About 82% of the world's population is in developing nations  and by 2020 the developing world is projected to account for 40% of the global energy use .
Hence, there is great value in understanding what drives resource consumption and conservation in the developing world.
In this paper, we present a study of energy, fuel and water management practices in urban India, focusing primarily on affluent households in Bangalore.
We chose to focus on middle and high-income households because they consume resources in more diverse ways .
Our focus on Bangalore allowed us to gather data from "early adopters" that might be using technologies likely to become widespread in the future.
India is the world's second most populous country, with a population of over 1.2 billion in 2013 .
India is growing at a rate of about 1.3% per year and economic growth has been averaging more than 7% per year since 1997 .
These two trends have led to a substantial increase in national consumption of energy  and water .
The Indian electricity sector produces 880 billion kWh per year  , while about 400 million Indians have no access to electricity  and about 80 million lack access to clean water1 , due to a combination of poverty and infrastructure limitations.
Even those who have access to resources face severe supply shortages.
As late as 2007, 20 major Indian cities provided clean supply for only 4.3 hours per day, and no city supplied continuous clean water .
Similarly, households with electricity connections face several hours of power cuts per day due to an 8.9%  energy shortage .
Urban India constitutes a major share of Indian energy consumption .
Domestic water use is only 5% nationally in 2000  .
Global consumption of water and energy has been increasing rapidly over the past decades, and both resources are in short supply.
While increased supply is one solution to this problem, this cannot always be done fast enough to meet demand, and some resources  cannot be replaced as they cannot be quickly replenished.
An alternative solution is to decrease demand and wastage.
This requires a deep understanding of consumption practices; attitudes towards conservation; and other factors affecting resource use.
Several studies, primarily in residential settings, provide insight into these factors and their potential implications for technology design .
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Examples of "extreme" conservation actions   Sitting outside to use natural light: "it's like where you place yourself for reading.
A majority of urban households have access to electricity  and water  .
An understanding of consumption and conservation practices in urban Indian households is crucial for designing appropriate technologies for this population.
To address this gap, we conducted a photo-elicitation study in urban India .
Our findings illustrate a practice of deep conservation.
Some factors that influence conservation behavior included motivations such as resource scarcity and household characteristics such as the use of household staff.
Figure 1 shows a few examples: reading outdoors to reduce the use of electric lighting; heating milk by placing it between two burners of a stove to benefit from "dissipated heat"; storing water in buckets for later use and re-use.
Our primary contribution is a rich description of everyday practice around resource management, including water, electricity and fuels, in urban households in India.
We also provide design implications showing value in point-of-use feedback rather than monitoring technologies, modular solutions, distributed energy storage, harnessing byproducts and automated load shifting.
Although these implications are derived from a particular population in India, they may inform work in other regions with similar characteristics such as scarce resources or multiple household staff .
Other studies of routine domestic energy consumption practices in U.S. households and their interactions with specific devices  find that most energy consumption interactions become unconscious, habitual and in some cases, irrational .
There is also a long history of interventions designed to reduce energy use and/or encourage other types of green behavior  in the developed world, as summarized in .
Within the CHI community, a number of papers have been published on interaction designs for eco-visualization and feedback .
Although most of this past work has focused on energy, Chetty et al.
Researchers have also developed mechanisms for sensing water consumption at fixture level .
Water-related eco-feedback has been provided using ambient displays at the point-ofconsumption in both public  and private spaces , and in-home displays showing the aggregate water consumption .
Additionally, eco-feedback for fuel conservation via green transportation has been explored in the U.S. .
This section starts by reviewing some of the key results in the developed world around energy and water use  and their findings about conservation practices, motivations and challenges.
This is followed by relevant work from the developing world , with a particular focus on India.
Some focus on data from the entire country  while others focus on a particular demography of a country .
For example, Pachauri et al.
A number of qualitative studies have looked more deeply at the underlying factors driving energy use in Indian households.
Vyas  studied Indian middle-class women who creatively adapted existing and worn-out household objects to enrich their everyday activities and found that factors such as religious belief, traditions, family intimacy, and personal hygiene influence such sustainability practices.
However, none of these works focus on understanding how resources such as water and energy are consumed and conserved among urban residential Indians.
Two authors conducted the interviews.
Interview questions were primarily derived from the photos, with a focus on why the photo was taken, and its importance to conservation.
Interviews lasted for 45 minutes to 1.5 hours and were conducted in English in all but one case.
The participants and interviewer were both fluent in English.
Participants took 6 photos on average .
Although this is a relatively small number, it still sufficed to provide rich data about conservation practices.
In the initial part of the interview participants were asked to describe their community and shared resources.
We also asked about their interest in and knowledge of their neighbors' resource consumption.
Following that, for each photo, the interviewer asked about the participant's thoughts and intents.
At the end of the interview, each participant was asked to provide data about people with whom he/she interacts to share or use resources on a daily basis.
All interviews were voice recorded.
The interviewer took extensive notes during each interview.
All interviews were transcribed: one was translated into English.
Notes and transcripts were both used in our data analysis.
The interview coding and analysis was done in an iterative fashion following methods taken from informed grounded theory .
Transcriptions were open coded by one author.
Two authors then jointly conducted selective coding to identify themes that were representative of the data and novel or important according to the literature .
Because of the relative lack of information about how urban Indian households consume and conserve energy and water, we conducted a photo-elicitation study with 11 participants .
The aim of our study was to elicit a detailed picture of participants' current practices and beliefs with respect to resource consumption and conservation.
We sought to understand conservation practices, the motivations behind these actions and challenges faced by participants in resource management.
We used a combination of word-of-mouth and snowball sampling to recruit households.
We recruited participants who were either living with their families or sharing accommodations with friends.
This was done to learn how other household members affect conservation behavior.
We selected households that had more than 3 electrical appliances  apart from lights and electric fans.
This focused us on middle and high-income urban Indian households.
We met people in their homes, and ensured that the interviewer knew the local language of the participant.
All participants were from urban centers in the southern part of India, primarily Bangalore and Hyderabad.
We based our design on Dillahunt et al.
All participants had one or both of these.
They were given a minimum of a week to complete the task.
On completion, they were asked to email the photos to their interviewer.
Interviews were conducted with 11 participants  during the Spring of 2012.
Table 1 provides key demographic data about our participants.
Eight lived in Bangalore, two in Hyderabad, and one in Chennai.
All the participants had advanced degrees, with four having college degrees, and seven having post-graduate degrees.
The average participant household included 3.45 people  including children , spouses  and adult relatives .
The household income was evenly distributed with one household earning between 1-3 L, three 4-6 L, one 7-9 L, three 10-20 L, one above 20 L, and two unknown.
These earnings are above average for urban India where the average earning is around 0.75L .
The majority  were working full-time, three were not working, and one was a student.
Most participants  were responsible for paying their own electricity bills.
Parents paid the bills for two participants.
All the participants owned a washing machine, six owned a smartphone, and five owned a car.
Five participants had access to or owned a backup power source such as a generator and/or inverter, used during power cuts.
The majority  of them lived in rented homes, while two were homeowners.
Seven lived in apartments and four lived in standalone houses .
Own/Rent and Household describe living arrangements.
Stuff indicates which large items the participant owns: car ; smartphone ; clothes washer .
Power sources are electricity ; liquid petroleum gas ; generator ; inverter .
Annual Income is in units of Lakhs .
Conservation was an integral part of participants' lifestyles.
The conservation practices we observed were deeply integrated into daily activities and holistic in nature.
We define the deep conservation we observed as conservation practices that are contextually imposed, habitual , deeply integrated into daily activities and involving a combination of traditional practices, manual effort, and technology.
The following subsections illustrate deep conservation further by exploring conservation practices and motivations with respect to water, appliance usage, electricity and fuel.
We end by summarizing participants' thoughts about the rapidly changing socio-economic context in which they must operate, and its influence on their beliefs and actions.
Typically, water conservation is a very low-tech activity .
Participants manage water efficiently by carefully storing, using and re-using the available water.
Water is usually stored in 20-25 liter buckets as shown in Figure 1E and re-used multiple times as it moves through "tiers" of cleanliness.
As described by Raj and Kiran:
So this water can be used for flushing."
I reuse it for cleaning bathroom floors... water used for mopping the house will be used to clean the outer balcony...
Similar to actions of Raj and Kiran, Vyas  also found Indian middle class women reuse water after boiling potatoes and rice to clean silverware.
Even though participants could afford to buy and store water, they tried not to overstock or to overuse just because they could afford it.
Shyam and Raj also avoided wasting water at home or when out: " I tend to finish it .
Instead if it goes into your body, it cleanses your body."
Although water shortages were not a major issue during the months we conducted our interviews, access to clean drinking water was a concern.
Water for drinking and other domestic purposes is either supplied by the government or by privately owned water tankers.
Only three participants had wells on their household premise.
Especially during the summer or when the Monsoon  is delayed, the water supply in cities gets disrupted.
Hence, urban residents face regular water shortages.
Participants were also still employing traditional methods for cooking and cleaning even though they had access to modern appliances.
None of the participants had a vacuum cleaner.
They swept floors manually using broomsticks and doing that was seen as energy efficient, and healthy:
Although much of the work around water conservation was manual in nature, the adoption of major appliances such as clothes washing machines and mixer/blenders creates a situation in which manual and automated tasks are played off against each other to save time, protect fragile clothes, and save water and energy.
Washing clothes is a daily task performed early in the day in most Indian households using a combination of hand and machine washing.
This is often done by domestic staff who may help with housekeeping, clothes washing, and cooking.
Even though all participants had a washing machine at home, three of them preferred to use the machine for bed linens, towels and other hardy fabrics, and wash most clothes by hand :
The conservation actions we observed were motivated by multiple factors.
For instance, hand-washing clothes not only saved water and electricity, but also protected delicate clothes, while sweeping floors manually was considered to be good for health.
Time was a complicated factor in all this.
Rather than be concerned about time lost due to manual effort, participants spoke of health and energy gained.
On the other hand, when time was short some behaviors could circumvent conservation.
Saris and embroidered Salwar Kameez, the most common clothes worn by Indian women, can at times be damaged if washed using a washing machine .
Even when washing machines were used, participants employed innovative techniques to minimize electricity and water consumption.
For instance, items were pre-soaked in a separate bucket of water to save energy and water by skipping the machine's soaking cycle.
Two participants saved energy by skipping the spinning cycle as well.
In urban India, unscheduled and scheduled power cuts occur multiple times per week, sometimes lasting several hours at a time.
While some apartment complexes hide the effects of this by providing backup power, most do not, and even backup power is limited to a few key plugs.
When necessary, participants use their own backup solutions such as in-home batteries .
These solutions are used only for essential loads such as night-time lighting and fans.
According to Kiran, "We usually use it 
Two participants expressed an interest in local energy generation.
However, they were unaware of local energy generation techniques  that are being promoted and subsidized by the Indian government.
Participants also mentioned other strategies for efficiently managing power cuts.
For cooking at home, the participants again relied on manual work and automated solutions.
Cutting/chopping of vegetables were usually performed manually.
All except one household had a mixer/grinder system at home, which was mostly used for very specific grinding purposes, mostly when cooking in bulk was required.
Although power shortages were a strong motivator for minimizing electricity use, participants also tried to minimize their electricity consumption at other times.
For example, they purchased energy efficient appliances, and avoided all possible stand-by consumption.
As is common throughout India, all of the participants' power sockets have a switch as shown in Figure 1D.
Participants attentively switched off these sockets when appliances plugged in were not in use.
This not only saves money, but also protects appliances from power surges.
Figure 2: A water pump switch installed in Maya's home, which automatically turns on and off the pump based on the water level sensing in the overhead tank.
Participants questioned the idea of monitoring energy use  but were willing to use technology to avoid any wastage of electricity or water  other ancillary resources which we get from all these natural products... is very limited."
In addition, healthy living acted as a motivator to use minimal fuel, as Faiza said, "Our mom tells us to go by walk, it's good for health, and you will be fit and fine".
Despite such concerns, most participants drove regularly.
Interview participants identified road safety, time, and comfort, as the main barriers in taking these green actions:
The primary factor why I stopped cycling these days is the  safety factor."
So, that's where we felt finally to have a two wheeler  so that I can save my time."
Even when participants owned a vehicle, they drove it with fuel price in mind.
There is a tendency to turn off vehicles  while waiting for traffic lights to turn green.
The main reason for doing so is to reduce petrol consumption as well as air pollution.
The Government encourages such actions by installing traffic light timers  and through campaigns.
Surprisingly, multiple participants felt that energy monitors were not an effective mechanism for reducing energy consumption.
Anything that must be left on all the time is typically seen as wasteful.
For example, when discussing an appliance purchase, the interviewer asked "what kind of feedback are you interested in getting ... to monitor energy."
Conserving fuel is a part of the daily practice of participants.
As with other issues, participants had a holistic view of its value .
However, they traded these motivations for saving off against the complexities of daily life including safety, time and availability of alternative products.
As societal context influences resource consumption patterns, participants' attitudes about the changing socioeconomic context in India provides insight into additional motivational factors that may have an influence on conservation behaviors.
At the same time, participants were aware of the potential for unintended consequences of technological innovations.
For instance, although Raj was excited about the prospects of using water as a fuel for cars, he was also concerned that this could lead to increased water shortages.
In spite of concerns regarding resource scarcity, participants were optimistic about the future sustainability of India.
They tended to think about this in terms of the actions of individuals.
While a focus on individuals has been problematized in the literature , it is nevertheless common.
And then someone put up this board with this beautiful saying... someone really felt that with this particular sentence over there, they wouldn't put garbage over there, and then, they cleaned it up.
And then, the other people actually stopped putting garbage over there."
However our findings suggest additional categories, as described below.
Cutting, Trimming, and Shifting: A range of actions reduced or minimized or shifted the time of energy use.
Examples include not turning on lights, not using AC even during hot times of day, using 1 instead of 10 buckets for washing, and cooking at different times due to power cuts.
Upgrading, Downgrading, and Maintaining: Technology is chosen and maintained with careful consideration of how it will influence resource use.
In some cases this means choosing high tech solutions , in other cases, it means choosing lowtech solutions such as a broom or an earthenware vessel for smashing grains.
Equally important is the ongoing maintenance of technology .
Modularizing and Multiplying Use: From the micromanagement we saw with respect to water use, to the combination of manual and automated labor in the case of washing and kitchen work, we can see a theme of modularity.
Participants broke tasks up into modular components that allowed them to more effectively manage their use of resources.
Participants also found ways to multiply the values gained from that use through recycling, re-use, or creative piggybacking of use.
Examples include heating milk with dissipating heat and re-using 'different tiers' of water for washing/flushing.
Participants in our study shared motivations to conserve with participants in past studies of typical  and lowincome households  including money, comfort and religion.
Barriers to conservation such as money, comfort and safety also overlapped past studies.
While there is some overlap in our findings with prior studies of sustainability, there are also some key differences.
Table 2 summarizes our results and compares them to studies of different demographic groups studied in North America.
We highlight two differences here: the impact of resource shortages ; and the value of eco-feedback.
Scarcity: Similar to participants from low-income North American communities , conservation habits among our participants developed as a result of past experiences with scarcity.
Perhaps as a result of this, personal preference was not as prominent in our data as in other work.
For example, Pierce et al.
I want `em'" in reference to appliances like the television and air conditioner .
Such inflexibility, as Pierce characterizes it, is difficult to develop in environments with scarce resources.
Eco-feedback: Our participants' views of eco-feedback technologies also differed from US sustainability studies of "green" , and "typical" participants .
It should be part of the blood" - Raj.
Bala points out that such learning starts at home: "When  to switch on the light.
Our study highlights a complex and adaptive set of behaviors and attitudes that demonstrate a deep commitment to conservation.
For the most part, things that seem burdensome  were a natural extension of participants' culture, context, beliefs and goals.
However, participants did not necessarily think about "being green" when they performed these actions.
Instead, participants were motivated by a holistic set of concerns, which encompassed conservation but also goals relating to health, tradition, cost, and scarcity.
In addition, participants were cognizant of the complex tradeoffs between potentially conflicting goals, and the impact of barriers such as limited available time.
In the conservation practices we observed, some key types of actions were visible across categories of conservation.
Our action categories below were inspired by the action vocabulary of Pierce et al.
Findings from other U.S. based studies  Green: Future generations; Activism; Religion/ethics, Trendy utopian optimism; Rugged independence; Self-reliance; Habit Typical: Money, Comfort, Convenience, Environment; What can I do?
Low Income: Future generations; Religion/ethics; Habit; Money; What can I do?
Our findings Necessity; Practicality; Childhood Habit; Tradition; Comfort; Moral values; Spirituality; Healthy living; Resource shortages; Money; Environment Deep conservation integrating manual labor and modern technologies; Tiered water management; Only refrigerator plugged in at all times.
Our participants, however, viewed these technologies as potentially wasteful.
A limitation of our study is our small sample size.
India's cultural, climate, demographic and economic diversity are hard to capture in any one sample.
In our case, participants were highly educated, living with friends/family, and belonged to middle and high-income urban residential households.
Additionally they were all from three cities in southern India, most from Bangalore.
This population may have been at one end of a spectrum in terms of conservation behaviors.
One benefit of this particular population is that they are likely to be "early adopters" of technology.
However, the wide range of behaviors, motivations, and barriers that we found provide a valuable starting place for exploring ideas that move beyond existing work on ecofeedback.
For example, factors such as resource shortages, the use of household staff, and the prevalence of manual labor of different sorts in daily activity are all new to the literature on sustainability and likely to appear in other contexts.
Factors such as childhood habit, healthy living, comfort, financial constraints, and safety are all present in existing literature and also the work presented in this study.
While the specifics may differ across different social, economic, and cultural settings, the importance of investigating and addressing these factors in the design of eco-feedback technologies is clear from our work and that of others who have studied conservation behavior.
This in turn helped to highlight issues beyond resource conservation.
Our design guidelines reflect on the wide ranging issues we saw with respect to the action categories described in our discussion section.
Cutting and Trimming Appliance Use: Built-in point-of-use feedback.
Awareness and monitoring technologies have been a significant focus within sustainable HCI.
However, our findings indicate that monitoring technologies may not be sufficient.
Since participants felt they are aware of their energy use, they would rather invest in more efficient appliances than monitoring systems.
Systems that provide point-of-use feedback and/or suggest efficiency measures, as proposed in , may resonate more with this population than ones that only provide consumption data.
Such systems could be integrated into appliances so that they collect data, show feedback, and take action only when the appliance is being used.
Our findings demonstrated a strong reliance on doing things manually, even when automated solutions were available, often as a way of conserving resources.
An example is that participants made use of only some cycles 
Such a hybrid approach to task completion was one of the distinguishing characteristics of our participant households.
Technological solutions should allow users the flexibility to have manual control over some sub-tasks.
For example, a battery backup that includes a manual control for altering the charging/discharging functions as per users' energy needs would be appropriate as the lead-acid battery life and available capacity are determined by charging/discharging rates and the depth of discharge.
Opportunistic Resource Consumption in the face of Cutting and Shifting.
The data we have presented provides a rich basis for rethinking the design of technology to increase resource conservation.
While the population we focused on provided many insights into urban households and their conservation practices, participants also raised issues that cannot be addressed by an individual or a family.
For instance, consumer electronics appliances with local energy storage such as the Toshiba TV with integrated battery  do not require constant power.
Similarly, Energenie  shuts down TV and DVD players if they are in standby mode for more than a particular duration.
Of course, solutions need to be carefully evaluated in terms of conversion losses, battery lifetime and costeffectiveness, against alternatives such as regular consumer appliances with centralized battery backup solutions.
Multiplying Use by Harnessing By-Products.
Participants in our study multiplied resources by making use of waste products such as dissipated heat from the stove and viewed technologies that consumed unnecessary resources negatively .
New technologies designed to leverage waste products could overcome this view.
For example, a refrigerator magnet with a temperature sensor could be powered by a refrigerator's waste heat  and the same heat can be monitored to identify any malfunctioning.
Automated Shifting Enabled by Load Sensing.
Appliances that can communicate with a utility could better support shifting, trimming and cutting with respect to available power, however the communication infrastructure necessary for this is not currently available in India.
An alternative is adopting technologies such as the nPlug, which can sense from within the home what the current grid load levels are, and schedule appliances appropriately .
Such adoption could in turn help to address utility load problems in a bottom-up distributed fashion.
However, policy level changes would be required to encourage widespread adoption of such technologies.
Resources such as water and energy are a matter of global concern, and the differences in how they are used across cultures, socio-economic contexts, climates, and geographies are significant and important.
Our comparison with other similar studies demonstrates many similarities along with the great differences that we found.
An understanding of these differences is a necessary first step toward a more global investigation of issues such as resource availability and scarcity.
We have provided a rich description of some of the deep conservation practices taking place in urban households in southern India.
We emphasize the specificity of our study here as a reminder to readers that this study is at best a first step towards characterizing conservation outside of the developed regions context.
Even within India, wide socio-economical, cultural, and demographic diversity makes it difficult to know exactly how broadly these findings generalize.
For example, many common conservation behaviors found in lower-income settings were not mentioned by our participants.
Examples include re-using plastic drinking bottles for storing oils instead of buying dedicated containers, packing a family of 5 or 6 onto a single moped, and washing dishes using sand, ash, or coconut husk where water is in short supply.
As highlighted recently by Dourish , a perspective that focuses solely on individuals is problematic for a variety of reasons.
However, infrastructure-level change is a complex process that brings in many difficulties such as availability of networking and power resources necessary to support advanced communication solutions.
