In this paper, we propose design strategies for persuasive technologies that help people who want to change their everyday behaviors.
Our strategies use theory and prior work to substantially extend a set of existing design goals.
Our extensions specifically account for social characteristics and other tactics that should be supported by persuasive technologies that target long-term discretionary use throughout everyday life.
We used these strategies to design and build a system that encourages people to lead a physically active lifestyle.
Results from two field studies of the system--a three-week trial and a three-month experiment--have shown that the system was successful at helping people maintain a more physically active lifestyle and validate the usefulness of the strategies.
Sometimes those decisions support her desired lifestyle; other times they do not.
Often, it is a pattern of "poor" decisions that prevents the individual from achieving her desired lifestyle .
Making an occasional poor or arbitrary decision is seldom a serious problem.
Fortunately, behavior and how behavior is influenced is well studied in the field of psychology.
Designers of persuasive technologies often draw from behavioral theories such as Goal-Setting Theory  or the Transtheoretical Model of Behavior Change .
While such traditional behavioral theories are important to the development of persuasive technologies, a critical design component is often ignored.
That critical, and perhaps unobvious, component is how technical support for behavior change impacts the individual's social world, as these technologies often must effectively integrate into the individual's everyday life.
They are likely to be used in various circumstances, often crossing personal and work life.
They inherently encroach upon the individual's social world and must therefore consider the social implications for the individual's daily experiences.
Thus, in this paper, we use concepts from behavioral and social psychological theories to shape an understanding of how to design technology to support behavior change while supporting fundamental social needs.
We draw from Presentation of Self in Everyday Life  and Cognitive Dissonance Theory  in addition to the theories above.
We propose design strategies for technologies that motivate behavior change in everyday life that specifically account for the intersection of the technology with the individual's social world.
Our strategies extend four existing design goals through the application of the theories and findings from recent persuasive technology research.
Our extensions account for characteristics that must be supported when a personal technology is used throughout everyday life.
We used these strategies to design a system that encourages a physically active lifestyle.
Two field studies of our system--a three-week trial and a three-month experiment-- have shown that the system was successful at helping people maintain a more physically active lifestyle and validate the usefulness of our strategies on behavior change.
A recent trend in computing is to develop persuasive technologies  to help people change their everyday behaviors in support of the lifestyle they wish to lead .
For this paper, we define a lifestyle as a pattern of behaviors that an individual enacts and that characterizes who she is and how she is perceived.
Thus, a lifestyle results from the choices that an individual makes, and she may make different choices to change that lifestyle.
However, getting an individual to change her everyday behaviors, and hence her lifestyle, is challenging.
People want to be financially secure, yet consumer debt is on the rise.
People want to be fit and healthy, yet physical inactivity and poor eating habits are leading to serious health problems.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
We begin by recalling key aspects of the theories upon which our design strategies are based, focusing on the social psychological theories.
We describe persuasive technology research that has influenced our strategies, and build on the discussion of theory and recent persuasive technology research by proposing our design strategies.
We then present our system and discuss key results from our studies which validate that the proposed strategies are useful.
However, because individuals are likely to use the technology throughout everyday life, we turned to social psychology for theories that focus on how individuals manage their daily behaviors as part of a larger social context.
Thus we adopt Presentation of Self in Everyday Life , which addresses the social interactions that individuals manage daily.
And because the desire for lifestyle change often emerges when the individual recognizes a conflict between her current and an ideal state, we also use Cognitive Dissonance Theory , which describes what happens when an individual realizes that her behaviors and attitudes are inconsistent.
The application of Presentation of Self and Cognitive Dissonance Theory to persuasive technology is novel, however use of the theories in research and practice is not.
For example, Aoki and Woodruff use Presentation of Self to analyze online community interactions and develop collaborative systems .
While the HCI community has yet to adopt Cognitive Dissonance Theory, some therapeutic approaches to lifestyle behavior change rely on it.
In this paper, we illustrate how ideas from these two theories can be valuable for persuasive technologies.
In the remainder of this section, we recall useful concepts from Presentation of Self and Cognitive Dissonance Theory and implications of these theories to the design of technologies that support lifestyle behavior change.
Designing persuasive technologies that target long-term discretionary use throughout everyday life is challenging, especially when those technologies attempt to help individuals change their everyday behaviors.
Interestingly, this task often remains challenging even when the individual wants to change.
Fortunately, much work in psychology focuses on how human behavior can be shaped and influenced, as well as people's basic social functioning.
We draw from Goal-Setting Theory  and the Transtheoretical Model of Behavior Change --two theories that are often used in persuasive technology and health intervention research.
Goal-Setting Theory  describes how individuals respond to different types of goals and thus which tend to motivate well.
For example, the individual needs to have decided that the goal is important to her.
It should be set by the individual or participatively with the help of an expert .
It should be easy to gauge her progress and know when she has met her goal, and it should be challenging, yet something that she believes she can realistically achieve.
Feedback and incentives should be provided as progress is made and not limited solely to goal achievement.
The Transtheoretical Model  describes the stages through which an individual progresses to intentionally modify addictive or other problematic behaviors: Precontemplation--no intention to change in the foreseeable future; Contemplation--seriously considering changing, but has not committed to taking action; Preparation--intends to take action in the next month and has unsuccessfully taken action in the past year; Action-- has performed the desired behavior consistently for less than six months; and Maintenance--has consistently performed the desired behavior for six or more months.
The Transtheoretical Model suggests that a persuasive technology that targets precontemplators might focus on education.
For contemplators, the design might focus on techniques for overcoming barriers or rewards for performing the desired behavior.
For preparation stagers, it might focus on rewarding behaviors, even when the behavior is not consistent and increasing awareness of patterns of the behavior to encourage consistency.
For action stagers, the design might focus on keeping track of progress to maintain consistency and possibly incorporate elements of social influence.
Presentation of Self in Everyday Life  describes how individuals attempt to manage the impressions they want others to have of them.
This impression management is a constant process.
Presentation of Self uses the metaphor of the theatre stage to describe how people interact with others.
The performance encompasses "all the activity of an individual which occurs during a period marked by his continuous presence before a particular set of observers" .
The individual performs for an audience.
The audience consists of those who observe the performance.
The individual and audience are the participants in the performance.
The individual has a personal front, which consists of traits such as gender, age, size, looks, and clothing.
A given performance has two regions: front and backstage.
Front stage is where the individual knowingly performs.
Backstage is "a place, relative to a given performance, where the impression fostered by the performance is knowingly contradicted as a matter of course...Here the performer can relax; he can drop his front, forgo speaking his lines, and step out of character... where the performer can reliably expect that no member of the audience will intrude" .
Impression management describes how the individual moves between front and backstage and controls access to backstage.
Other important concepts include dramatic realization, misrepresentation, and secret consumption.
Dramatic realization occurs when the individual draws attention to facts that may go unnoticed.
Misrepresentation suggests that individuals may be incented to misrepresent facts.
Secret consumption explains that, "If an individual is to give expression to ideal standards during his performance, then he will have to forgo or conceal action which is inconsistent with these standards.
When this inappropriate conduct is itself satisfying...then one commonly finds it indulged in secretly; in this way the performer is able to forgo his cake and eat it too" .
Secret consumption often results from idealization--the idealized impression the individual may attempt to convey of her behaviors.
Technology to encourage lifestyle behavior change must support fundamental impression management needs.
Effective support implies that the individual should be in control of information about her that is collected and how that information is used.
For example, it may be important to provide the ability for the individual to disguise something about her activities.
The technology may also need to enable the individual to misrepresent something about her behavior, perhaps to support secret consumption.
It is often the case that a technology that seeks to represent "perfect information" may not effectively support an individual's basic need to control backstage access, yet it is important to give individuals control over their backstage.
The technology needs to enable the individual to perform differently for different audiences.
If the technology allows an audience member or outsider to access her backstage, the individual may perceive a violation of her privacy, which could result in her abandoning the technology.
Cognitive Dissonance Theory suggests that a persuasive technology to encourage lifestyle behavior change should address whichever factors may prevent the individual from incorporating the change into her everyday life .
For example, the technology should help the individual remain focused on her commitment to change and her relevant patterns of behavior.
The awareness provided by the technology should be persistently available and easy to access, yet subtle enough so as to support occasional needs for information/situation avoidance.
Next, we describe persuasive technology research that has also influenced the development of our design strategies.
Cognitive Dissonance Theory  explains what happens when an individual realizes that her attitudes and behaviors are inconsistent.
When that happens, the individual will experience psychological discomfort .
Because this dissonance is psychologically uncomfortable, the individual will be motivated to reduce or eliminate the dissonance.
Her motivation depends on how important the beliefs or behaviors are to her.
That is, the more important they are to the individual, the more likely she will try to reduce or eliminate the dissonance.
When an individual is motivated to reduce or eliminate dissonance, she can change her behavior or knowledge.
She may also reduce the importance of the dissonance by actively learning about other things that are more harmful than whatever is causing the dissonance or by actively avoiding information or situations that may produce  the dissonance.
For example, a smoker may experience cognitive dissonance because of the health risks she believes smoking causes.
Breakaway  encourages the user to change behavior at work by getting up and taking a break.
A sculpture that sits near the user's monitor slumps over as she continues to sit without taking a break.
It provides peripheral awareness to the user when she is at her desk.
If she takes regular breaks, the sculpture sits upright and appears "healthy."
If she does not, the sculpture slowly slumps over.
A pilot evaluation with a single participant  confirmed that the participant appreciated that she could ignore Breakaway during busy times--something her electronic calendar did not permit.
She also took more breaks while using Breakaway.
Fish`n'Steps  encourages users to take more steps each day.
The user's daily step count  is linked to the emotional state, growth, and activity of a virtual fish displayed in a virtual fish tank with the fishes of other users on a kiosk in a common area of the user's workplace.
Individual progress is accessible through a web site.
Progress toward the user's step count goal affects the growth of her fish  and the fish's facial expression .
Insufficient progress from any user in the tank may result in murky water and the removal of decorations.
A six-week deployment of the system  that was compared to pre- and post-intervention baselines using pedometers only for eight additional weeks revealed that some participants ignored the display when their fish was not happy, causing the researchers to rethink the use of punishment.
Houston also encourages users to take more steps each day .
A small group of users share their step counts, as determined by a pedometer, and performance toward a daily step count goal via their mobile phones.
They can add notes to their step counts, send messages, and review trending information.
A congratulatory message and an `*' next to their step count reward each user for achieving her goal.
A pilot evaluation  found that most participants increased awareness of their activity levels.
They were motivated by simple rewards for achieving their goal .
Several explained that their step counts did not represent their activity levels, as pedometers do not detect activities such as bicycling and rock climbing, and they do not detect step count if the user is wearing a dress and therefore has no place to put it.
The participants pointed out that receiving credit for all relevant activities is critical.
Next, we present our strategies for designing technologies to encourage lifestyle behavior change that were driven by the theories and research projects discussed above.
We note that the strategies can overlap at times and are not meant to be mutually exclusive.
We explain each strategy in turn.
Abstracted data helps the individual with the task of impression management  by providing flexibility in the data's representation.
This flexibility allows the individual to create alternative explanations of the data should it intentionally or otherwise be seen by another--that is, it provides ambiguity to create a "story" --and it enables the individual to have the representation with her in various situations, thus increasing the opportunity for reflection.
Using abstraction to represent behavioral data to the individual was employed by Breakaway  with the sculpture that represented how long the user had been sitting without taking a break and Fish`n'Steps  with the fish tank display that represented the user's step count.
As we have argued, designing technology to help people get from the lifestyle they have to the lifestyle they want is complex.
In the following, we present a set of strategies to inform the design of such technologies.
We started with four design goals established by Breakaway : abstract, non-intrusive, public, and aesthetic .
Breakaway's original goals were specific to the Breakaway project--they were not presented as general design goals for technologies to encourage everyday behavior change.
In many cases, our extensions to those goals involve generalizing them to apply to everyday behavior changes, we validated our proposed strategies in two field studies , and we use the theories and research projects described above to explain the rationale for each strategy.
We wanted to use data abstraction, rather than raw sensor data collected from the user, to display information to encourage people to be more active and to draw attention to the harm that is done to the body by sitting for long stretches of time; 2.
We wanted to present data in a nonobtrusive manner and to make it available at all times during the work day without interrupting work; 3.
We wanted to present data in a way that people would willingly display it in a public place like the office.
To support impression management, the technology should not draw unwanted or unnecessary attention from or to the individual, despite being available when and where she needs it and in time to modify her behavior.
Houston  addressed its goal of being unobtrusive by using a common technology that the individual already carries and uses in a wide variety of places-her mobile phone.
The technology should also support occasional ignorability as suggested by Cognitive Dissonance Theory  and evidence from Breakaway's pilot study.
Breakaway allowed the study participant to ignore the technology when she was particularly busy --a feature that she specifically mentioned was important.
Present and collect the data, which is personal in nature, such that the user is comfortable in the event that others may intentionally or otherwise become aware of it.
Because the data needs to be available whenever and wherever the user needs it, it is likely to be something that s/he wears/carries, resides in a shared/common space, or uses while in the presence of others.
The technology should not make the user uncomfortable in those situations.
There is always a chance that a technology intended for personal use may be noticed by others, especially if it is being used throughout everyday life.
This is particularly important when the data represents behaviors from front and backstage, and potentially across different audiences.
Breakaway used data abstraction so that its sculpture could be in the presence of others without drawing attention to it or the individual.
Because Houston runs on the individual's mobile phone, and individuals already use their mobile phones in a wide range of settings and are familiar with the social norms of using phones in public, it is unlikely that the individual would draw unwanted attention to herself while discretely interacting with the technology.
Several existing behavior change technologies reward behavior.
For example, Houston provides simple rewards upon goal attainment .
Similarly, Fish`n'Steps provides a happy fish, tank decorations, and clean water.
Results from Houston's study showed that individuals appreciated the rewards and found them to be surprisingly motivating.
However, the use of punishment in some projects--such as Fish`n'Steps' sad or angry fish, murky water, and removal of tank decorations--sometimes resulted in reduced use.
The "Aesthetic" strategy ties directly to the concept of personal front from Presentation of Self, as personal front includes the individual's appearance.
If any aspect of the technology is worn or carried by the individual or displayed in her personal area, its aesthetics and comfort must reflect her personal style.
Aesthetics can also help with the technology's surface credibility.
Fogg notes that people often "assess the credibility of computing products based on a quick inspection of such surface traits" .
A success in Fish`n'Steps was the look of the fish when it was happy.
Not only did a happy fish make participants feel good, but the aesthetics also drew interest and created excitement from others who were not participating but could see the kiosk display.
Conversely, participants in the Fish`n'Steps and Houston studies complained about the ugliness of the pedometers that they wore.
Whether the information is manually entered by the individual, automatically detected by a monitoring technology, or some combination of the two, the system should permit the individual to manipulate the data and give her control over who has access to what data.
This can help overcome limitations of technologies that automatically infer behavior and gives the individual control over access to her backstage.
Further, allowing the individual to manipulate her data facilitates dramatic realization, misrepresentation, and secret consumption.
A tricky problem is how to accommodate such concepts while helping the individual reflect on her actual behaviors.
The issue of the limitations of technologies that automatically infer behavior has two important components:  individuals will be upset when a technology does not give them proper credit for behaviors they do that are in support of their desired lifestyle, and  individuals may be frustrated when they receive credit for something they did not do.
Although the problem of getting credit for something one did not do is less obvious than the problem of not getting credit for something one did do, it is nevertheless important.
For example, if the system reflects that the individual is burning enough calories each day to lose two pounds per week when she is only burning enough to maintain her weight, she may have difficulty realizing why she is not experiencing the expected weight loss and get frustrated.
Fogg warns that the issue of inaccurate data representation may lead to a loss of credibility :
A critical issue for technologies that encourage lifestyle behavior change is that they are likely to be long-term, discretionary use technologies--that is, the individual chooses when and if to use them.
When actual behavior does not reflect desired behavior, the technology should not reward nor punish the individual, however it must sustain her interest.
This is particularly important for technologies that are intended for use over long periods of time.
Individuals occasionally get sick, injured, or have a deadline that legitimately prevents them from performing the desired behavior.
Other times, they just need a break, perhaps to accommodate the basic need for secret consumption.
At such times, the technology must sustain the individual's interest without making her feel too bad or it runs the very real risk of being abandoned.
Participants in Houston's study complained about missed steps in their daily step counts when they forgot to wear their pedometers or when they were wearing a dress and had no reasonable place to clip the pedometer.
This shows that sometimes the usage model of the technology, and not its accuracy, causes problems.
The seemingly mundane choices that individuals make every day often impact whether they achieve their desired lifestyle.
As aforementioned, this is complicated by the fact that infrequently making a poor or arbitrary decision is seldom a disaster.
Rather it is a pattern of such decisions that typically prevents the achievement of lifestyle goals .
If the individual considers each decision in isolation, and not based on a history of decisions, it is easy for her to make a "poor decision," as it often leads to immediate satisfaction.
This point is echoed by Cognitive Dissonance Theory's concepts of information/situation avoidance and magnitude, as the individual may try to reduce dissonance by deliberately ignoring the impact of the pattern of her behaviors.
Technologies to encourage lifestyle behavior change should help the individual reflect on her past behaviors in relation to her goal.
This historical perspective will help the individual "keep her eyes on the prize."
Houston provided short-term trending information, which was used and appreciated by the participants.
While our theoretical basis and strategies do not preclude collaboration, we caution that moving from designing for an individual interacting with a technology to designing for collaboration  requires careful consideration.
In this section, we describe a system that we developed using our proposed strategies.
During our initial design phase, we engaged the aforementioned theories, developed the design strategies, then used the strategies to inform the design of our system.
Our strategies were refined as we conducted field studies of the system .
The persuasive technology we present here, the UbiFit Garden system, encourages individuals to lead a physically active lifestyle.
We believe that the design could be modified to support other lifestyle behavior changes.
UbiFit Garden uses the screen background, sometimes called "wallpaper," of an individual's mobile phone to display a garden that blooms as she performs physical activities throughout the week.
Upon meeting her weekly goal, a butterfly appears.
Smaller butterflies represent goals attained from the past three weeks.
An interactive application on her phone includes detailed information about the individual's physical activities and a journal where she can manually add, edit, and delete information about her activities.
A fitness device   automatically infers and communicates information about walking, running, cycling, using the elliptical trainer, and using the stair machine to the garden display and interactive application .
More details can be found elsewhere .
UbiFit Garden implements the design strategies as follows:
UbiFit Garden's display uses an animated garden as a metaphor to represent physical activity behavior and goal attainment.
The data abstraction--the garden--being on the background screen of the individual's mobile phone affords frequent reflection that supports the individual's desire to live a physically active lifestyle.
With Fish`n'Steps and Houston, pedometers were used to measure behavior and subsequently calculate goal progress.
If the individual went for a bike ride, a desirable behavior regarding a "physically active" lifestyle goal, the individual would not receive credit toward her goal.
Participants in Houston's study specifically complained about that situation, and explained that it discouraged them from performing some healthy behaviors.
For example, why go for a run when walking will yield a higher step count for less effort?
Why go for a bike ride when those activities will yield no step count?
Houston's results point to an important side effect of the system not properly accounting for relevant behaviors.
That is, Houston was trying to help individuals focus on being active, but for several participants, the focus turned to optimizing their step count.
This change in focus often resulted in participants doing less healthy activities than they had planned.
This point is particularly important for individuals in the contemplation, preparation, and action stages of the Transtheoretical Model who are attempting to establish routines.
Discouraging an individual in one of these stages from performing a relevant behavior may inhibit progress and result in her reverting back to a prior stage.
The interactive application also resides on the individual's mobile phone.
Due to their popularity, mobile phones are essentially available whenever and wherever the individual is.
Because individuals already use their phones often, they will see the background screen often.
Individuals will not stand out as different for using a mobile phone, nor will they have to take new or additional action to see the garden display1.
Because mobile phones are frequently used in social situations, their screens may intentionally or unintentionally be seen by others.
The abstract nature of the garden display supports the public strategy.
For example, if someone unintentionally sees the individual's background screen, she could describe the image in any number of ways, including it simply being a picture.
People frequently change the default background screen of their phones to an aesthetic image or photograph.
Because the garden display uses a feature that is traditionally aesthetic only and replaces it with something that has utility, its design must not only be functional, but also aesthetic.
Therefore, the garden display has been designed to look like something that an individual might use as her personal background screen.
UbiFit Garden uses rewards to encourage behavior.
When the individual performs an activity, a flower blooms in her garden.
If she meets her weekly goal, a large butterfly appears.
Smaller butterflies indicate when goals were met for the prior three weeks, therefore the individual can see up to a month's worth of goal attainments in her garden.
If she performs activities but does not reach her goal, she simply does not get a butterfly.
If she does no activity whatsoever, she will have an empty garden with green grass and a blue sky.
The flowers do not die.
The grass does not wilt.
The sky does not storm.
The individual also gets a fresh start each week when the screen resets to an empty garden, so even if she had a bad week, she can start over fresh in the coming week.
The small butterflies indicate goal attainment for recent weeks, serving to reward and remind her of up to a month's worth of successes.
The interactive application also allows individuals to reflect on a longer view of past performance.
One idea that was not implemented in the UbiFit Garden prototype is that the display and interactive application could be mirrored on a traditional desktop software application or on a web site.
Additional features that are less suited to the phone's small screen and limited text entry capabilities could be added to a more traditional software/web site component.
For example, longer term trending charts and images could be useful for individuals as they use the technology over longer periods of time.
Most current fitness devices do not detect such a range but are limited to measurements such as step count , running & walking durations/distances , or cycling durations/distances .
However, because the MSP does not detect the full range of activities that are relevant to a physically active lifestyle, the interactive application allows individuals to manually enter any physical activity of their choosing, and they have flexibility over how those activities are categorized .
We have used an iterative design process to develop the UbiFit Garden system and validate our design strategies.
This process included a paper-based survey, a 3-week field trial, and a 3-month field experiment.
The survey included a mix of multiple choice and open-ended questions about respondents' use of mobile phones, their physical activity goals and practices, and two proposed designs.
Seventy-five people  who ranged from 18 to 63 years old and lived in 13 states across the U.S. responded.
In the three-week field trial, 12 participants  who were recruited from the general public used the UbiFit Garden system for 21 to 25 days.
Participants were from 25 to 35 years old, lived in the Seattle Metropolitan area, and were regular mobile phone users who wanted to increase their physical activity.
In the three-month field experiment, 28 participants  who were recruited from the general public used one of three versions of the UbiFit Garden system for three months over the winter holiday season.
Metropolitan area, and were regular mobile phone users who wanted to increase their physical activity.
Three experimental conditions  helped us determine the impact of the garden display and MSP.
Additional details can be found in .
Reactions to UbiFit Garden have been overwhelmingly positive.
Everyone who used the garden display thought that it  was essential, and most who had not used it wished they had when they learned about it at the end of the study.
The garden metaphor was an understandable representation of physical activity behavior and goal attainment.
In fact, several participants explained how even small children understood it.
The garden's effectiveness was further supported by a statistically significant analysis that showed that participants in the Full System and No MSP conditions  maintained their weekly activity duration on average throughout the three months, even on weeks that contained a holiday, while the activity duration for those who did not have the garden went down over time and on holiday weeks.
For more detail, including a discussion of the statistically significant findings, please see .
However, due to the early nature of the MSP prototype that we used, it often did not meet the criteria for being Unobtrusive or Public.
Most participants who used the MSP recounted anecdotes of being asked about it.
Although they were often not uncomfortable by the inquiries per se, it got tiresome over time.
Participants established practices where if they were concerned that the MSP would be distracting , they would take it off or leave it behind.
Participants also explained how because the garden was on the background screen of their phone, they thought about their physical activities and commitment to being active more than usual.
One participant observed how it reminded her to be active:
As mentioned earlier, for behaviors such as physical activity, individuals are unlikely to perform the desired behavior all of the time for any number of reasons, many of which are perfectly legitimate2.
Participants encountered barriers throughout the field studies--several of which were out of their control--that led to their not performing as much physical activity as they had hoped.
One participant described what it was like to be sick:
Individuals already feel bad when they do not meet their goals; they do not need the persuasive technology that is trying to help them instead make them feel worse.
Most participants in our studies were able to get back on track, which emphasizes the value of trying to sustain their interest and gently remind them of the commitment they made without punishing them for the lapse in behavior.
Unlike in the Houston study , no participant in the UbiFit Garden studies refrained from doing an activity because of the system.
These findings suggest that when the technology accounts for the range of relevant behaviors, individuals do not artificially limit themselves to the behaviors that the technology can automatically sense.
Above, we mentioned specific projects that directly influenced our proposed design strategies.
In this section, we describe other related efforts that use technology to encourage healthy lifestyle behavior change.
Similar to Houston, two other projects that use mobile phones to facilitate the exchange of physical activity measurements amongst small groups of users are Chick Clique  and Shakra .
Chick Clique uses mobile phones and pedometers to help teenage girls share their step counts.
Shakra uses mobile phones to help adults share their daily physical activity durations as well as to determine estimates of those durations based on the mobile phone's travels.
Similar to Houston, Shakra experienced credibility issues with automatic activity measurements during a oneweek pilot study.
Shakra's sensing technology sometimes mistook healthy behavior for sedentary behavior, thus resulting in inaccurate representations of behavior that could not be corrected in the system by the participants.
ViTo  replaces the television  remote control with a hand-held device to help the individual decrease TV viewing time and increase physical activity.
In addition to channel navigation, ViTo offers alternatives to watching TV, including listening to music, viewing a "to do" list, and playing isometric conditioning games.
The researchers emphasized, "elements of fun, reward, and novelty are used to induce positive affect rather than feelings of guilt" , which is consistent with our Positive strategy.
A 28-day field study  compared the persuasiveness of the mobile application to an equivalent web application.
Results revealed no significant differences across conditions.
However, the analysis did reveal a strong relationship between pre-existing motivation for lifestyle behavior change and goal achievement .
Results also revealed that the mobile application was used throughout the day, more effectively incorporating with everyday life than the web application-- which supports our Unobtrusive strategy.
All participants who used the MSP thought that those features were essential.
In many cases, they made inference errors tolerable, as participants were able to correct mistakes, whether it was an error of confusion, omission, or credit for something unearned.
They also permitted participants to receive credit for activities performed when the MSP was not charged or had been left behind.
Participants stressed the importance of their activity record being accurate, as an inaccurate record would only hurt them.
However, despite the occasional problems with the activity inference, most found it useful.
We only have limited evidence to support Trending / Historical, given that three months is not very long when considering a lifetime.
However, participants commented on how the month's worth of goal attainments motivated them: I could see my progress, if I was--how much more I needed to do to get to my goal...And I could see the butterfly and think, `I did it last week, you can do it again this time.'
Although a longer-term study, probably with an accompanying web site to accommodate limitations of viewing charts and other effective representations of trending information on the mobile phone, is needed to provide stronger evidence to support the Trending / Historical strategy, results from the field studies confirm that at least short-term trending is useful.
In both studies, participants recorded a broad range of physical activities.
We are exploring how to design technology to help people transition from the lifestyle they have to the lifestyle they want by helping them change their behavior.
In this paper, we made two primary contributions.
We employed two theories that are not traditionally used in the development of persuasive technologies--Presentation of Self in Everyday Life  and Cognitive Dissonance Theory .
Second, we described how our UbiFit Garden system, which motivates a physically active lifestyle, was designed based on the strategies.
We highlighted results from our studies, focusing on results from our three-month field experiment, which confirmed that the system was successful at helping people maintain physical activity and validated the usefulness of the design strategies.
It is important for technology designers to recognize that lifestyle behavior change is a long-term endeavor that pervades everyday life, including the social world.
If done poorly, the technology is likely to be abandoned; therefore a principled approach for its design is needed.
This paper presents such an approach based on theory and prior results that we are using in a larger research agenda to design persuasive technologies to affect lifestyle behavior change.
Festinger, L. A Theory of Cognitive Dissonance.
Persuasive Technology: Using Computers to Change What We Think and Do, San Francisco, CA, USA: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, .
Gasser, R., Brodbeck, D., Degen, M., Luthiger, J., Wyss, R., Reichlin, S. "Persuasiveness of a Mobile Lifestyle Coaching Application Using Social Facilitation," Proceedings of Persuasive 2006, Eindhoven, The Netherlands, , 27 - 38.
Goffman, E. The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life.
We would like to thank our many colleagues who helped develop and support the UbiFit Garden system, particularly Beverly Harrison, Pedja Klasnja, and Tammy Toscos who were instrumental in running the field studies.
We would also like to thank the study sponsor, Intel Research Seattle, the participants in the UbiFit studies, and the reviewers for their feedback.
