The value of involving people as `users' or `participants' in the design process is increasingly becoming a point of debate.
In this paper we describe a new framework, called `informant design', which advocates efficiency of input from different people: maximizing the value of contributions tlom various informants and design team members at different stages of the design process.
To illustrate how this can be achieved we describe a project that uses children and teachers as informants at difTerent stages to help us design an interactive learning environment for teaching ecology.
By placing users in this reacting role, designers can obtain a range of feedback as to what is good, bad and ugly about their designs.
A further problem with this kind of asymmetrical relationship is that the onus is entirely on the designers to take on board and translate the users reactions.
Many obstacles can prevent this from happening in a beneficial way, ranging from the designers' own reluctame to reconsider and possibly throw away their own design ideas to organisational constraints that demand the product be shippwl before any redesign can be put into practice.
All too often the actual contribution made by users to the redesign of a system/interface is "too little, too late".
The more recently popuku-ise~ alternative `participato~ design'  approach is to respect users more as partners in the design process and in doing so explicitly give them a more equal and responsible role.
In this way users can jointly work together with the designers to develop a system to fit their needs, This kind of relationship is exemplified by the Scandinavian Approach to system design  and more recently, by Participatory Design , Here "the goal is to provide an equal opportunity design envinmment in which all participants can contribute as peer codesigners" .
Such approaches have proven to be effective for adult usem, where it is possible for users and designers to view each other as peers.
But what happens when the users are children and the domain is something that they know little about but which the software is specifically intended to teach them about?
In what respects is it desirable, useful and sensible to set up design teams whereby children are given equal responsibilities to those of adult designers in such contexts?
Moreover, is it possible for adults to treat children like themselves whilst at the same time not being patronizing?
Conversely, can children make contributions about the content and the way they should be taught something which adults have atways been responsible for?
The creative involvement of children early in the process of design has increased considerably in recent years, For example, Cypher and Smith not onty used fifth graders in informal tests of their own examples of the KidSim rule set but also of rules written by other children .
Involving users in the design process is now so deeply ingrained in the philosophy of HCI practice, that it would be difficult to imagine othenvise.
Current textbooks, guidebooks or rnanifestos written on how to do `good' software/system design proselytise the necessity of involving users from start to fhish in the design process.
Recently, however, the MU@@ of this golden rule has been questioned.
For example, Webb  has challenged the value of involving users on the grounds that it is infeasible and undesirable: "the user is not a designer and studies have shown that users' designs are generally inferior to those of interface professionals" .
He asserts further that users' inexperience and lack of design skills constrains and thus thwarts creative activity, However, one could equally argue the opposite: designers have a difficult time managing the complexity of software design and a closer involvement with the audiences they are designing for could greatly help them in their struggle.
Similarly, Oosterholt, et al, describe the process of co-design of a communication device with childreL pointing to the need the to "enter their world", as well as to recognise sophistication of the current generation.
In the latter case the children were involved throughout the development process .
There is, therefore, a growing body of evidence that shows that children can and should be involved more in the design process.
However it is not clear what status they should have in their relationship with designem.
Should we view them in a participatory design context, where they are given the role of partners  or in a more user-centred context, where their level of involvement is mo~ c ircumscribed by us?
Clearly, there is much to be gained from adopting a childcentred framework that allows for different kinds of inputs from childnm.
In particular, they can have insight into what learning methods are effective and what motivates them, based on their experiences.
We also need to recognise, however, that chilchen cannot design their own learning goals.
Here input from teachers, psychologists and educational technologists can play a valuable role.
But, agaiw we need to appreciate what each has to offer and not be tempted simply to use them as token guiding voices.
For example, teachers are very good at informing us about what children find difficult to learn using traditional materials but generally do not have much to offer in terms of how to put interactive multimedia to good use.
Similarly, educational technologists can let us know what kinds of learning metaphors might be effectively utilised in the design of interactive learning environments but not know how best to transform them into interactive media.
Hence, in treating children as native informants, we hope to be able to discover what we did not know rather than t~ to confirm what we thought we knew.
We atso do not treat them as equal partners, as we are realistic as to how much they can be involved, since they neither have the time, knowledge or expertise to participate in the collaborative model pnxcribed in PD approaches.
Another aspect of collaborative design is that it typically emphasises the use of `low-tech' and `lightweight' communicative and creative tools.
Here, the emphasis is very much on co-making mock-ups and co-constructing rapid prototypes, as opposed to one group making them and another commenting on them.
For example, one of the most well known methods, called PICTIVE, provides common office objects  with which the users and designers can together model and design putative user interface objects for a given application The success of such approaches has been documented elsewhere .
Use of such materials and methods seems particularly well-suited for childre~ who spend much of their time constructing.
For example Druin and Solomon  describe a number of different ways of using such prototyping techniques.
Typically low-tech prototypes feature early in the design process, before any coding begins.
Our approach is to blend different low-tech and hi-tech methods that work in parallel whilst also informing each other.
In this respect, the controversy over the merits of lo-j prototyping versus hi-.
Instead, the important point is to know how to use different methods, how they can inform and build on each other, and by doing so be clear about what it is that we are wing to prototype with diffexent kinds of prototypes .
Where children are involved we need to consider how best to use low-tech materials to bring out their contributions.
In particular, it is important to be clear what sort of data we might elicit from them.
It is frequently noted that  users have difficulty in articulating the ways in which a system might help them.
However, children are likely to have difi3cukies, by detinitioq with articulating what needs the interactive learning environment should be meeting - since they do not know how to express concepts that they have not yet grasped.
We think it useful, therefore, to try and be clear exactly what kinds of benefits accrue from the application of different methods.
Likewise, we think it useful to be quite specific about what kinds of suggestions  a designer might expect from working with childre~ teachen, educational psychologists and OthCrS.
Our approach to the child-designer relationship for designing interactive learning environments is to position ourselves between the user-centred and participatory design perspectives .
Clearly it suggests that they are aware of aspects of leamingheaching practices that we are not and which we need to be told of.
Sometimes this will concern content as when they tell us what sort of feedback is f~ sometimes it will concern structural aspects, particularly when informing us about what encourages learning.
PAPERS design process, namely the `informants'  and ourselves - the design team .
The table shows how each informant provides different inputs to the design at various phases of the project using different methods.
Each phase is onty briefly described in the table so as to give an ovetview of the value of different methods and contributors.
It should also be pointed out that each phase is not necessarily sequential, but may overlap and run in parallel.
More detail will be provided in the next section where we explain our particular project, using this framework.
In the first phase of design the emphasis is necessarily on spec@ing appropriate learning goals and identifying the pros and cons of current teaching practices within the domain , At this stage children and teachers are involved separately as informants, since they have quite different perspectives on what problems are most salient for teaching and learning.
These data enabled the design team to itemise existing problems of teaching and learning a difficult topic.
The output from this is a list of problems that are then turned into high level functionality requirements for multimedia implementation in the second phase.
This is done through cognitive and interactivity analysis .
These specifications are then used in phase 3 for designing the low-tech materials which are used by the child informants to come up with designs and suggestions as to what is motivating for them.
Input from &se sessions is then used for evolving the hi-tech prototypes, .
These are subsequently tested by the child informants and teachers and their design further iterated, Finally we would envisage a phase not shown in the table - the testing of prototypes in a classroom context, as part of a lesson plan.
THE AIMS OF OUR PROJECT: ECO-I One of the main aims of our project, called Eco-i2, is to design interactive learning environments for domains that have proven diftlcult to teach using existing media, Here we focus on concepts in ecology such as food webs and element cycles which teachers and childrem within the 7 to 14 year age band, have a hard time teaching and learning, respectively.
Another aim is to focus on what would constitute `good design' for learning using multimedia.
In this respect we have tried to relate two things.
The first is a theoretical analysis of what role traditioml external representations, like diagrams or pictures, might play in learning.
In doing this, we are investigating how new kinds of interactivity, that can only be implemented using new media forms, can support learning more effectively ,
In this section we describe how we put our informant design framework into practice for designing educational software.
We begin by summarising the learning aims of our interactive learning environment and the learning problems we sought to address through designing interactive multimedia.
We also describe briefly our experiences with using teachers as informants in the early stages of the project with the employment of a "teachers panel".
We began this phase by analysing the demands of the current UK national curriculum for biology for ages 7 to 14 years of age, identi@ing how relevant concepts were to be introduced and what levels of comprehension were required at different points.
We asked sixty childrew across the age range, about their experience of being taught these concepts, probing them for the depth of their current understanding and identifying issues and teaching methods they found problematic.
Children were seen in pairs, outside the class by one of the psychologists.
Discussion was focused on current booldvideo material and classroom practices, for example: "Do you know what a food chain is?
In parallel we asked twelve teachers of this age range how they would approach the teaching task, for example introducing their pupils to concepts like food webs or the carbon cycle and what conceptual diffkulties they typically encountered in class, All teacher interviews were individual, conducted by one of the psychologists.
In addition to the UK sample a similar exercise was carried out with nine pairs of 7 to 11 year old children in the US public school system as well as interviews with five of their teachers.
As with the Rst of the project all sessions were recorded, either audio or video, for later transcription.
At this point we were also concerned to make some estimate of the current and potential value of computerbased teaching materials.
One way in which we elicit this kind of information is via a `teacher panel', conceived of as an analogue to a consumer panel.
We believe that this would make the underlying ecological concepts easier to understand and the material more accessible to the child.
Interactive multimedia allows us to do this in a novel way by allowing dynamic changes to different displays in response to user interaction.
We call this dynamic linking or `dynalinks'.
For example, for our first designs, we built a suite of interactive multimedia prototypes that used a pond as a model ecosystem.
The series of prototypes leads the learner from a mode where s/he simply observes the ecosystem to one where S/he can effect changes in it which are simultaneously linked to a diagram representing the food web in the pond.
Each module, therefore, introduces more cognitive complexity as well as different kinds of control of the changes that could be made to the pond.
An example is illustrated in Figure 1 where clicking on a link of the web diagram activates behaviowzd actions in the animated pond, e.g.
The important feature of this space is that the effects of manipulating a food web as an abstmct representation can be directly viewed in the adjacent concrete animation, We are capitalizing on a novel kind of interactivity to `fii' a profound cognitive diffkulty.
During this phase much of the effort is from the interaction of HCI analyst and software designer, exploring the possibilities of mapping the interactivity ideal into runnable prototype animations.
All of these discussions and interviews were reviewed by the whole design team.
We recognised that the data from the informants described different aspects of the same problem space and we used the data from the interviews in several ways.
One was as input for a developmental analysis of the cognitive Wlculties likely to be posed by diflerent kinds of representation in learning.
For example: what kind of diagram would work with an eight year old?
What did they seem to understand?
This discussion was linked to our analysis of how any external representation was effective, what the pros and cons of different forms might be, e.g.
Thus, even at a preliminary stage, the designer had a basis to begin sketching out a mnge of ideas for alternative representations.
The two most salient outcomes of the interviews/panel were the surprisingly wide range of approaches to teaching and the shallowness of learning evident in the students.
Part of the problem lies in the complexity of the learning task - many of the concepts are hard, e.g.
But it is also the case that conventional media - paper, pictures, video - are ill-suited to represent these processes in ways that make them easy to visualise.
To grasp such concepts requires a lot of further work - something which teachers or children rarely have the opportunity to do.
It is no surprise that teachers do not have a strong common intuition about how to teach from, nor students a good grasp of what is conveyed, by these materials.
This is a fundamental component of ecosystem understanding.
Children fiid it easy to understand the basic relationship of X eats Y.
However, typically they do not understand that the feeding relationships are <really' about energy transfer  nor can they use the food webs they construct to make inferences about the effects of species or population changes.
How could we make this more accessible?
In this phase, theu we are principally concerned to take the problems identified in phase 1 and relate them to the possibilities afforded by the interactive software environment.
As part of our efforts to improve and validate the design of these prototypes, as they were being built, we undertook a programme of evaluation with easy-to-use, paper-based materials, These were  manipulable cut-outs of a number of possible pond animals and weed and  a colour print of the pond background  as used in the prototypes provided by the software designer, These materials were taken to schools in order to test a number of assumptions about our project:
Teachers typically selected same-sex friends who worked together well.
At the beginning of the session we explained to the children that we were developing software, primarily for CD-ROMs , and that it aimed to teach children in a better way than books currently did, What we wanted was for them to help us out by testing some of our ideas and to help us with their design.
The pairs of children were seen by an adult `facilitator', who was a psychologist from the design team.
We structured the sessions as a series of three design-validation exercises.
Exercise 1:Validity of design and cognitive assumptions For the first exercise, it was explained to the children that we were interested in how they understood food chains.
They were shown the cut-outs and background and the feeding habits of each were discussed.
Then the children were asked to put the cut-outs onto the background so as to convey these relationships.
Any questions the children asked about the animals were answered.
Next, they were asked to draw the resulting food web on paper or construct a food web diagram using a sepamte set of cut-outs and arrows.
Finally the facilitator asked questions about the effects of changing the population such as "What would happen if the beetles all died?".
Here, the children were allowed to make changes to their lay-outs and relate them to their web diagrams.
This exercise demonstrated that the children could manipulate the items with ease but also that such manipulability was not, by itself, suftlcient to allow them to solve novel problems - more powerful interactivity was meded.
This produced an astonishingly wide and sophisticated set of answers.
We discovered that the children had well-articulated representations of what they had come to expect from interactive software in general and its good and bad features, both in terms of enjoyment and of promoting learning.
In shofi they seemed to have a good grasp of interacting with this genre of technology.
Examples of their suggestions are:
For the fd exercise we asked k children how by would design the software themselves.
We decided to get around the problem described earlier - of children not being able to design for domains they have not learned about - by asking them to envisage the needs of children younger than they were, by a year or two.
Typically our informants were able to remember their own experiences at this point.
The procedure we adopted was fairly loose-format.
We asked the children what they thought would make a good CD-ROM for teaching about food webs.
The facilitator encouraged them to use the low-tech materials that they had been working with in the previous exercises.
Typically each pair of children would talk for anywhere between ten and twenty minutes about their ideas, which we recorded on audio or video tape.
The children would often talk extensively without prompting but if they seemed to be stuck the facilitator would ask about the consequences of the imaginay user behaving in a certain way, e.g.
At the end the facilitator asked for suggestions about special effects, such as noises made during eating.
Throughout the session the emphasis was on eliciting as many suggestions for animations as possible while minimizing input from the facilitator.
A main finding is that the majority of children have absolutely no problem in using the paper materials to simulate an interactive game.
They do this easily, providing animations, special effects, sounds and feedback with little or no prompting.
Their animations were clearly understandable, mocking-up the kinds of interactions between creatures in the pond that they thought appealing.
For example, all of their designs involved a puzzle or game.
Typical concerns here were: the benefh of better narratiok feedback and cues for action.
Examples include: the need for commentary for indicating the range of possible actions which users would otherwise have to discover - such as `add food', `click on a link'; the need to distinguish buttons 
These data came primarily from the child informants.
Teachers typically did not notice or mention these aspects, taking their brief to be one of commenting on the classroom value of the prototypes.
One persistent concern that they had was the motivating power of the software, something they shared with the children but expressed in a different form.
In additio~ we discovered how good children are at testing the non-obvious aspects of our desi~ stretching the limits of the software functionality.
For example in one module where the task was to stock a jam jar from a `palette' of animals, children would drag and drop animals outside of the jar just to see what happened.
This remains to be put to rigorous empirical test but questioning of children, together with their spontaneous comments, suggests that many understood the links between the two views after interaction with Pondworld where they had not before.
As mentioned earlier, we already were developing a suite of interactive multimedia prototypes  in our project when we began to use the children as design informants.
The prototypes were tested both in-house, by bringing children to our laboratory and in the school.
In testing to date a total of twelve, same-gender pairs of children were involved, spread equally across the 7 to 11 year age range, with equal numbers of boys and girls.
These children did not have access to the low-tech materials, The prototypes were introduced after a brief description of the project's aims.
We said that we were interested in finding out what the children did and did not like about the program because we were still in the early stages and able to make changes.
The children were shown the opening scree~ giving them access to the four modules and then allowed to interact with the modules as they wanted.
The findings resulting from the paper-based testing and design sessions were much more general in their scope compared with the more specflc findings arising from the testing of the hi-tech prototypes, In particular, they highlighted the crucial importance of making learning game-like and how important `silly'  things are.
The last of these concerns is sif@cant since it is ve~ diffkult for adults to decentre sufficiently to realise what is fun feedback.
In many ways, the inherent flexibility of the `design your own software' format lends itself to more general suggestions than eliciting responses with the software prototypes.
When confronted with a piece of software that is already designed by any user - be it child or adult - the evaluating users are constrained to make suggestions at a lower level of detail.
Wong  also has pointed out how interfaces that are presented as rough sketches are often much more appropriate prototypes for eliciting responses from users than more finished interfaces because they prevent users getting too fixated on low level issues, such as what size a button should be rather than asking more general questions like whether buttons are appropriate for the application in hand.
The process that we have described worked well in the context of the project.
However it was not without its chfflculties.
Firstly not all children are able or willing to be creative designers, or even informants about cuqent practices.
The demand characteristics of talking with unfamiliar adults, in a school context, can be a big inhibitor.
Several of our informants offered typically short or uninformative contributions.
Working in pairs helps to lessen this problem as does having the shyer children begin by commenting on the suggestions of others, rather than begin from scratch.
A second, related dMc@ is that it is hard for the facilitator to judge when to intervene to revive a flagging discussion: too soon or too often and the situation can become overbearing, with children possibly feeling that their contributions are not being listened to.
A third issue concerns the effort that was involved in following our framework.
Clearly not every project will have as many resources to dmw on.
So could steps be shortened or omitted?
Moreover, in doing so we would run the risk of imposing our view on a classroom culture that we had little experience of.
Teaching experienced developers to design graphical user interfaces, in Proc, of CHI'92  ACM Press, 557-564.
G. Interaction design and h+ factors suppo~ in the development of a personal communicator for children, in Proc, of CHI'96  ACM, 450-457.
Rogers, Y. and Scaife, M. How can interactive multimedia facilitate learning?
To appear in CD-ROM Proceedings of the First International Workshop on Multimodaiity in Multimedia Interfaces.
Rubinstein, R. and Hersh, H, The Human Factor: Designing Computer Systems for People.
Scaife, M. and Rogers, Y.
External Cognition: How do graphical representations work?
Informant design is a framework for involving various participants in the design process, that aims to maximise their input at different stages of design.
We have shown how it can be used for the design of interactive learning environments - in this case the development of multimedia software for teaching difficult concepts in ecology.
We believe that the framework is also generalisable to other domains, although there will need to be a different emphasis on the various contributions of the relevant informants, depending on what is being developed and for what domain.
We consider it important to ident@ what these should be, rather than trying to build an integrated team to work together throughout the design project.
But it is also because we see eftlciency as being about specialised inputs, Thus, we see different informants as shaping the design at diffenmt points; for example, at the beginning to help us problematize the domain, in the middle to test out and reflect on our cognitive and design assumptions and at the end to evaluate our prototypes in real-world contexts, The role of informants in the design process, therefore, is multiple - as partners, users and evaluators, designing with and for us.
Yvonne Rogers thanks Apple Computer Inc., and Stanford University where she has been on sabbatical.
Mike Scaife thanks UC hvine where he has been on sabbatical.
Virzi, R. A,, Sokolov, J.L, and Karis, D, Usability Problem identification Using Both Low- and HighFidelity Prototypes, in Proceedings of CHI'96.
Rough and Ready Prototypes: Lessons from Graphic Design, in CH1'92 Conference Companion , ACM Press.
