Crowd-sourcing social computing systems represent a new material for HCI designers.
However, these systems are difficult to work with and to prototype, because they require a critical mass of participants to investigate social behavior.
Service design is an emerging research area that focuses on how customers co-produce the services that they use, and thus it appears to be a great domain to apply this new material.
To investigate this relationship, we developed Tiramisu, a transit information system where commuters share GPS traces and submit problem reports.
Tiramisu processes incoming traces and generates real-time arrival time predictions for buses.
We conducted a field trial with 28 participants.
In this paper we report on the results and reflect on the use of field trials to evaluate crowd-sourcing prototypes and on how crowd sourcing can generate coproduction between citizens and public services.
Service design is an emerging discipline uniting operations research and design.
Operations research has long focused on redesigning processes to improve efficiency and effectiveness; however, the transition to service design has generated a new focus on customer's experience of a service.
Interestingly, this transition mirrors the change in HCI from its traditional focus on usability to an emerging focus on user experience.
Discourse in service design addresses the differences between products and services as a shift from value-in-exchange of goods to value-in-use that emerges between a customer and service provider .
This new perspective comes from the realization that customers have competence service providers can use.
They characterize this new perspective as co-creation, where value emerges through the interactions of customers and service providers .
Crowd-sourcing social computing systems provide a rich space to investigate the intersection of HCI and service design.
Our research investigates the application of service design theory and crowd-sourcing technology to improve public services.
Our intention is to help citizens who receive public services feel like co-owners.
The work follows a research through design approach  where we design speculative systems, using methods from HCI and from service design, as a way of learning how to best design these kinds of systems.
Our work began with a focus on transit commuters working as sensors in the transit network; reporting problems they experienced as a way of engaging in the "co-design" of this public service.
However, fieldwork revealed that commuters had very little interest in reporting problems .
Instead, they wanted to know when their bus would arrive.
Based on this feedback, we reframed the opportunity for service improvement of transit.
We proposed that commuters could engage in co-creation of value by using the GPS enabled mobile phones they carry to generate real-time bus arrival information.
Further, we speculated that if commuters engaged in frequent information exchanges with the transit service, then they would be more likely to engage in co-design activities, such as problem reporting.
To further investigate the validity of our hunch and to extend our knowledge of how to effectively design crowd-
The emergence of crowd-sourcing social computing systems has fundamentally changed computing.
The success of services such as Wikipedia  , Travelocity  , Yelp   and reCAPTCHA   demonstrates the many different forms this new technology can take and the range of problems it can address.
Crowdsourcing systems provide a "new material" for HCI designers to play with.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
The interface provides real-time, historic, and scheduled arrival times organized by stop.
In addition, it allows commuters to submit reports based on their ongoing service experience.
We conducted a field trial with 28 commuters who used Tiramisu for three weeks.
In this paper, we provide an overview of related research, details of our prototype interaction design, results of our field trial in terms of participation in providing GPS trace information and problem reports, and reflections on how to more effectively design crowd-sourcing social computing systems.
Interestingly, there are negative consequences to haphazardly combining approaches.
For example, providing rewards for work people previously performed for intrinsic reasons can reduce their perception of intrinsic value for the activity, thus negatively impacting their contribution .
Crowd-sourcing systems are difficult to prototype.
They resist the tried and true HCI methods of paper prototyping and controlled lab studies, because researchers and developers cannot accurately predicting if users will contribute the information needed to make a system valuable to users.
In addition, researchers and developers have no tools to help them understand how many users constitute a "critical mass" needed to keep a system working.
Interestingly, some early research exploring this challenge has described how researchers can use Amazon.com's Mechanical Turk service to simulate crowdsourcing activities .
While there has been little research on how to improve prototyping of crowd-sourcing systems, there has been a great deal of work on how to increase contribution in social computing systems.
Some of the earliest work goes back to investigations of groupware.
Researchers noted that many of these systems failed not for cognitive reason , but for social reasons; many workers did not enter information into these systems because they did not perceive enough individual value for their effort .
A forthcoming book on the design of online communities reviews the literature on contribution and draws out approaches that system designers can take to improve contribution .
This work is also framed in terms of perception of value and it details three specific approaches for increasing people's contribution to a community: * Asking: People are more likely to contribute if they are asked, and if they are asked specifically/individually.
In addition, people perceive value in helping others and in helping groups of people they feel an affiliation towards, so they will contribute if it helps someone else or if it helps an affiliated group.
In the service design community, the concept of "service" has been described as a "perspective" focused on cocreation of value between customers and service providers .
This idea of co-creation emerged partially out of the insight that customers can be more than consumers; they can also be a source of competence .
As an example, Prahalad and Ramaswamy note that in the software industry, customers commonly share their competence by becoming beta-testers .
Interestingly, this insight came in part because the Internet allows companies and customers to engage in dialog and also from the recognition that dialog between the customer and service provider and within communities of customers presents an opportunity for value to emerge .
To better understand service design, Kuusisto and Paallysaho conducted a review that revealed four types of co-production; where consumers participate in the production of the services they consume .
Service designers must take care when working on public services.
Often these services function as monopolies and are not driven to improve their service offerings through competition.
This is not necessarily a negative quality, as competition can diminish the importance of marginalized communities like the poor and people with disabilities, who are often the intended audience for public services, and in fact, many public services exist specifically to address issues of fairness by creating a more level playing field for marginalized communities .
Public services have looked to technology as an approach to service improvement.
Traditionally they have focused on automation and on improving the speed of service delivery.
However, when public services take a more user-centered design approach, they often learn that their customers' main desires are for different services, not for automated services .
Efficiency: More outputs for less money Equity: General sense of fairness towards citizens in terms of costs and benefits Outcomes: Increased usage of a service by the citizens or by a percentage of the citizens Value: Cost per unit of outcome Consumer satisfaction: Often a result of several of metrics above 
Finally, Pathfinder focused on investigating the design of systems in support of citizen science .
Citizen science is a philosophical approach to the practice of science where citizens in the community take on the role of research assistants, helping to collect information needed for analysis.
Pathfinder intended to advance this notion by allowing citizens to participate in making sense of the data instead of limiting their role to data collection.
Specifically, citizens shared information, asked questions, and proposed speculative hypotheses on commuting.
Tiramisu is fundamentally different in intention from Pathfinder in that it is not designed in support of scientific sense-making by either citizens or professional scientists.
Our participants share data and report problems, but they share data in terms of their own self-interest of wanting to know when a bus is coming, and they report problems with the intention of citizenship and civic engagement outside of science.
All three of these projects describe their motivation in terms of increasing sustainability through increased use of public or alternative transportation.
Our work has a distinctly different intention of citizens feeling more ownership, responsibility, and control over the public services they use.
Fortunately, the use of real-time arrival information has been reported to significantly increase the use of public transportation , and thus Tiramisu will likely have a positive impact on sustainability.
Tiramisu improves "quantity outputs" by providing realtime arrival and bus fullness information, services not currently offered.
Researchers have proposed that co-design, where customers engage in the design of the services with the provider, may be a particularly good approach for service improvement of public services.
They noted three distinct beneficial outcomes: services that are more responsive to the changing needs of citizens; increased trust of the government through citizen's more positive engagement with services; and building of social capital through an increased sense of community .
Tiramisu attempts to operationalize the concepts of coproduction.
Specifically, we want transit commuters to coperform in terms of generating bus the arrival information they desire by combining their traces with the transit service's schedule.
We want commuters engage in codesign through problem reporting; indicating issues that effect them enough to be worthy of the transit service's immediate attention.
By conducting a field trial, we have gained insights how to operationalize these concepts.
The HCI research community has engaged in several projects at the intersections of commuting/transit and social computing.
Here we discuss three working systems and detail how Tiramisu connects and provides an advance.
Researchers at the University of Washington developed a mobile system called OneBusAway that allows transit commuters to see real-time arrival information .
They have had great success at getting lots of participants to use this service and have noted some behavioral effects, such as an improved perception of personal safety and people choosing bus-stops farther from their currently location because the arrival time made it obvious that the bus would get them to their destination sooner.
This system is similar to ours in that it focuses on the value of providing real-time bus arrival times.
Tiramisu advances this work in that we have bus commuters generate the arrival time information, while their system uses GPS data logged by buses and provided by the transit service.
The Biketastic system was designed to support bike commuters .
Researchers conducted a proof of concept trial where participants used the system to record and share GPS traces as a way of describing a specific commute.
In addition, cyclists added details of problems or challenges for a trace.
Motivated by our fieldwork with transit commuters, discussions with a local transit agency , and the concepts of co-production and co-design from service design, we developed a conceptual model illustrating how information exchange between commuters and the transit service could provide a foundation from which co-design could emerge .
We focused on crowd-sourcing the vehicle location data, literally appropriating the GPS and communication devices commuters already carry, because the transit system we were working with reported costs of approximately $70 million to install a commercial Automatic Vehicle Locator system for a mid-sized city.
In this model, transit commuters provide GPS trace data using their phones.
The transit service provides planned schedule information.
Based on the schedule information and the GPS traces, a computational system generates realtime arrival information.
The transit commuters we interviewed during our fieldwork shared that reporting problems and engaging in improving the transit services offerings was not their responsibility .
They felt that the effort to report a problem was simply too high compared to the perceived value.
In working on our conceptual model, we speculated that if transit commuters accessed the arrival information and traced GPS data, then they would often have the system-in-hand.
Selecting the button on the annotation transitions to the "Select Route" screen, which displays a list of upcoming buses for the selected stop .
This screen displays real-time arrival information for a bus when there is a commuter on that bus who is sharing GPS.
When this is not available, the system shows historic arrival information, assuming the system has previous trace data for this bus at this time.
When neither real-time nor historic arrival information are available, the interface shows the scheduled arrival time.
In designing this screen, we chose to combine real-time, historic, and schedule information as a way of addressing the bootstrapping challenge of getting crowdsourced information into Tiramisu.
Our plan is that when this app is first released, commuters will see scheduled information, and as more and more commuters use the system and trace their rides, the schedule will be replaced by real-time and historic information.
We also specifically chose not to show the difference between the real-time and the scheduled arrival times.
Our intention is to help commuters know when the bus is coming, and not to "shame" the transit service by revealing that their bus may be earlier or later than scheduled.
Real-time and historical data include bus fullness information, something currently not available as an estimate in the schedule provided by the transit service.
Our previous fieldwork with commuters revealed their unhappiness when they would see a bus they wanted coming towards and then have it drive past them because it was too full to allow more people to board .
We assumed that knowing ahead of time that a bus was full might lessen the blow of watching it drive past without stopping.
Main Menu : Main Map : Map with selectable stops based on location.
Select Route : Arrival times for selected stop.
Report : Select destination bus stop.
Record : Report fullness and share GPS trace info.
Recording : Update fullness and stop trace.
We chose to prototype and conduct the field trial using iPhones because of the critical mass of iPhone users at the time of the trail, and because the iPhone has a screen reader that supports blind and low-vision commuters.
A production version of the system would need to operate on many smart phone platforms to minimize barriers to participation.
From the "Main Menu," users can access information on bus arrival times in three ways: nearby, search, and favorites .
Selecting "Nearby" transitions the interface to the "Main Map" screen, which offers a view similar to Google maps.
Nearby stops appear as red pins.
Additionally, we thought commuters could use this information during rush-hour to decide if they should wait a few minutes in order to ride a bus that is less crowded.
Finally, we felt fullness would benefit commuters with walkers, wheelchairs, strollers, and large bags.
Clicking on the star in the upper left corner of the "Select Route" screen  adds this stop to a commuter's list of favorites.
Additionally, selecting favorites from the main menu  transitions the interface directly to the "Select Route" screen .
When commuters decide on the bus they wish to take, they select that bus from the list of arrival times, transitioning the interface to the "Destination" screen .
Here they select from a list of upcoming stops.
Making a selection transitions the interface to the "Record" screen .
Once they board the bus, commuters indicate fullness and press the "Start Recording" button to share the fullness rating and the GPS trace from their phone.
While tracing, Tiramisu displays the next stop .
At the end of the trip, commuters press a stop recording button  as they exit.
Selecting "Report" from the "Main Menu" , or selecting the "Report" tab at the bottom of any screen transitions the interface to the "Report" screen .
This allows commuters to immediately express positive or negative comments about their transit experience.
Commuters categorize the report by selecting schedule, route, vehicle, driver, and bus stop.
Next, they type a message and possibly provide a photo .
Client instances issue three types of requests to the server.
Trace messages contain the client's GPS coordinates, fullness, departing-stop, destination-stop, bus route, and a trip identifier.
Reports  are written directly to the database.
Informational queries  are processed against the current state of the database.
Figure 3 displays a high-level functional architecture of Tiramisu.
A single backend server maintains a client-server arrangement with multiple clients running on iPhones.
Clients contain the user interface and a data model that records favorite stops.
The server logs recorded  trips, predicts arrival times, logs fullness, logs problem reports, and processes client information query requests.
To initialize the system, a GTFS  representation of the transit agency schedule is loaded to the database.
Every thirty seconds a real-time model predicts bus arrival time and fullness for buses with trace data within the last 30 seconds.
Once a day, the previous month of recorded trips are used to construct a historical model of bus arrival times and fullness.
Both arrival-time prediction models first prune outliers and then regress the distance the bus must travel to a stop against the absolute time of the arrival at that stop.
This model is robust against a variety of sources of error in the system, such as bad GPS information, dropped trace signals, and user error.
Similarly, the real-time and historical fullness model is based on a simple average of past fullness.
Models can be generated based on days of the week, weekends, and holidays.
The models predict bus location and fullness approximately 20 minutes into the future.
Typically, HCI design processes recommend an iterative process of moving from low fidelity to high fidelity prototypes.
This reduces risks by addressing critical challenges before making too large of an implementation commitment.
Crowd sourcing systems, however, make this iterative approach difficult.
The main challenges generally have to do with acceptance of the system and participation in generating the information, and these cannot be easily investigated, with respect to a specific system, through the use of lab studies.
These aspects of crowd-sourcing systems require a critical mass of participants to create the social effects of use.
In our case, we needed to know if commuters would actually share GPS traces, since this information would only help commuters downstream of their location.
An individual commuter never immediately benefits from the traces they provided.
Tiramisu's interaction design relies on intrinsic motivation to get commuters to share traces and report problems.
In addition, during the field trial participants were paid to use the system.
While creating the design, we specifically decided to not attempt to amplify people's contribution using the many approaches recommended in the literature in order to get something close to a baseline for this behavior.
We also wanted to know if the co-production of the real-time arrival information would lower the barriers to co-design .
Neither of these issues could be assessed in a lab study using paper prototypes or a roughed out technical system; therefore, we chose to conduct a field trial.
We recruited participants using electronic message systems and flyers at bus shelters.
Through selective placement of the ads, we targeted people who rode through a specific transit corridor.
We wanted to reduce the number of participants needed to create a "critical mass."
We recruited 28 participants: 16 fulltime students, 5 fulltime workers, and 7 part-time students who also worked fulltime.
Participants visited our lab where they took a pre-survey detailing their typical transit use and probing on their history of reporting transit issues.
In addition, we loaded the Tiramisu software on their iPhone.
They then left the lab and used the system for two weeks.
Near the end of two weeks of usage, we schedule an appointment for participants to return to our lab for a post survey and for payment.
When they returned, we gave them the TAM 3  .
This instrument measures perceptions of usefulness, ease of use, enjoyment in use, output quality, results from use, and behavioral intent .
Responses use a 7-point Likert scale ranging from 1 = "extremely unlikely," to 4 = "neither," to 7 = "extremely likely."
We use this instrument to get a baseline perception of the user experience and possible acceptance of Tiramisu.
While at our lab, we connected their phones and downloaded the favorites they created and the impressions they experienced.
The term "impression" indicates that an arrival time was displayed.
For example, Figure 2C shows the "Select Route" interface screen.
This screen has 5 visible impressions: 1 real-time, 1 historic, and 3 scheduled.
We also conducted a semi-structured interview to find out more about their experience with Tiramisu to get arrival information, to provide traces, and to report problems.
Each participant was paid $20.
They were told they could continue to use Tiramisu, but that we would no longer pay.
Throughout the trial, Tiramisu logged when and where individuals accessed bus arrival information, when and where they traced,, and any problems that they reported.
Participants did not all start using Tiramisu on the same day.
Instead, they continued to enroll over the 38 days our trial ran .
For our analysis, we normalized the data based on an individual participant's first day, and we only included their first 21 days of use in calculating the averages.
Because of the slow startup of use, participants who joined later in the trial had a higher likelihood of encountering real-time and historic data.
During the field trial we encountered many typical challenges not usually faced in lab studies.
These include a schedule change instituted by transit agency affecting a small number of bus routes, broken and upgraded phones that required participants to return to our lab to have the software reloaded, one participant moving outside of our targeted corridor, and participants taking vacation.
Participants provided traces  for approximately 56% of their sessions.
A "session" happens anytime a participant accessed the arrival time information on their phone.
We infer an untraced-session when participants do not start a trace within 15 minutes of a session.
We calculated the participation rate by dividing sessions that contain a trace against total sessions.
The participation rate is only an estimate of traces to actual "rides".
We had no way to detect cases when participants boarded a bus without using Tiramisu or when they accessed the arrival time information and then chose not to ride a bus, and thus did not trace.
The highest contributing participant traced 96% of their sessions and the lowest contributing participant traced 4% of their sessions.
Figure 5 shows the participation rate over time, normalized to the number of days a participant has been in the trial.
Across all participants, sharing traces decreased over the course of the trial as indicated by the regression equation  with R = 0.0551.
Participants viewed 16,263 arrival impressions.
These were captured when we synced their phones in our lab at the point of payment; black marks on Figure 4.
Across all participants, 5.9% of the impressions they viewed showed real-time arrival times and 7.2% showed historic arrival times.
Together, 13%  of all impressions were created by data participants supplied and 87% came from the schedule.
In the post-survey, we asked each participant about the three types of arrival times: real-time, historic, and scheduled.
Interestingly, three participants could not claim a specific preference between these three.
In addition, four participants rarely if ever had the experience of having realtime or historic data available for a bus they were taking.
In general, participants really liked the real-time data, when it was available.
Twenty-one participants stated that this was their favorite kind of arrival time.
P28 elaborated on the difference between the printed paper schedule and the real-time: "Although the scheduled time was  20-minutes later, the real time showed 2-minutes later.
And the bus did come in 2-minutes."
Two participants expressed a preference for historic data.
P27: "It was most useful when a route I was planning on taking had a historical data time with it.
It was then I noticed that the historical time was closer to actual time than the published schedule."
However, 11 participants did not trust historic data.
P7: "I least trust historical data because the system is new and has not necessarily collected enough data to be useful, although this will presumably become more reliable as the amount of data increases."
One participant expressed a desire to see the scheduled data instead of historic.
P18: "I prefer scheduled time  because if the scheduled time is wrong, at least I can get angry at Port Authority for being inefficient."
Twelve participants expressed distrust of scheduled data.
They stated that in their experience, the buses never arrived as scheduled, and that they were always late.
In discussing the addition of fullness information, several participants expressed an appreciation for this new information.
P5 described a situation where she used the system to adapt her evening commute.
While using the system she saw a bus scheduled to arrive 30 minutes later than her usual bus, and the historic data showed this to typically be empty.
She shared that her usual bus never had any seating.
She left work a little later and the bus did in fact have many seats available.
Reports on infrastructure generally addressed vehicle conditions.
Examples include: "Broken seat" , "The bus died!
It also seems to have troubles going up hills and the panel covering electronics above the driver's head is about to fall off it appears."
Interestingly, one report contained both positive and negative observations: "The  and message board are not indicating the next stop.
The bus was nice and cool though."
Several reports expressed frustration about late and missing buses.
In two reports, riders attempting to explain arrival time problems: "Traffic jam at Murray at Hazelwood in 61D."
Participants submitted 9 reports regarding errors with the arrival list.
Typical comments included: "Boarded 61D.
It was not displayed in the arrival list."
It had fallen off the list of possible buses", "67 not listed.
Bus routes on 67 line should be updated in Tiramisu to reflect recent schedule changes."
There are four possible causes for these breakdowns.
First, as mentioned in a message, a bus could deviate from the schedule enough to fall off our interface.
Second, some drivers pull over to stops they have not been assigned, because commuters push the stop request button or the driver spots a waiting commuter who signals the bus.
Third, there were a few errors in the schedule we received.
Fourth, there was a slight schedule change during the trial and we did not incorporate this into Tiramisu.
In the post-use interviews, participants shared that they liked using Tiramisu.
Several participants even expressed concern when we cabled their phone to our computer, fearing we would delete the software.
They intended to keep using Tiramisu even without a financial reward.
In fact, 26 of the 28 participants asked us to email them if a commercial version becomes available.
Results from the TAM 3 are captured in Table 1.
Various analyses impression values as independent variables revealed no significant differences.
These included direct analyses of impression subtypes  as well as analyses where the independent variables described the percentage of impressions containing value-added data viewed by each participant.
Since none of the comparisons generated a statistically significant result, we simply report the average rating for each category across all participants.
Participants shared how Tiramisu influenced their commuting practices.
P23: "Sometimes I don't need to look up the schedule but  I felt forced to look it up ..." P31: " I chat with my friends and get on whatever bus that comes.
In the pre-survey, 3 participants answered they had previously reported problems to a transit authority within their lifetime.
Over the course of our trial, 14 participants submitted 22 problem reports: 9 related to transit infrastructure, 9 related to schedule information, and 4 reporting that the Tiramisu software had crashed.
In speculating on new features, two participants inquired about reporting availability for bikes on the bike rack mounted on the front of many buses.
Two participants mentioned that Tiramisu would be improved if it could notify users of upcoming stops.
Finally, one participant suggested that Tiramisu should automatically stop recording at the appropriate time.
Third, we paid participants to use Tiramisu for two week, and after the payment, they may have felt less obligated to trace their rides when this effort primarily benefited others.
Surprisingly, students traced fewer rides than workers, and their traces were generally less valuable in terms of minutes of GPS trace, as their trips tended to be shorter; they generally lived close to school.
This finding is important for others who wish to conduct field trials of these types of systems.
It is important to predict which participants will receive the most value and also which participants have the most value to contribute in the process of recruiting.
As mentioned, we did not choose a specific strategy to increase participation with Tiramisu.
In looking at theories on contribution, we see at least three ways to proceed.
We could give commuters an individual score  for each minute or for each stop-to-stop segment they trace.
We could add this scoring and then also generate competition between groups, such as different businesses competing.
Finally, we could start scoring and then charge users points  in order for them access the valuable real-time arrival times.
Participants made many comments in terms of their phone.
Several expressed concern about how much battery Tiramisu requires when sharing traces.
P23: "It sucks up your battery" P14 : " uses 30% of the battery from home to work."
In addition, participants expressed concern for having to explicitly stop tracing.
Several noticed hours after they had exited the bus that their phone still indicated that is was "recording."
Finally, several participants complained about a lack of multi-tasking on the iPhone and their desire to access other applications during their commute.
Following our analysis, we reflected on our findings.
Below we highlight key insights in terms of advancing the design of Tiramisu, understanding the connection between social computing technology and service design, and prototyping social computing system via field trials.
These insights are organized around the themes of participation, bootstrapping, co-design, and user experience.
During the field trail, 28 participants created 13% of the data they experienced: impressions of real-time and historic arrival information.
Once again, this seems higher than expected and again we did not have a good method of calculating how good this is or how good "good enough" is in terms of crowd-sourcing data.
In particular, participation rates depend on the initial distribution of participants, which in turn affects participation rates, which in turn affects the distribution of participants, leading to a feedback-based system that is difficult to accurately model without measurements from the field.
Our design strongly benefited from the fact that we could start with a static dataset -- in this case the transit schedule -- which users would find to have some value in use.
Tiramisu then allows users to improve this dataset by replacing instances of the static data with crowd-sourced data.
This structure allowed for a slow rollout of the application.
We did not, as a research team, need to generate an initial set of crowd-sourced data to bootstrap the system.
In deciding on whether to field test a crowdsourcing social computing system, we speculate that this model of augmenting valuable static data with more valuable crowd-sourced data decreases the risk of abandonment of the system when working with a small set of users.
Extending the transit schedule with fullness information also appeared to improve the value-in-use of Tiramisu for participants.
In one case a participant was able to adjust her schedule to ride a much less crowded bus.
Access to this information could potentially increase the flexibility of commuters by letting them see into situations they have not yet experienced.
During the field trial, participants traced more than half of their rides.
This contribution rate seemed surprisingly high to us; however, we had no way of predicting a baseline for participation prior to the field trial.
It is difficult to a claim that this is a good rate or even a "good enough" rate of participation for a crowd-sourcing social computing system to survive and flourish.
While participation seems higher than expected, it did have a slight downward trend over the course of the trial.
We see three possible reasons for this.
First, there was most likely a novelty effect when the app was new on the phone, and over time this effect began to diminish.
This information helps commuters improve their personal experience as well as others' experience with commuting.
The conflicting findings on historic arrival times surprised us.
We assumed that participants would view historic as more valuable.
In the next iteration of Tiramisu, we will consider the issue of trust in intelligent systems .
One of the main hunches driving our design was that codesign in terms of problem reporting would increase due to participants having a phone-in-hand as they accessed the arrival time information and provided traces.
The change in behavior, from 3 previous problem reports from 28 participants, to 22 problem reports from 14 of 28 participants provides some confidence that this hunch could pay off.
Interestingly, the problem-reporting rate of our participants appeared to be about equal with the reported problem reporting rates of commuters with disabilities, a segment of public service users who may have higher motivation to participate in co-design due to a higher-level of dependence on this service .
In terms of the design, reporting problems seem like a shallow level of co-design, with a narrow focus on complaints as a measure of an issues importance.
In advancing this work, it will be important to investigate if this idea of phone-in-hand would also result in increased participation of commuters in regards to more strategic planning issues, such as route and schedule changes or issues relating to taxes and budgets.
It was interesting to see participants submit reports that explained why buses were delayed; possibly in the hope the transit service could use this information to make changes.
However, this action raises the possibility that commuters might be willing to share this information with each other.
In reconsidering our design, we see an opportunity for commuters to add comments about an individual bus or a stop that are immediately pushed out into the system, sort of like a very localized "tweet" without the need for a special language to communicate vehicle, stop, or route information.
In thinking about having the "system-in-hand," it is impossible for us to tell if problem-reporting contributions are linked to tracing contributions or simply to the ability to access arrival information via a mobile phone.
An important advance to service design research would be a clearer investigation of the effect of commuters producing traces versus a system that simply provides this information on a mobile form.
Little research has investigated how the activity of co-production changes a user's perception of the relationship they have with a service provider .
This analysis would get more to the heart of the co-production and co-design concepts in service design.
One concern that surfaced in our previous fieldwork from both commuters and the transit service was a lack of trust in the other commuters.
Both groups felt that some commuters would maliciously produce "bad" information in terms of traces and problem reports.
We did not see this effect in our field trial; however, this absence is not surprising since participants knew their behaviors were being monitored.
This result offers some insight that a way to address the perceived issue of malicious behavior might be to force users of the system to give up their anonymity.
This design decision is an interesting question in terms of privacy and location based technologies and in terms of governments monitoring the behavior of citizens.
It may be possible to convey accountability without revealing identity .
This is clearly a topic for deeper investigation.
In terms of user experience and Tiramisu, our TAM scores were quite high.
Our inability to tease out more specific trends in the data suggests a ceiling effect combined with very low overall variability.
Scores were uniformly high for almost all TAM indices, thereby leaving little room for differentiation on the upper end of the scale.
This indicates an increased likelihood of acceptance for Tiramisu and for other systems that follow a similar design.
However, this speculation is based on results of a self-selected group who volunteered for this trial.
Nevertheless, these results give us confidence that the basic framing, features, and usability of the design are "good enough" to push out for a larger scale field deployment and data collection effort.
Comments from the interviews indicate that co-design of the transit service might also include co-design of Tiramisu.
Participants had design ideas for new features that emerged from their use; however, our report function did not make these ideas easy to share.
This desire provides further evidence of a strong connection between web 2.0 technology and opportunities for co-design.
Crowd-sourcing social computing systems are difficult to prototype.
Iterative design techniques like testing with paper prototypes cannot investigate the critical risks of bootstrapping and contribution.
In our research, we addressed this challenge by conducting a field trial of Tiramisu; a system that allows bus commuters to share GPS traces using their smart phones.
Tiramisu then uses these traces to generate real-time arrival estimates of buses commuters can access on their phones.
Tiramisu's design integrates theories from service design on co-production and co-design, with the intention of getting commuters to engage more deeply with the transit service and begin to feel they can influence its service offerings.
Our field trial demonstrates that this concept works in practice.
Participants were successful at tracing information and at using the real-time and historic estimates to improve their commuting experience.
In addition, we noted high participation rates for explicitly sharing location traces and for reporting problems encountered with the transit service.
We plan to redesign Tiramisu based on insights from the trial.
We want to provide commuters with a way of sharing short-term and long-term information about buses, routes, and stops, particularly information related to accessibility.
We want to extend our reporting feature to support feedback on submitted reports, expressions of preferences for relocating stops and arrival times, and proposals for entirely new routes.
We also plan to optimize the design to better support blind and low-vision commuters.
Understanding the Space for Co-Design in Riders' Interactions with a Transit Service.
Bendapudi, N. and Leone, R. P. Psychological Implications of Customer Participation in CoProduction.
Bradwell, P. and Marr, S. Making the Most of Collaboration an International Survey of Public Service Co-Design, DEMOS Report 23.
Sources of Public Service Improvement: A Critical Review and Research Agenda.
Casey, C. Real-time information: Now arriving.
Davis, F. D. Perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use, and user acceptance of information technology.
Edvardsson, B., Gustafsson, A. and Roos, I.
Service Portraits in Service Research: A Critical Review.
Ferris, B., Watkins, K. and Borning, A. Onebusaway: Results from Providing Real-Time Arrival Information for Public Transit.
Why Groupware Applications Fail: Problems in Design and Evaluation.
Kittur, A., Chi, E. H. and Suh, B. Crowdsourcing User Studies with Mechanical Turk.
Kraut, R. E. and Resnick, R. Encouraging Contributuon to Online Communities.
