Can one 6 DOF device be substitutedwith multiple lower DOF devices?
Rice et al  observedthat controlling 6 DOF with one hand is difficult.
Someteleoperationsystems,such as the Shuttle Remote Manipulator, also known as the "Canadatm", require two-handedoperation: one hand for rotation control and the other for translation control.
O'Hara  contradicted such an observationand found little performance difference between two 3 DOF controllers and one 6 DOF controller.
To answer these questions on a firm scientific ground, we fust need to define informative measures beyond speedand accuracy.
One of them is the degree of coordination among the multiple degrees of freedom.
Study of computerinput deviceshasprimarily focusedon trial completion time and target acquisition errors.
Resultsshowedthat while the usersof the free moving device had shorter completion time than the users of an elastic rate controller, their movement trajectories were less coordinated.
These new findings should better inform system designers on development and selection of input devices.
Issues such as mental rotation and isomorphismvs.
For a given trial of motor performance, such as an athlete's movement or a trial of docking in 3D space, people can often agreeif it is coordinated.The research challengehere is how to reflect consensualand intuitive understandingby quantitative measures.In the case of multiple degreesof freedom input control, the following measures havebeenconsideredas indicesof coordination.
Driven by the need in 3D user interfaces,much research has been done to evaluate various multiple DOF input devices.
Many fundamental questions on multi-DOF input, however, remain to be scientifically addressed.
Can userssimultaneouslycontrol all 6 degreesof freedom?
Permission to make digitalkard copies ofdl or part of this material fir peS0nal or classroom use is granted w&out fee provided that the copies are.not made or distributed for proffi or commercial advantage, the copyright notice, the title oftbe publication and its date appear.
The drawbackof the simultaneity measure is that it doesnot accountfor the magnitude of the control actions in each degree of freedom.
As long as all of the degreesof freedom are activated, regardlessthe amount of input generated,the trial is consideredcoordinatedby this measure.
In a 3 DOF pursuit tracking task, Ellson  recordedsimultaneous time-ontarget  in all pairs of degrees of freedomaswell as all three at once, in addition to TOT in each of the component dimensions.
He then compared STOT scoreswith the products of the componentTOT scores.His argumentwas that if the percent STOT was equal to the product of the component TOTS, then the components may be considered independent .
However, both TOT and correlation as coordination measures have drawbacks.One of them is that these two measuresdo not account for perfect trials.
EFFICIENCY AS COORDINATION MEASURE Me propose efficiency as a measure of quantifying coordination in multiple degreesof freedom.
For a task that involves N degreesof freedom,the trajectory that has tie shortest length in that N dimensional space is considered the most coordinated movement.
For simplicity, let us examine trajectories on a 2D space,as illustrated iu Fig.
In order to move from Point A to B in this space,two variablesx and y have to be changedfrom xA to xn and yA to yn respectively.
Supposingwe had an input device that has two separate1 DOF controls, as in an Etch-a-Sketchtoy> one possible trajectory would be AC-CB, as a result of moving in the x dimension first and in the y dimensionsecond In such a case,the two degrees of freedom are completely uncoordinated,becausex and y are not meved at the same time, resulting in a longer trajectory than necessary- With an integrated 2 DOF device such as a mouse, one may produce a trajectory 1 that is closeto the straight line AB.
Trajectory AB is the shortestand most efficient among all possibletrajectories.
It `canalso be consideredmost coordinated in the sense that x and y move simultaneously at the same relative pace.
Any deviation from the path AB can be considered a result of imperfect coordination, which will result in a longer trajectory.
In light of this analysis, we define the translation inefficiency, i.e.
Length of actual path - Length of shortest path Length of shortest path By this definition, trajectory I in Fig.
1 is better coordinated than trajectory AD-DB, which is in turn better coordinatedthan AC-CB.
The same definition of coordination coefficient can be easily generalizedto translations in 3D spacesimply by measuring3D instead of 2D Euclidean distances.Fig.
2 showsan exampleof the 3D application.
The two coordinationcoefficientsdefined abovedeal with translation and rotation separatelybut do not reveal the coordinationaspectbetweentranslation and rotation taken together.
In other words, a trial can be perfectly coordinatedwith respectto both its translation trajectory and rotation trajectory, but the rotation and the translation may not necessarily be performed at the same time.
Hence, a thiid coordination factor is defined in the translation-rotation spacewhich hastwo dimensions.
Note that both d, and $I are function of time, which define a 2D trajectory over the courseof an experimenttrial.
Defining coordination by optimality in fact has been proposed in the human motor control literature.
For example, Flash and Hogan have measuredcoordination by the miniium jerk for arm movement.
The EGG  represents a different class of 6 DOF devices that are constrainedon desktop and work in rate control.
A 6 DOF docking task, illustrated in Fig.
2 and 5, was used for this experiment.
The edgesand vertex markers  of both tetrahedra were colored so that there was only one correct match in orientation.
The stars on the target indicated the acceptable error tolerance for each vertex .
During the trial, whenever a comer of de cursor enteredinto the tolerance volume surrounding the corresponding comer of the target, the star on that comer changed its color as an indication of capture.
Whenever all four corresponding comers stayed concurrently matched for 0.7 seconds, the trial was deemed completed At the end of each trial, the trial completiontime was printed on the screen.The begnming of eachtrial was signaled with a long auditory beep and the end of eachtrial was signaledwith a short beep.
At the beginning of eachtrial, the cursor appearedin the centerof the 3D spacewhile the target randomly appeared in one of S pre-setlocations and orientations.
The 8 trials were divided into two sets of 4 trials.
In another set the orientation mismatcheswere about arbitrary vectors* that did not coincide with the X, Y, Z coordinates.
Me hypothesized that once interaction  is allowed, subjectsshould be able to find the correct rotation path.
Note that the magnitude of mismatch of both translation and rotation in eachtrial in one set correspondto a trial in the other set, so the total amount of translation and rotation are equalized in the two groups.
Practice trials  were given between the tests.
The entire experiment lastedabout 1 hour for eachsubject.
A follow-up experiment, Experiment 2, was conducted for two reasons.First, we wanted to seeeffect of retention and extendedpractice.
Secondand more importantly, we wanted to know if a coordination difference betweenthe two devices still exists if we, give explicit instructions emphasizingcoordination.
16 subjects who participated in Experiment 1 were called back two months later in Experiment 2, which startedwith the sameinstruction as in Experiment 1.
After regaining their skills in Test 1 and Test 2, subjects were instructed  to perform the trials as coordinated  aspossible,while trying to completeeachtrial as quickly aspossible.
As a motivating tactic, before Test 3 of Experiment 2, completiontimes were displayedto the subjectsafter each trial and each test.
After Test 2 of Experiment 2, these were displayedtogetherwith coordination measures.
Experimental Results and Discussion The results of statistical analysesof data collected in the two experimentsare summarizedin Table 1.
6, for both experiments,the mean trial completion time of the free position control  group was significantly shorter than that of the elastic rate control  group.
Particularly worth noting is that after Test 2 in Experiment 2 when the emphasis on coordination was given, the subjects sacrificed their completion time in order to make more coordinated movements.
As they gained more practice, however, the completion time continuedto improve.
Both experimentsusedbetween-subjectdesignin order to avoid asymmetricalskill transfer betweendevices - In Experiment 1, eachdevice group had 16 subjects,none of them had prior experience with using 6 DOF input devices.
Each experimenthad 5 repeatedtests, which consistedof raudomly shuffled S trials .
Subjects significantly improved their translation coordination over the five tests in each experiment, particularly after Test 2 of Experiment 2 when emphasis on coordination and efficiency was given.
In terms of magnitude, on averagethe initial translation trajectories were 300%  or 200%  longer than the optimal path.
At the end of Experiment2, the mean inefficiency of the elastic rate control group was reduced to 43.3% but that of the free position control group was still at 88.7%.
The lesser degree of coordination of the free moving position control device is plausible.
First, position control is directly proportional to ha.nd./finger movementand thus constrained to anatomical limitations: joints can only rotate to certain angle.
In contrast with au elastic rate control device, a small amount of hand movement is mappedonto the velocity of the cursor movement.The integral transformation in rate control makesthe actual cursor movementa step removedfrom the handanatomy.
Subjectsalso significantly improved their rotation performance over the five testsin eachexperiment.At the end of Experiment2, the mean rotation inefficiency of the bee position group was reduced to 97.3% and elastic rate control group reducedto 70.4%.
Note that subjects'rotation inefficiency was much higher than that of translation, up to 580% in Test 1 of Experiment 1 by the free position control group.
One possible reason is that humans can not effectively do mental rotation of 3D objects.
In other words, subject might not be able to figure out the ideal rotation axis before they manually trying out the movement.We will return to this issueshortly.
PAPERS The impact of 30 mental rotation.
As recent studies in mental rotation have shown , human subjects are incapableof mentally rotating objectsin 30 space.This is particularly true when the rotation axis doesnot coincide with viewer's primary axes.
In Parson's experiments, subjects did not perform better than chance in mentally iinding the correct rotations about arbitrary 3D axes.
In our experiments,it is indeed true that the subjectswere significantly less efficient in trials with arbitrary initial rotation mismatch than in trials with rotation mismatch aboutprimary axes.Fig.
At the last test, the inefficiency of the rate and position control group was 26.1% and 36.8% respectively.
Interestingly, the mean percentages of `kisted' movementin the translation-rotation spacewere in fact lesserthan in the translational spaceand rotational space, suggestingthat there is little reason to separate translation and rotation control into two hands,as in some telerobotic systems.
The total transport, defined as the line integral of the four vertices of the cursor tetrahedron,was used as an integrated measure of coordination in 6 degreesof freedom.
Sameas the conclusions drawn from the previous three measures,the rate control device was significariiy more efficient than the position control device.
Practice and instructional emphasisimproved efficiency with both devices and the difference between the two was reduced by the instruction, but the final difference was still significant.
At the last test of the Experiment 2, the inefficiency of the rate control group was 65.4% and that of the position control group was 96%.
In not a single trial in our experiments,however,were the subjects unable to successfully complete a trial both in translation and in rotation, including trials in practice sessions when the rotation mismatches are randomly generatedand not repeated.The reason, in our view, lies in interaction, the interaction between action and cognition.
Note that to be able to manipulate still needs the involvement of mental rotation, the probability to match the target by random manual exploration could not be high.
We should point out that the focus of this study is not on mental rotation, although interesting research can be carried in such a direction with the current p-digm.
A greater efficiency difference between the two devices was found when the trials involved rotations only about viewer's primary axes.
This is again plausible: for arbitrary rotation trials, the rotation inefficiency was partially caused by physically searching the correct rotations.
For trials that were mismatched about the primary rotation axes, subjects can mentally find the correct rotation more easily so the advantageof the rate control device that may enable higher degree of coordination was better revealedin suchtrials.
PAPERS degrees of freedom.Onepossibleargumentagainstsuch a measure is that it is a definition, not a vali&ted conclusion about coordination.
The critical issues are whether it is an arbitrary definition or a definition in agreement with our common sense judgement of coordination, and furthermore, if the definition is informative.
We think both are true.
Another drawbackof the efficiency measureis that other factorsbesidesmanual coordination,such as the mental rotation factor presented abovealso contributeto the trajectory efficiency, although one can argue that coordination simply includes a cognitive component.
The coordination measureproposed in the paper can be applied to research beyond 6 DOF input devices.
For instance, it is conceivable to define coordination of human movementthat involves N joints.
The elastic rate controller  usedin the experimentsis suchan example.
Moving to the left of Fig.
For position control techniques,the mathematical transformationfrom the control spaceto the display space is a multiplication, which is simpler than integration.
Among position control techniques, absolute devices, such as a 2 DOF digitizing tablet or the 6 DOF Fingerball in Experiment 4 are more direct than relative devices, suchas a 2 DOF mouse or the 6 DOF glove .
Relative devices require a clutch mechanism to engage and disengagethe link between control actions and cursor movements.For a mouse, for example, lifting it from mouseuad will disengage the linkage betweencontrol and display:
By applying the efficiency basedcoordination measureto input device evaluation,we begin to gain insights into the characteristics of 6 DOF input devicesthat have not been rigorously demonstrated before.
Our experimentsshowed that while the 6 DOF free moving position control device was faster in docking task completion, the elastic rate control device produced more efficient or coordinated trajectories.The difference was true even after emphasis on coordination was explicitly given to the subjects.The contrast betweenthe pros and cons of the two types of devices tested illustrate a more general philosophical issue on computer input device design: isomorphism  versus tool-using that has been informally debatedby researchers.
12, there is in fact a continuum on the dimension of directness'.The most dominating factor to directnessof an input method is the transformation from the control space to display space.
The more mathematically complexthis transformationis, the more indirect the input technique is.
Input techniques with first order  or higher order control dynamics are indirect "tools".
12.Isomorphism - tool continuum: A taxonomy of cIassi@ing inputdevices according to directness of transformation f?om controlspace to displayspace Another factor that affects the directness of position control techniques is the control-display  ratio.
When the C-D ratio is 1, the multiplication operation is reduced to an assignment  operation, which makesthe input control more direct than when the C-D ratio is not 1.
There is still another factor that makes some absolute position input techniquesmore direct than the others:the orientation or location offset between the control space andthe display space.Both a touch-screenand a tablet are absolute position control devices but the latter has an offset between the display and the control space in orientation  and in location .
A touch screen interface is therefore more direct than a tablet interface.
In the experiments presented in this paper, all input techniques had a translation offset betweenthe control spaceand the display space,but no orientation offset.
6DOF techniques without offset can conceivably be implemented, particularly in immersive virtual environments in which the display space and the control space  can completely overlapwith eachother.
It shouldbe noted that to the left of Fig.
12 there are input devicesthat are even more direct.
These are the position control devices with force-reflecting capabilities.
12 can be viewedas an input devicedesignspaceor taxonomy.
For proposals anddiscussions of input taxonomy, see W. Buxton "Lexical and Pragmatic Considerations of Input Structure" Computer Graphics 17 ; J. Ma&inlay, S.K.
Robertson "A Semantic Analysis of the Design Space of InputDevices" Human-Computer Interaction vol5 pp145-190.
Green, M., Bryson, S., Poston, T. & Wexeblat, A, Hands off my VR the role of gesturesin VR .
Hinckley, K., Tulio, J., Pausch,R., Proffitt, D, Kassell, N., Usability Analysis of 3D Rotation Techniques,to appearProc.
Kabbash, P., Buxton, W., Sellen, A., Two-handed input in a compoundtask, Proc.
Telerobotic control of a dexterous manipulator using master and six-DOF hand controllers for space assembly and servicing tasks.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance,1995,Vo1.21,No.6, 1259-1277. ll.Poulton, E.C., Unwanted asymmetrical skill transfer effects with balanced experimental designs.
Capture of satellites having rotational motion.
Human Performancein Six Degree of Freedom Input Control.
Http://vered.rose.toronto.edu/people/shumin.html 16.Zhai, S., Milgram, P. Buxton, W., The influence of muscle groups on performance of multiple degreeof freedominput control, Proc.
17.Zhai, S., Senders,J-W., Investigating Coordination in Multidegree of Freedom Control I: Time-on-Target Analysis of 6 DOF Tracking, to appear in Proc.
Human Factor ErgonomicsSociety 1997. lS.Zhai, S., Senders,J.W., Investigating Coordination in Multidegree of Freedom Control II: Correlation Analysis of 6 DOF Tracking.
In other words, the ultimate isomorphic interfacesare completely "transparent" to the user.
It is important to note that there are both advantagesand disadvantages to techniques on each end of the isomorphism - tool contimmm, as illustrated by our ~coordinationexperiments.
In daily life, we prefer to perform many tasks with our bare hands.
Even with a ,glove,de small "transformation" between the hand and the actual manipulation may be undesirable on some occasions.
On the other hand, we do frequently use various tools, sometimesas simple as rulers, wrenches, screwdrivers, etc., for precision, for power and for ,overcoming some of our other physical limitations.
In general,more isomorphic  designsare more intuitive and require less learning.
Such devices are neededfor applications where an explicit learning period is perhapsnot available, such as commercialvideo games where users should be able to walk-up and play immediately.
The disadvantageswith such isomorphic designslie in possible fatigue, coarseness of the control action, and anatomical liitations of the human limb.
In contrast,less direct, tool-like devicesmay take more time to learn but may be more efficient in terms of reduced fatigue, coordinated motions, and fewer physical limitations of the human limb.
Such designscan be more suitablefor tasksof long duration, such as in teleoperation andimagevisualizatior~
The experimentspresented here were conducted at the ETC lab of the University of Toronto.
The study was madepossibleby a researchgrant from ITRC, a center of excellence of Ontario.
We thank our co-grantee Bill Buxton for his support and close collaboration.
We also lie to thank the IBM Ahnaden Research Center for supporting the first author to continue and completethis study.
